Good afternoon, counsel.

Good afternoon, Your Honor.

It's a pleasure to have you both here, albeit virtually.

The case before the court is matter 20190727,

Genworth Life Insurance Company versus State of New Hampshire

Department of Insurance.

Genworth is represented by Attorney Paul Hummer.

And the State of New Hampshire or the Department of Insurance

is represented by Attorney Samuel Garland.

Mr. Hummer, do you reserve any time for rebuttal?

I would like to reserve two minutes, Your Honor.

All right.

Brian, do you have that? Two minutes?

Yeah, I think he does.

All right. You certainly have two minutes, sir.

And you may proceed whenever you are ready.

Thank you, Your Honors.

Thank you for hearing us this afternoon.

I thought pending questions from you that I would start

by addressing the two claims that were resolved

on some of the judgments first.

On the figure that if the court, as Genworth requests,

reverses the lower court and directs

that sub-judgment be entered in favor of Genworth

on either account, that would end this litigation.

So I'll start with the non-constitutional claim

because that is the claim that we would decide first

as I understand your address to the prudence.

And that is the claim that the regulation issue,

the amended regulation is ultraviolence.

The statute, as the court is aware,

that sets forth the grant of authority

to the department is RSA 415 D-12.

And in relevant part, that statute empowers

the department to issue reasonable rules

to promote premium adequacy

and to protect policyholders

in the event of a substantial rate increase.

In this case, the amended regulations

do not permit a...

do not promote premium adequacy

and they do not protect policyholders

in the event of a substantial rate increase.

How do we know that?

You can tell it from the language of the regulations themselves.

So the rate caps limit

and are intended to limit the rates

that were allowable under prior iterations

of the regulation.

So they definitely do not promote premium adequacy

because they limit rates that are insured and made charged.

What are the typical rate increases

that are applied to these policies?

The range, Your Honor,

based in part on what prior rate increases

have been granted and how long the policies have been,

they can be anywhere from 10% to 80%.

I think is what's in the record

from the JLCAR proceedings.

And the current regulations allow you to increase rates

or up to 50% for somebody that's under the age of 70.

Is that right?

That's correct.

The big difference, Your Honor,

between the current regulations and the prior regulations

is that the prior regulations allowed a rate increase

sufficient to achieve the applicable expected loss ratio

that was set forth in the regulation.

And the expected loss ratio differed

depending on when the policy was issued

because different iterations of the regulations

were in effect at different points in time.

But they were not tapped.

And so you could have a rate increase of whatever magnitude

that was sufficient to enable you

to achieve that expected loss ratio.

What language in those prior regulations

authorized the commissioner to reject a rate increase

even if it was actuararily supported?

None, Your Honor. That's the point.

And that's exactly what the department acknowledged

in its letter to JLCAR.

What the department said in its letter

is the purpose of this regulation

is to give us the authority to deny rate increases

that we previously lacked the ability to...

or the authority to deny.

So this was a material change

in the regulatory structure for rate increases.

And it is that fact that...

Correct me if I'm wrong.

There's no language that prohibited the commissioner

from rejecting rate increases, was there?

Yes, Your Honor.

The statute said that the rate increases...

it's 1901C, that the rate increases shall be determined

in accordance with the standard set forth

in the applicable version of the regulations.

And that's still the language of 1901C.

It seems to me that it's difficult,

it's impossible to analyze this ultra-various argument

without thinking about the department's argument

that there's a safety valve,

that there are a number of safety valves here,

and therefore, while on the face of it,

something might appear to be ultra-various

if you take a look at everything in the totality,

there actually are a number of safety valves

so that this isn't as absolute as it might appear.

I think, Your Honor, that there is no safety valve

and I will tell you why.

The department's argument is that you have the ability

to take an administrative appeal of an adverse determination

or you have the ability to file a petition

for review or relief, again, at the administrative level.

What the department ignores is that the current regulations,

the challenge regulations,

allow the commissioner no discretion to avoid the rate caps.

The commissioner is without authority,

whether it's in the context of ruling on the original application,

ruling on an administrative appeal,

or ruling on the petition for relief,

to avoid the rate caps.

And that means, Your Honor, that there is no safety valve.

That's the critical difference, for example,

between the regulatory regimes that were at issue

in the California case and California

or the State Farm case in New Jersey.

In both those cases, the court made an express finding

that the commissioner had the authority

in the terms of the regulation itself

to avoid rates that were confiscatory.

And because the commissioner had that authority,

there was a safety valve,

whether in ruling on the original application

or in the context of an appeal.

That is what's missing from this regulation.

That's why it is both,

and frankly, constitutionally defective.

Wouldn't you have recourse to the courts

if that is in fact the case?

Ultimately, Your Honor,

but the fact that we can go to court

and challenge the statute does not make it,

does not make the regulation okay.

Every regulation that is subject to challenge

is ultimately challenged in court.

That doesn't make the regulation constitutional

or, in this case,

within the scope of the enabling legislation.

Your Honor, talking a little bit more about the...

Just for clarification,

you're referring to the language in 360119F

that says the commissioner shall not approve any increase.

I am. Thank you, Your Honor.

And maybe you can explain, maybe you can't.

The trial court followed that statement

in order with a sentence that says,

however, statutory and regulatory procedures

allow review of rules decisions.

Yes, Your Honor.

Is that intimating a safety valve review

or are we talking about review of the rule itself

or do you know?

I do not know.

The only thing I do know

is that there is no ability at the administrative level

to deviate from the statutory,

from the regulatory requirement

and therefore, from our perspective,

it is both ultra-virus and constitutionally-defective.

Your Honor, I think I would

make two points

on ultra-virus and then I'll move on

unless you have other questions.

In addition to not promoting premium adequacy,

the statute also does not protect policyholders

in the event of a substantial rate increase.

Instead, by its plain terms

and by its obvious operation,

it protects policyholders from a substantial regulation.

And that's a meaningful distinction

because what it's doing

is precluding rate increases,

not offering policyholders additional protections

when there is a rate increase.

And you can, by way of contrast,

you can look at some other provisions of

3,601.19.

You can look at F, G and H2

to see the kinds of things

that you can, protections that can be put in place

for policyholders in the event of a rate increase.

You can also look at 3,601.27

which was adopted contemporaneously

with the original iteration of 3,601.19.

And that steps in explicitly defines

what is a substantial rate increase

and defines and prescribes

what options policyholders must be given

if there is a substantial rate increase

such as the right to change their benefits

to minimize the rate increase, etc.

Those distinctions show you

what's wrong with the amended regulation.

In every prior iteration of its rulemaking authority,

the department properly gave effect

to the requirement

that they have rules that both

promoted premium adequacy

and protected in the event

of a substantial rate increase.

This regulation does not.

Now, the state argues that

you're focused on methodology

and there's a lot of case law that says that

you can't prevail if

what you're challenging is methodology.

What's your response to that?

Sure, that's certainly talking about the confiscatory rate

which was where I was going to go next anyway

so that's a perfect question for me.

Your Honor, I think that the issue is not

that we are attacking a particular methodology.

Our challenging and our challenge to the regulation

is the structure of the regulation itself.

The failure to allow the discretion

to impose a rate that is not confiscatory.

The failure to include that form of safety valve

renders the regulation unconstitutional

under the takings clause.

The lower court acknowledged that principle

in its decision on the third motion to dismiss.

The department argued there as it does here

that the court really should not consider

the safety valve issue that that was somehow embedded

in the consideration of the rate making methodology.

And the court correctly found in its third motion

its decision on the third motion to dismiss

that that was aromies, that the case law

and many jurisdictions at both

the state supreme court and circuit court levels

found that the absence of a safety valve

was an appropriate basis to either strike down

to strike down a regulation

or if the court found that there was a safety valve

an appropriate basis to affirm the regulation.

When it came time for summary judgment however

the court simply did not reach that issue.

It failed to address the absence

of the safety valve in its decision

and it failed to address it again

in the motion for reconsideration.

And that is the legal error

in that portion of the court's ruling on summary judgment.

I have a sorry to jump around here

but I have a question in regard to summary judgment

if we were to agree with you

at least in part that the summary judgment

should not have entered for the department

it seems to me there may be factual

material factual issues that would need to be developed at trial

and that might preclude entry of summary judgment

for your client but would compel us

to remand the case back to the trial court

what's your thought on that?

Your Honor I think from the question of the safety valve

that that is a legal issue on which there really is a

factual issue for you to decide

I think that that is a more realistic possibility

with respect to the other basis

on which we challenge the rates as confiscatory

as you are aware in addition to saying

that the regulation is structurally invalid

we also say that the only evidence in the record

is that it will necessarily produce confiscatory rates

I see that the red light has gone on

but I will just say

on that latter issue

the court could find that there were factual issues

that preclude summary judgment for either party

and I think our view would be that

the court certainly applied the wrong standard

in assessing those factual issues

with respect to the department's motion against general

Thank you Mr. Homer

I'd like to ask Mr. Homer

if I could

something we don't agree with you with respect to the safety valve

but if we find that the regulations

the retroactive application of the regulations

do violate the contract clause

would the regulations otherwise

pass constitutional scrutiny?

So your Honor that particular claim was resolved

on the motion to dismiss speech

and there is not at this stage the factual record

to address the question

whether it is a fair and reasonable regulation

notwithstanding the constitution

Okay, thank you very much Mr. Homer

you still have your two minutes

Mr. Garland

Thank you your Honor

may it please the court

my name is Sam Garland

I'm here on behalf of the insurance department

and I'll welcome questions at any time

Before I get to the individual claims here

let me interrupt you right now

where is the safety valve in this regulation?

Your Honor there are three safety valves

one of which is statutory

and the other two of which are regulatory

the first in the most robust I would say

is an RSA 400 A17-24

we've identified that in our brief

and that sets for a robust adjudicatory process

in front of the agency

where an insurer could say

a particular rate making decision is confiscatory

or it is imposing a confiscatory taking on the insurer

the commissioner would have to entertain evidence of that

the commissioner then has to issue a written opinion

or order that is subject to the 541

re-hearing and appeal procedures

that is an incredibly...

Wouldn't that process be sort of short cut

if the commissioner says look

I'm required by this rule I shall

not permit a rate that exceeds the cap?

Conceivably Your Honor

but I dispute that the commissioner

is bound by the language shall there

the commissioner has a broad authority

through that adjudicative process

to determine that a particular application

of a rule I believe

should be brought to the confiscatory rate

and to afford relief

I think that's contemplated

within the adjudicative process that's there

and I'm here on behalf of the insurance department

to tell you that that is our interpretation

of what the commissioner would be authorized to do

So can we just avoid the constitutional problem

by saying well the department has acknowledged

that shall doesn't mean shall

so there's really no problem here

I wouldn't go so far as to say

well doesn't mean shall Your Honor

I would say that the application of this particular rule

is redressable through the adjudicative process

again it's a robust evidentiary process

that's there

and it's frankly what's contemplated

and this is getting a little bit

beyond the scope of the question

but it's what's contemplated by this court's

rate making jurisprudence

the idea that you come to the court

after going through the administrative process

challenging the particular rate as confiscatory

brings some sort of challenge to the methodology

and we do believe this is a challenge to methodology

the amended regulation here

talks about the methodology at arriving

at a rate making decision

there isn't any rate making decision

and so that we believe would be the proper way

to challenge it

now notably Genworth

for went that option

in this case they agreed

as in the lower court

we moved several times

to say that if this is a

has applied fact-based inquiry

it needs to go back to the agency

there needs to be administrative exhaustion

Genworth seemingly to avoid that

agreed that these were facial challenges

that these were no set of circumstances challenges

and brought those challenges in court

and the trial court recognized that fact

and so

but to the larger legal question

are there safety valves

yes we believe

400A17-24 is one that is comparable

if not more robust

than the ones that the California court

and the New Jersey court recognized as sufficient

that insurance rules

3601.16

gives an insurance

an insurer the opportunity

to propose innovative ways

of insuring a product and be exempted

from the application of a particular rule

that insurance rule on part 205

allows an insurer to seek a declaration

that a particular rule

does not apply to it in a particular way

there are both

regulatory and statutory safety valves

but again I don't think you need to

reach that issue because this court's case law

at least with respect to the confiscatory

taking is clear and it's consistent

with the US Supreme Court's case law

and in fact the same justice was involved

both at this level and at the US

Supreme Court we don't get into methodology

we don't care how you got there

we frankly don't care how the sausage was made

you come to us with a particular rate

and you tell us that rate is confiscatory

and we figure that out and that's frankly

the administrative process is designed for

Are you saying that there's

sufficient flexibility built in now

whereby

Genworth could propose

a rate increase and alter

the scope of coverage provided

in order that the rate increase

would not take hold

if you understand what I mean

I think I do Your Honor

and I think the answer to your question

if I understand it is yes

if Genworth wanted to propose

a particular rate increase and the commissioner

denied that particular request

because it exceeded the percentages

that are set forth in the amended regulation

the

the insurer Genworth could go seek redress

from the administrative agency

through the administrative process

and ultimately have that decision reviewed

by this court if it believed that the rate

was confiscatory

but would it have the ability

would the insurer have the ability

to adjust the coverage let's say

downward in order to provide

the policy holder with an option

to not experience an increase

and pay the same amount

I don't believe so Your Honor

I believe

that the

benefits that are conferred under

a policy at the time of agreement

have certain protections that don't allow

for that

I will note though and this gets back

to the first point that I wanted to make

there's a suggestion

particularly in the briefing that this is some

sort of unprecedented change

in the regulatory scheme

that's like interfering substantially

with the insurance industry

and we dispute that

these regulations do not preclude

insurers from seeking rate increases

they do not preclude insurers from seeking

substantial rate increases

they only require that

those rate increases be staged out

over time so that consumers have

some predictability so that they're not

after paying years or decades or premiums

with a triple digit

rate increase that makes

the policy unworkable

and in that way frankly

they also make sure that insurers

when they are developing policies

the assumptions

that underpin those policies

are sound and that gets

a bit to the testimony before

the jail car and we dispute

that that's evidentiary material

we dispute that it's admissible in the first place

in terms of material at all to the facial analysis

but in that instance

we were talking about a

25 specific requests

by an unidentified number

of insurers for unidentified products

that even under David Skye's

testimony would have resulted

in a loss ratio

of 100% if the

premium requests, increased requests

that the insurers made

were approved and so we're talking about

policies there that very likely had

significant problems at the outset

and certainly

not anything that would demonstrate

that there's no set of circumstances

where these regulations

could be imposed

wasn't that evaluation

of the policy

already

happening in the department

and so what is added

by setting

a cap

divorced from

sort of that individual analysis

so what

tool does that add to the department's

toolbox

it ensures

your honor that

that there's predictability

for consumers I think is the primary purpose

behind it the idea that

that a rate increase wouldn't come

along a decade or two after

a policies in place and the consumer has paid

toward that policy

and that that would jack up

the premiums by 150%

the idea is

you can get there and ensure if the assumptions

that underpinned the product in the first place

turn out to not

bear out because of economic factors

because of things that the insurer didn't predict

you can get substantial rate increases

you can get rate increases

as Justice Donovan pointed out

up to 50% every three years

however you can't do it in one

swell, fell swoop

and one thing that that also accomplishes

is it make sure that insurers

who have policies that are

failing that are based on faulty assumptions

aren't bailed out simply on the backs

of the consumers because they can

convince the insurance...

Mr. Garland I'm confused it sounds to me like

you're describing the way the system worked

before this regulation

where you could get increases

and they could be spread out

over a number of years

and then this regulation says

zero so it seems to me

that well-oiled functioning machine

you describe as the one

that's being

cut off by this cap

I don't think so Your Honor

and we don't view this

as a cap I don't think that there is

an instance under this

under this

the regulation where the increase is ever zero

the rule was prior to

this regulation that you could only get

rate increases every three years that's still the rule

and for people up to the age of 70

it's a 50%

we can have the authority

to reject a proposed rate increase

under the old system

we believe so Your Honor and we've set that forth

in the brief and I appreciate

you asking that question actually because

as you pointed out

there is nothing in the regulations

that Jenworth has pointed to here

that precluded the commissioner from rejecting

a rate increase request

previously the use of the word shall

in the regulation that Mr.

Hummer points to

361019C

I believe but forgive me if I got

some of those numbers wrong

is talking only about the insurer

and what is required when the insurer

seeks the rate increase it requires

a particular minimum

loss ratio so a particular minimum amount

of dollars out in benefits

paid for dollars in and

premiums received it is not

a target loss ratio it is not

a loss ratio that defines premium adequacy

is a baseline and

there's nothing in there no mandatory language

at all that suggests that the commissioner

could never reject a rate

increase that

that met that actuarial

justification and so

we don't read that in there at all and Jenworth

hasn't pointed to any other regulation

any other statute or certainly any

contract yes Your Honor

maybe I'm confused says the commissioner

shall not approve any increase

if the increase results in a

percentage increase

exceeds the rate cap table

based on the policy holders

age so that seems

to me not to be actuarial

but sort of a

a definitive

level that the commissioner cannot

exceed

so Your Honor that's the regulation

now and that's the regulation that's

challenged and we dispute that

the commissioner couldn't if the rate

that was that resulted from the

application of that regulation

work in fiscatory we dispute that

the commissioner is not authorized

to avoid that result

but what I believe

you were speaking of a shall that pre-existed

that dealt with

the actuarial tables

exactly Your Honor and

it was forgive me I think

I can find the citation

but it's the regulation

that in Jenworth's reply

brief it's

administrative rule 3601.19

so I think I got the numbers right

probably in the wrong order

Jenworth points to that as the

only example of some sort of mandatory

requirement prior to these

rules that

the commissioner had to approve

some particular actuarially justified

request for a rate increase there's no

language in there that required that

the shall that Jenworth highlights

repeatedly in that administrative rule

is the insurer shall

make sure that

that it's insurance that its

premium rate increase application

meets this baseline this actuarially

justified baseline it is a minimum

and it could exceed that the loss ratio

that's all it does it doesn't put any obligation

under the text of the rule at all

on the commissioner

I'd like to talk

go ahead I'm sorry

I just want to talk very briefly about

the contract clause claim which is where

Mr. Hummer left off

as a matter of law at basically every

step of the analysis we dispute

that there is even really been a material

change in the law but as I just noted

even if there was Jenworth has pointed to

no contractual language no

statutory language no regulatory language

that conferred on it any right

to increase premium

rates in a manner that's inconsistent with

the amended regulations Jenworth

relies on this court's decision in

Tuddle but Tuddle was fundamentally different

that's that is policy language

that expressly incorporated

a regulatory provision there's nothing

like that here they rely on older

U.S. Supreme Court case law that's been

subsequently disavowed as obsolete that suggested

that that certain

contractual obligations that may exist in a

regulation or a statute would be incorporated

in by reference but the Supreme Court's made

clear that that's no longer an absolute rule

and even going beyond and those are the

grounds the trial court ruled on even going

beyond that each

initial additional step in

the process it also fails and gives you

alternative grounds for affirmance

there is not

all impairments even if you were to find one

are substantial in regulated

industries such as the insurance industry

you look at reasonable expectations Jenworth

certainly could reasonably expect that

there would be some regulation on its ability

to charge premiums there's case law that supports

that in other contexts that we've said in our brief

and also

if you're going to even get to a substantial

if you even if you were to conclude there were

a substantial interference

you then look to how it's justified and that's

reasonable and necessary to serve a significant

illegitimate public purpose

I won't go into detail on your case law

on that but in the dear case in particular

you pointed out that when the state

is not the contracting party when there's no question

of profiteering when there's no question of

pecuniary interest you largely

deferred to the legislative and

regulatory reasoning

behind it and we would pause it that

that's also something that you can do here as a matter

of law.

Mr. Garland let me ask you if we

conclude that

the trial court shouldn't have

entered summary judgment for the

department

can we go ahead and decide the case

on the record we have in front

of us or does it need to go back

for development of a factual record?

Your Honor

I would argue that it needs to go back to the

insurance agency that's an argument we made below

if there were factual questions here

do you mind if I

finish my answer justice 6?

He means to say

no go ahead

I'm sorry I mean to say no and I also want

Justice Donovan to have his

question if he still has it

I'm good

Thank you Your Honor

so we would argue not only does it have to

go back to the trial court but it has to go back to

the agency

that is a question of administrative exhaustion

there's a process that's available to

insurers to challenge this

on evidence based challenges before the agency

and that's something that Genworth again

expressly disavowed

by seeking facial challenges it didn't

dispute when the trial court agreed

with it that it was a facial challenge

that they weren't that

matters that were kind of extraneous

and not part of the corners of the regulation

were irrelevant

Genworth didn't dispute that didn't seek

reconsideration so we believe you can

our favor in that you should resolve it in our favor

now and without I

ask unless Justice Donovan

I wasn't sure if you have another question

thank you

thank you all your honor

so we would ask that you affirm

the trial court in all respects that there was no error

in this case thank you

Thank you Mr. Hammer you have two minutes

Thank you Your Honor I have very briefly

I think that the

argument

establishes that

the entire defense of the

regulation is premised

under a fundamental misstatement

of the commissioner's authority

and of the regulatory scheme

the department argues that the commissioner

has broad authority and can somehow

ignore the mandatory restrictions

of the amended regulations

it cites no authority

for that proposition in its brief

not a single citation

there is no such authority for that

and in fact this court

made it clear that an agency

must follow its own regulations

and cannot engage

in the kind of ad hoc rulemaking

that the department appears to say that

the commissioner can do

in the context of an administrative appeal

secondly Your Honor

the department characterizes this amendment

as not a material change

in the law when in fact

it is a fundamental

change shifting from a regime

which essentially ensures

premium adequacy to one in which

rates are capped without regard

to premium adequacy

and third Your Honor the commissioner

the department argues that there is no right

to a rate increase because the commissioner

is not required to approve anything

that is contrary to the language of the

regulation which says that the rate increases

shall be determined

in accordance with the statutory standard

for rate

for expected loss ratios

and it's fundamentally inconsistent

with the department's very public representation

to J.O.R.

that the entire purpose of this regulation

was to give the department

the authority to deny

a rate increase that it had previously

lacked the authority to deny

thank you

thank you very much

case submitted

it was a pleasure gentlemen hearing such fine arguments

the court now is adjourned
