This is case 2019-0522, State of New Hampshire v. Miguel R. Razor.

May it please the Court.

My name is Thomas Barnard.

I represent Miguel Razor.

I reserved one minute for rebuttal.

I plan to make three points this morning.

First, the prosecutor's theme in this case was that Bolinda betrayed A.H.

and thus the jury should feel sorry for her.

Second, the trial court's ruling here cannot be reconciled with this Court's

opinion in DePaulah.

And third, the error was not harmless because the prosecutor, in closing argument,

exploited the error by continuing to attack Bolinda to further evoke the jury's sympathy

for A.H.

I concede in this case that the evidence that Razor sought to admit was not admissible

in the first instance.

It was excluded by rules 404b and rule 403.

Was the evidence that the State offered in its opening admissible?

A witness's opinion about another witness's credibility?

No.

No.

It wasn't.

And that's one of the basis for argument here is that the evidence that Razor

offered was admissible because the State relied on this irrelevant and

misleading argument about Bolinda.

Was there any objection to the argument?

There was not.

There was not.

But...

Do that matter?

It shouldn't.

There are some courts that have looked at whether there was an objection in deciding

whether to apply the curative admissibility doctrine.

But in many instances, an objection is an insufficient remedy.

And requiring an objection as a prerequisite for curative admissibility would

essentially give litigants an incentive to see what they could get away with.

Go ahead and try it.

And if there's no objection, you're home free.

You don't have to worry about rebutting evidence.

Why wouldn't an objection and an motion for immediate mistrial be in order?

Well, it's for a number of reasons.

Razor had a right to be free from double jeopardy.

He had a right to continue his proceeding with that jury.

And he may have reasonably concluded that this misimpression that the prosecutor

created could be remedied simply by explaining why it was that Bolinda

suspected Hernandez rather than Razor.

Well, there were other reasons that were admitted at trial,

like she might have suspected somebody else,

because the victim told her that she lied on two occasions.

And that came in evidence, right?

It did. It did.

The A.H. admitted that she told her mother that her allegations weren't true on two occasions.

I agree.

Bolinda had other reasons to suspect that it was Hernandez rather than Razor.

But this was a major reason for her.

And it directly rebutted the state's argument that Bolinda was feigning skepticism

of A.H.'s accusations because she was biased,

because her livelihood was tied to Razor,

and because she was afraid to look like a bad mother.

And the state emphasized this theme not only in its opening statement,

but in its direct examinations of A.H. and A.H.'s sister.

When A.H. testified, the state elisted testimony that Bolinda did not believe her

and was on Razor's side, which upset A.H.,

that A.H. was being forced to live with Hernandez rather than at her home,

that she missed her mother and that her relationship was different.

When A.H.'s sister testified, the state elisted her testimony that she only seized

Bolinda once a week, which was really rough for her.

All of this was both irrelevant and misleading.

But there was no evidence with respect to the mother's alleged bias

by virtual or financial support of her husband.

That didn't come in evidence other than opening and closing.

Yeah, I don't believe there was any evidence of that, no,

because ultimately Bolinda didn't testify, which I think goes to the prejudice

of the error here.

I mean, it's impermissible for a testifying witness to testify that they do

or do not believe the testimony of another witness.

It's doubly inadmissible if we're talking about the opinion of a witness

who doesn't even testify in court.

Mr. Barnard, my goal in this case is not to make any bad law.

How was the door actually opened?

Well, the door was opened in an opening statement and in the prosecutors' examinations

of A.H. and A.H.'s sister.

Door to what?

I'm sorry?

Door to what?

Dooring what?

What door is he asking?

Oh, which door?

Door to what?

So the door was opened in two ways.

The state referenced inadmissible evidence.

As we've been talking about a witness's opinion of another,

the truth of another witness's testimony is inadmissible.

So that opened the door under care of admissibility to explain

Bolinda's reason, legitimate reasons for suspecting that Hernandez,

rather than Razor, was the perpetrator.

It was also admissible under the specific contradiction doctrine.

And on this point, DiPaula is especially instructive.

In DiPaula, the defendant was charged with burglary,

and there was evidence that he and some accomplices went to the victim's home

one week prior to the charge of defense.

The defendant testified that he didn't know that the purpose of that trip

was to prepare for a future burglary,

but the purpose was to buy a gun.

The trial court, in response to that testimony,

admitted evidence that the defendant participated in an unrelated murder

later that same day under the specific contradiction doctrine.

And on appeal, this court affirmed.

So there are similarities here between this case and DiPaula.

Like DiPaula, there was evidence that was initially admitted that was

misleading.

That evidence would have been, in the first instance,

admissible under rules 404b and 403, and there was triggering evidence

that placed that misleading evidence in context.

But there are three key differences between DiPaula and the case here.

First, the triggering evidence here was so much more misleading

than the evidence in DiPaula.

Second, the response of evidence was so much more on point

than the response of evidence in DiPaula.

And third, the response of evidence in here was so much less prejudicial

than the response of evidence in DiPaula.

And DiPaula was evidence that the defendant had participated in a murder

just one week prior to the charged offense.

Here, the response of evidence was that Hernandez had sex with his future wife

decades in the past.

And was that issue disputed factually by the State?

No, the State agreed that Bollinda had stated that Hernandez

had sex with her when she was 12 years old.

But how does that actually contradict a motive to favor her current husband?

Well, the State's argument was that Bollinda was feigning skepticism

in AHA's accusations for a couple reasons.

One, because she was financially dependent on Razor.

And two, because she was afraid to look like a bad mother.

So this evidence would have shown that Bollinda wasn't feigning skepticism

in AHA's accusations.

She had sincere skepticism of those accusations.

And it was based on a legitimate reason.

It wasn't based on her own self-interest.

It still seems like two different issues, if you will.

It's a stretch.

One is, one is her, right, she would have a basis to favor her current spouse.

There's another issue whether her skepticism has some basis, I guess.

So how do you pull them together?

Well, I think they are, they're closely related.

The State elicited evidence that Bollinda chose to live with Razor after these allegations

were made that AHA only saw Bollinda infrequently, that it was really rough on AHA

and her sister.

So that placed an issue, the reason for those actions by Bollinda.

Doesn't it also support another reason why Bollinda did not believe the allegations?

One, because the victim admitted to lying about it on two occasions.

And two, there was another person in her life that had committed a similar act against Bollinda.

Exactly.

Exactly.

This explains the basis for Bollinda's skepticism of the allegation that it's Razor

who committed these acts.

And how important in the grand scheme of this trial is her skepticism?

It should not have been important at all.

Bollinda's opinion about the truthfulness of the allegations should have had no role in this

trial.

The State had no obligation to make an argument about that.

The State had no, certainly no obligation to make it a centerpiece of its case.

But when the prosecutor did that, it entitled Razor to introduce evidence that explained

that and rebutted it and placed it in context.

And by doing so, Razor would have eliminated the prejudice of that State's argument.

Would it have refocused attention on the fact that the victim was living with Hector?

Well, I think the State focused on the fact that the victim was living with Hernandez.

So I don't think that it would have highlighted that any more than the State had highlighted

it.

But it would have explained why it was that Bollinda chose to continue to live with Razor.

And can you draw any parallels with State v. Godet and our attitude toward whether the

door was opened or not in that case?

I have a list of eight cases.

Godet is not one of them.

But if the Court wishes I'd be happy to submit a supplemental memorandum on Godet.

I do think, you know, de Paula is closely analogous.

And I expect the State will say, well, there's a deferential standard.

The standard is abuse of discretion.

What discretion means is there are some cases where the trial court must admit the evidence,

and then a middle ground, where the trial court has discretion to rule one way or the other.

But because the case for applying specific contradiction is so much more compelling here

than it was in de Paula, if we assume that de Paula was a close case, as we must,

then it cannot also be true that this was a close case.

It must be the case that the trial court here was compelled to apply specific contradiction

and admit the evidence.

But with respect to your curative doctrine, is that issue really preserved for us here?

Because it seems to me that the defense did not argue that to the trial court.

No, that's right.

The defense never uttered the words curative admissibility.

But the preservation isn't measured just by what defense counsel says.

It's measured by what the trial court understood the argument to be.

And here the prosecutor explained that opening the door comprises both curative

admissibility and specific contradiction, and the trial court in its order expressly

addressed curative admissibility.

If it hadn't done that, then perhaps defense counsel would have moved to reconsider

or clarified or renewed his objection on the basis of curative admissibility.

But that would have been futile given the fact that the trial court expressly

addressed the doctor.

Does the record give us any clue as to why Belinda did not testify?

No.

Why didn't the defense call her?

Why did the defense not call her?

Why didn't he?

Why?

I don't know.

I mean, I can imagine that the defense looked at the evidence here and said,

you know, we've got a good shot as things stand.

But I would be speculating if I said why the defense did not call Belinda.

She was on the State's witness list.

She was not on the defense's witness list.

The last point I want to emphasize is the prejudice of the error in this case.

And that prejudice came in closing argument, where the State expressly

evoked the jury's sympathy for AH.

Said how unbelievably sad it is for AH that her fear came true.

Her mom doesn't believe her.

Can you even imagine how difficult it would be for a 12-year-old girl to tell her mom

something so hard for her to say, to work up that courage, to put herself on that

limb and for her mom to say, I don't believe you?

Again without objection.

Again without objection.

But this was the prejudice of the error.

And for preservation purposes, certainly a litigant must object when the error

is made.

But this Court has never required a litigant to object again when that error results

in prejudice.

With respect to prejudice, the issue was squarely placed in front of the jury.

That being, AH was asked whether or not her biological father assaulted her

sexually.

And she denied it, right?

I believe that's her.

And Mr. Hernandez was asked directly whether he had sexually assaulted his

daughter.

And he denied that.

Yes.

Aren't you really asking us to make credibility determinations that belong to

the jury?

No, the purpose of this evidence was not to show that Hernandez was predisposed

to commit sexual assaults.

The purpose of the evidence was to explain Belinda's response to AH's

allegations.

In fact, we agree there should have been a limiting instruction saying this

can't be used for propensity purposes.

But by explaining AH's response or Belinda's response to AH's allegations, it

would have eliminated the misleading impression that Belinda was acting from

selfish motives.

And for that reason, the jury should feel sympathy for AH.

Your red light is on.

Thank you.

Thank you, Mr. Barnard.

Mr. Hernandez.

I'm to state for the record that Justice Bassett is participating

telephonically, and he is texting me questions when he has them.

Thank you.

Good morning, Your Honor.

May I please the Court?

Zachary Hyman for the State of New Hampshire.

We ask that the court affirm the defendant's convictions because the

trial court properly exercised its discretion when it excluded the

inadmissible propensity evidence regarding Mr. Hernandez.

I'd like to first address the two doctrines of opening the door that

my co-counsel has brought up.

Now, the defendant has acknowledged that they sought to introduce

inadmissible propensity evidence in this case.

And they have argued that they should be allowed in because the State

opened the door.

However, this is simply untrue.

The State did not open the door under either curative admissibility

or specific contradiction doctrines.

Do you admit that the evidence that the State referenced in its

opening statement was inadmissible?

No, Your Honor.

So witnesses can now testify about the veracity of another witness?

No, Your Honor.

Absolutely not.

But the admissible evidence showed that the influence that Belinda

had cited with her husband over her daughter was plainly present.

There was no evidence admitted, nor would I expect that the State

would have directly sought to elicit evidence of Belinda's opinion

on her daughter.

But they did.

Didn't they ask A. H.'s daughter, I mean, sister, whether or not

her mother disbelieved her?

I'm not entirely certain, Your Honor.

I think that they may have.

But in terms of Belinda herself, the evidence that she has had

cited with her husband is there without asking her that ultimate

question on her opinion of her daughter.

She continued to live with Mr. Racer.

Her daughter's moved out and she didn't either go with them

or insist that he leave and they stay.

Why is that relevant?

I beg your pardon?

Why is that relevant?

Well, it's relevant to show that Belinda has made a decision.

She has a bias towards her husband.

Why is that relevant?

It's relevant because...

She's not testifying.

She's not a witness.

Admittedly, she did not end up testifying.

But at the time, all the parties seemed to believe that she would

testify.

And so pulling out her motives for doing so is an important

consideration at that point.

The fact that she ultimately did not testify, notwithstanding,

her motives for her testimony would have been relevant had she

ultimately testified.

But given that she didn't, is it proper to revisit her testimony

or lack thereof in closing?

I think that there is ample evidence that was admitted that shows

Belinda's bias against her daughter.

And the reality is that whether or not she testifies,

these facts exist.

She does not live with her mother anymore.

She has had to move out.

This has created this rift in her family.

But this was a sexual assault case.

What the mother thinks or believes or whether she's

skeptical or not is of no moment to the underlying issues in

this case.

And to that point, Your Honor...

I did the State contaminate the case that way.

To that point, Your Honor, the State did not contaminate

the case.

The reality is that the State's opening comments, while they

ultimately didn't reflect what came to pass, did reflect what

the State thought was going to come to pass.

The...

Was any of this evidence subject to a pretrial litigation?

In terms of...

Motions in lemonade.

I don't believe so, Your Honor.

I have to tell you, Mr. Heim, I am deeply troubled by the

State's opening.

And the references to a witness's opinion about another

witness's credibility.

If the defense had jumped up and I was sitting on that trial,

I would have given them...

I would have issued a mistrial immediately.

And perhaps that would have been appropriate, Your Honor,

but the fact is that the defendant did not object to any

of this.

And the trial, as it played out, presented ample

evidence of Mr. Racer's guilt.

And it is, in fact, the defendant who is now trying to

contaminate the situation by introducing this

propensity evidence that really serves no probative value

to the actual case.

Explain to me why the analysis under 404b is the

proper lens to look at this proper evidence when

Mr. Fernandez was strictly a witness and not

a party to the case.

So what relevance does the alleged propensity

evidence have?

Well, character evidence is not limited simply to a

defendant in the case.

The witness can...

There does a defense that someone else did it.

I mean, wouldn't that always, if there were evidence

leading to that someone else, wouldn't that always

raise this 404b question?

Not necessarily.

If there were evidence, non-propensity evidence

that someone else did it, that would be entirely

proper for a defendant to raise.

But it's not proper to use propensity evidence.

Propensity evidence is inadmissible because it doesn't

actually prove anything.

It only proves perhaps someone's character.

But is that truly the analysis we employ under the

opening the door cases when we're strictly looking at

the prejudice created by the...

The prejudice created on the party to the case?

Well, if we're looking at the prejudice,

the prejudice was cured.

If you look side-by-side at the prosecutor's opening

statements and the defense's opening statements,

that they neutralized one another, that both sides

were given an opportunity to present this evidence

that they predicted about Glinda in the light most

favorable to their side.

Well, no, that's not true.

The defense wasn't allowed to introduce the fact that

Mr. Hernandez apparently had sex with his wife

when she was 12 years old or 13 years old.

They weren't allowed to enter that information

specifically because it is propensity evidence.

And it doesn't show that he is then responsible

for this crime.

Whether or not he committed a crime...

Well, it's not being admitted or sought to be admitted

for that.

It's sought to be admitted to Bluthorst's mother's

skepticism about the claim against the defendant.

But that logic then leads to the fact that the only reason

that she would have skepticism and point the finger

at Mr. Hernandez is because of this past act.

She has no present evidence that he committed this crime.

Well, the victim did tell her that she lied about accusing

the stepdad, right?

But she never said that it was her father that committed

the crime, saying whether or not her statements

were inconsistent regarding her stepfather,

her statements regarding her father were never inconsistent.

She never said that her father sexually assaulted her.

She said that she thought, I think, my stepdad did, though.

Yes, I believe she said I just keep thinking it was my stepdad.

Do you know why Belinda did not testify?

I do not, Your Honor.

Do you know if she was subpoenaed?

I don't, Your Honor.

I frankly have no idea why she didn't testify.

And it's not uncommon for witnesses that are referenced

in openings not to testify.

A trial, that happened.

Yes, absolutely.

And in this case, as I've mentioned,

the prejudice was neutralized by those opening statements.

But then further, the reality of opening and closing statements

is that they are not evidence.

And this Court has routinely said that what an attorney says

in their opening and closing is not evidence

and that a jury instruction stating that is sufficient

to cure prejudice in many of these cases.

This is one such instance where a jury instruction is sufficient

to cure that prejudice.

Well, the trial court ruled that this specific contradiction,

Doctor, didn't apply in part because there was too much prejudice.

Who was prejudiced by the introduction of this evidence

other than Mr. Hernandez?

And why does that matter of Mr. Hernandez?

His prejudice is just a way.

The prejudice isn't strictly to Mr. Hernandez.

The prejudice is to the State's case.

Bringing in this propensity evidence.

In response to inadmissible evidence that the State referenced

in its opening, mind you, right?

In response to the State's opening statements, yes.

But the prejudice is to the State's case, ultimately.

The prejudice would have created a mini-trial effectively

with Mr. Hernandez as the pseudo-defendant.

Mr. Hernandez was not on trial.

Mr. Racer was on trial.

And the evidence that was put before the trial court pointed to Mr. Racer.

The prejudice in this case would have immensely outweighed

any probative value that evidence of Mr. Hernandez's past acts

could have possibly struck.

It's a 403 analysis, in other words.

Yes, sir.

I think that the 404b and the 403 analysis both come into play here.

The 403 analysis in particular, because this is incredibly inflammatory

evidence that the defendant is seeking to elicit,

they are seeking to place blame on someone

for whom they have no actual evidence committed this crime.

They have only his actions 25 years ago.

They don't have a witness saying that this is the man who sexually assaulted me.

They don't have her sister saying I saw this man,

my father sexually assaulted her.

The only evidence they have is Belinda's allegation from 25 years ago.

An allegation that is frankly tainted by her own bias towards her husband

and is therefore that much more prejudicial to the defense, to the State's case.

Now, the curative admissibility doctrine in particular.

Oh, excuse me.

I lost my phone.

I'm sorry.

The specific contradiction doctrine in particular.

The party needs a justification beyond just relevance for the introduction of this evidence.

There is no justification that there is no prejudice to the defendant's case that needs

to be purged in this case.

The.

So the State's opening that the mother expressed skepticism doesn't leave a misleading

impression that needs to be countered?

Not when placed next to the defendant's opening statements.

The two opening statements neutralize one another sufficiently,

but there's no need for further curing of this prejudice.

What did the defense say in opening that cured or cleared any prejudice?

The defense, both parties spoke to Belinda's testimony and what they expected Belinda would say.

But in particular, excuse me, the State, the State, I apologize,

the defendant, in speaking of what Belinda would say,

cast her in a light of someone who's being reasonable,

who is that she initially heard the allegations and was upset about,

upset towards her husband, that she then looked further into it and didn't believe it.

They were able to cast this as a reasonable belief on her part.

And so when you look at the two side by side, any prejudice that the State's opening

statement caused is cured by the defendant's ability to elicit its own inferences

based on what they expected the evidence would show.

Including the A.H.'s admission that she told her mother that she lied about the allegation?

I'm not sure that that came up in the opening.

That came up a trial.

But it came up a trial, yes, Your Honor.

Now, in terms of a harmless error, the alternative evidence of this particular defendant's guilt was overwhelming.

We have a victim who testified that this was the man who assaulted her.

And in looking at this in terms of could it have been her father versus her stepfather,

this young woman is able to recognize the difference between her father and her stepfather.

And in doing and in testifying that it was, in fact, Mr. Racer, not Mr. Hernandez,

that itself is sufficient to cure a prejudice.

There's no indication that the victim ever believed that this was her father or that she believed

that her father was in any way involved.

And so taking what is...

But there's also evidence that she had a great relationship with her father?

I beg your pardon?

There was also evidence that A.H. had a great relationship with her father?

With her father?

Yes.

That she loved him?

Yes.

That she admitted that she told her mother she lied about the allegations?

Her stepfather, Your Honor?

Or her father?

A.H. told her mother that she lied about the allegations against her stepfather.

Until...

Yes, I apologize.

Tell us how it's overwhelming evidence, given that there's contradictory evidence

presented to the jury at the same time, during the same trial.

If there's contradictory evidence, it doesn't contradict...

Let me rephrase that.

There's no contradictory evidence that Mr. Hernandez was involved.

So this collateral issue of Mr. Hernandez doesn't change the flow of this case.

But could it not raise a reasonable doubt?

Well, even if it does raise a reasonable...

Could raise a reasonable doubt, the defendant was able to cast Mr. Hernandez

as a possible alternative perpetrator of this crime.

They weren't able to use the propensity evidence to prove that he could have been the alternative.

Can I see my light?

Your light is on.

Thank you very much.

Thank you.

Mr. Barnard, do we have one minute?

I would wait for your call.

Thank you, sir.

Thank you.

Case submitted.
