This is case 2019-0490 in 2021-0501, state of New Hampshire, versus Robert M. Fitzgerald,

Jr.

Mr. Norley, you've reserved two minutes. Is that accurate?

That's accurate, Justice Sakes. Thank you.

You may proceed whenever you're ready.

Good afternoon, Your Honors, and may it please the Court.

Mr. Chairman, I knew all on behalf of Mr. Fitzgerald.

I think there are three categories of issues in this appeal.

The first is whether the undisclosed evidence was favorable.

The second is whether the kidnapping conviction should be vacated, and we raised three cheap

arguments for that.

And the third is the ineffective assistance claims, which hold Germany from the same seed

of the grant of a mistress.

And my intention this afternoon is to focus on the first and third issues beginning with

whether the undisclosed evidence was favorable, and then address, what I think is the novel

issue, of whether effective assistance requires the defense counsel to consult with the

director accepting or waiving a mistrial, and to address the kidnapping charge of time

permits or if questions take us there.

And I'm happy to take your questions.

Go right ahead, sir.

Number one.

The undisclosed evidence.

So, on a motion for a new trial based upon undisclosed evidence, we have a three factor

test, and this case that really turns only on the first factor.

And I want to clarify something from the briefing based on discussion with my opposing

counsel and colleague that it appeared from the briefing, and I think we represent

that there's a green between Mr. Fitzgerald and the state on remand if the evidence was

favorable.

I think the state's position may be more nuanced than that, and that the state may be

asking you to reach whether the evidence was knowing withheld and whether the

evidence was material.

But our position remains that this court, what's before it, is just whether the

evidence was favorable because we don't have findings for this court to review

on the latter two factors.

And the reason we don't have findings is because the superior court assumed rather

than found the state knowingly.

And because then the court applied the wrong standard and the state hasn't

stated that Mr. Fitzgerald did not win because the court was assuming the

evidence was knowingly withheld, the correct standard would be whether the

state had proven beyond reasonable doubt that so we think it should be

remanded.

Why is this evidence favorable?

Excuse me.

I think we begin with the three ways of defining variable.

It's admissible evidence or anything that leads to admissible evidence or, and

this is the broadest, and this is the quotation from this court, otherwise

relevant to preparation or presentation of the defense.

It's very broad.

And it's easier to define by reference to what this court said is not favorable.

And in preparing for argument, I was looking for examples.

This court has not often found that this was not at least favorable when a

defendant was claiming that it was.

But state B, Wisa Wadi, 137, New Hampshire, 298, there was a hat found

in a road, a road that passed by a crime scene and was found a day later.

Nobody, no witness mentioned a hat.

The assailant wasn't wearing a hat, the victim wasn't wearing a hat,

the defendant wasn't known to wear a hat.

There was nothing connecting this hat to anything.

And this court held that the defendant didn't even have a rationale for

why that would be used, and that's not favorable.

Why is this evidence not a hat in the middle of the road?

Why does it get over that low bar?

Because this is evidence about the sole witness for the state.

And literally the only witness that the state put on, and the defense was

that she was either misremembering things or she was making up the incident.

And in fact, the jury acquitted on some of these.

They accepted that defense for at least some of the alleged.

And so we have a memorandum that says that this sole witness was

forgetting details of the incident.

Now it says they were small details.

The author of the memorandum didn't remember what those details were.

Well isn't it, isn't it not that the author thought

that she was forgetting small details, but she thought

that she might not be remembering details?

I think it's a little different than that, Your Honor.

If you look at our brief and full things,

I've reproduced the entire note in their briefs.

Well I read it, but I can't find it amongst all the papers

I have here, but.

Fair enough, Your Honor, page 17 of our brief.

She was worried because she had forgotten some small details

and was reminded when reading her application for protective order.

Now just to say, I think there is the distinction your drawing has to do

with when the prosecutor said that she should come back.

It will seem more coherent and strong.

And the testimony of the author of the note was that,

well that meant it would seem more coherent and strong to her.

It wasn't that it seemed coherent and strong to us.

But there was really no dispute that she had forgotten details

and was reminded.

Well at least this is the reporter's impression, however.

That's right.

Well and it's her interpretation of what she wrote.

She had no independent memory of the meeting.

Okay, thank you.

So it's just her interpretation of what she wrote.

But I didn't see any testimony where she said she had not forgotten things

after being confronted with her note saying that, yes,

she had forgotten some small details.

What she said then was wasn't anything important.

They were small details.

But she doesn't know what they were, but we do know from the note

that they were details that she found in her application

for protective order from this incident.

So they weren't small details like what did you have for lunch today?

They weren't small details that were a hat and a road.

They were details about this incident.

And the other reason that this isn't just a hat and a road

is because the witness testified that this meeting never happened.

So we had two preparation meetings right before the first trial.

This one that the notice from is from Monday and a second one on Friday.

And then the trial was, I believe, the next Tuesday or Wednesday.

And the witness said, I only met with the prosecutor two times,

once just after the incident.

And once last Friday, she just thought there was no Monday meeting.

In fact, she met with the prosecutor a total of four times.

So the first was April 16, 2018.

And then again in May 2018, before the grand jury,

we don't have any details about that meeting except that.

But so why is that favorable?

It seems to me that, I mean, that's normal witness preparation.

You meet with your witness a couple of times.

They need to do things to refresh their memory.

It seems to me this is just the normal thing

that any lawyer would do.

And in fact, having fewer meetings

might make the defendants' arguments more compelling

about that she wasn't prepared, didn't know what she

was talking about.

Well, I follow your point just as fast

until fewer meetings somehow being favorable to the defense.

I can't get my head around that.

But the first point about why is this favorable?

I think it's favorable for two reasons.

One is that in this meeting, we have this note saying

that she's afraid the jury's not

going to believe her on Monday.

The next week, she tells the jury this meeting never happened.

That's favorable.

And on a case that depends on her memory,

being able to impeach her and say,

well, actually, you did have a meeting.

And at that meeting, you had forgotten things

in the recollection of the press.

At that meeting, you were afraid the jury wasn't going

to believe you.

Is that why you're telling the jury the meeting never happened?

The witness can answer those questions any way she likes.

But I think any answer to a specific contradiction

like that is going to help the defendant in a case that

relies on arguing that she's either a liar or has poor

or weak.

And it's particularly egregious here,

because right after the witness testified to that,

we have a mistrial.

And we have a mistrial for a failure

to produce favorable evidence to the defense,

including information about preparing this witness.

The prosecution was certainly on notice

that it's meeting from last Monday, which

is memorialized, needed to be disclosed to the defense.

And it didn't do it.

So then we have a whole other trial,

and we don't find out until after the second trial

that this meeting happened that it was disclosed

that she was forgetting details about the incident

and refreshing a recollection of the protective order.

These are all things that could

be used in preparation for the presentation of the defense.

And I see my light is on, so I do

want to turn to what is a novel issue, which

the standard for ineffective assistance with regard to.

I think the standard most akin to it that we should look to

would be either failure to file a notice about you

or failure to notify a defendant about a plea offer.

Because in both of those instances,

the defendant has really lost the entire proceeding

or the entire beneficial item completely.

So if the defendant wanted one of those things,

there's no question that serves prejudice

in that he's denied it.

And if the defendant wanted this,

there's really no question that he was denied that jury.

And I do just want to take issue with this.

Well, what about the testimony that I think

defense counsel gave that basically the defendant,

every time I said, well, this is what I think we ought to do,

the defendant said, yeah, that's what we should do.

He testified that he was generally uninterested,

but he also testified that the defendant specifically said

he didn't want deals, he wanted to go to trial.

So the defendant certainly made decisions

about his case and about the conduct of his case.

He didn't leave everything to his attorney.

He didn't say, oh, I'll take the deal if you think I should.

The defendant had definite ideas that he wanted a trial.

And we have in Appendix 62, we have the affidavit.

I appreciate your, I'm sorry, go ahead and finish.

Well, I just want to point out that we do have evidence

on that point because we have the affidavit

on page 62 of the Appendix from Mr. Fitzgerald

saying that in fact he did want to continue

it now that he knows what a mistrial is.

And with the consequence of, he would have preferred

to continue with the trial.

Did he say why?

I haven't read that affidavit yet.

Did he say why?

He wanted to try.

Yes, he said he thought that the trial was going well

to that point that the jury was reacting well

to his lawyer, that he felt confident

in the case at that time.

Now, his lawyer said that he appeared happy

when he told him the mistrial was granted.

But his lawyer also said that the client was not legally

sophisticated, that's at Appendix 260 or excuse me,

I think that Appendix 260.

Mr. Fitzgerald was not particularly sophisticated

when it came to legal issues.

And he explained what the consequences of mistrial

would be after the mistrial motion had been decided

and had never told Mr. Fitzgerald

what a mistrial was or what the results.

And the remedy you're seeking here

is just a new trial, is that right?

I think it's a little more complex

than that Justice Six.

I think that we do ask for a new trial,

but we also argue in our brief that specifically

as to the mistrial, that just a new trial

doesn't cure the problem because he had a new trial

after the mistrial.

Now, we think that there's really only two ways

to cure that.

One would be to the extent the court has information

re-impaneling the same jury.

Summoning the same jury would cure the prejudice

to Mr. Fitzgerald because what he lost

was the right to have a second trial.

Have you ever heard of a case where that was done?

I haven't.

I have not.

Okay, thank you.

But there have been reversals for waving a mistrial

when a mistrial was offered.

And in those cases, the result was a new trial.

Here it's a little different because what he lost

was having that specific jury.

I think only the remedy that puts Mr. Fitzgerald

in the same position would be a judgment of acquittal.

I realize that's a different remedy.

Big bet because the jeopardy is attached.

I follow your argument.

Unfortunately, your red light is on.

Can you just wrap up?

I don't want you to leave anything on the table here.

Justice Sicks, I think I said what I came to say today.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Mr. Garnier.

Good afternoon, Mr. Harris.

May it please the court?

It's Em Garnier for the State of New Hampshire.

There's a lot going on in this case

and I ambitiously hope to get to the

ineffective assistance issue first

and the discovery violation.

Third, the merger doctrine

and finally the deficiency issue.

But despite my perhaps naively lofty goals,

I welcome the court's questions at any time.

First, I want to pick up a little bit

where the court just left off.

I want to point out to the court

that the affidavit that the defendant points out

specifically deemed not credible by the trial.

The defendant did not testify

in support of his motion for a new trial.

So there is no credible evidence in this case

that he would have objected to him in the trial.

I think that's great that trial judges could do that.

I don't recall ever doing that.

So he looked at an affidavit

and found it to be un-credible?

To the extent that I can discern the reasoning

from the trial judge's sentence, Your Honor.

Yes, he just looks at the affidavit

and I imagine he also bases on the testimony

of his trial counsel and maybe draws an inference

from the defendant not testifying in support

of his motion for a new trial.

Did Mr. Tocum testify in the motion for a new trial?

During the hearing on, but in a separate position.

Thank you.

And in Attorney Russell's,

the defense attorney's deposition,

he testifies that after he moved for the missed trial,

he had 25 minutes to prepare an argument for a missed trial.

He explained to his client what he had done,

just that he moved for a missed trial.

He only had 25 minutes to research it.

And during that brief consultation,

the defendant did not object to the missed trial

or say that he didn't want it.

And then Attorney Russell's testimony

is that after the missed trial was granted,

the defendant was happy to have another opportunity

to perhaps procure more witnesses

with which to impeach the victim's testimony.

So there just isn't any evidence in this record

that the outcome of the proceeding

would have been different if the defense counsel

had consulted the defendant further than he did.

This is not like a failure to file a notice of appeal

or a failure to notify a defendant of a plea offer.

Those two sorts of things go to the four sorts of decisions

that the Supreme Court of the United States

has said is for a defendant, not for an attorney.

That is whether to plead guilty,

whether to testify, whether to waive a jury,

and whether to appeal.

And the Eighth Circuit in the United States of Washington

acknowledged that those decisions

all implicate two basic tenets of our justice system.

The right to have your day in court

and the right to try your case to a jury of your peers.

And whether to move for a missed trial,

the Eighth Circuit explained it does not directly implicate

either of those things.

The Eighth Circuit explained that a defendant's

successful request for a missed trial

means that the first impaneled jury

will not judge the defendant,

not that no jury will decide the defendant's fate.

So the right to the jury trial

doesn't include the right to a specific jury?

I think it has been clearly acknowledged

that a defendant does have a right

to be first impaneled jury.

I think what I'm arguing is that it's not

on the same footing as deciding

whether or not you're gonna have a jury at all.

It is just, it's still an important decision.

It's just not one of the fundamental decisions

that is of such a moment that the defendant

must make the decision.

And as the Fourth Circuit explained

in the United States v. Chapman,

every federal circuit that has addressed this issue

has come out the same way,

that whether to move from this trial

is a tactical decision for an attorney,

not for a client.

Have we used that terminology or approach

whether something's a tactical decision or not?

I think this court has referred to decisions

as tactical or this court may use the word strategic

more frequently, but yes, I believe that concept

is built into this court's jurisprudence.

And the Fourth Circuit, again,

each circuit that has addressed this issue

has come out the same way.

And this is an issue of first impression for this court

in this arena of ineffective assistance.

And this court has stated in its case law

that the ineffective assistance analysis

is the same under the state constitution,

the federal constitution, and when this court addresses

an ineffective assistance issue of first impression,

this court lists of federal opinions for guidance.

And if this court holds to that in this case,

all of the guidance points in one direction.

And I want to respond to the defendant's reply brief

that seems to make a point of contention over the state

not directly addressing the Third Circuit's decision

in Weatherwax in the state opening our response brief.

Just to dispel any notion that the state

is running from Weatherwax.

The state did not address Weatherwax

because on this court's reading of Weatherwax

in the United States, the state was confident

that this court would readily discern

that Weatherwax just really is not applicable here.

Weatherwax was decided in 1996.

United States v. Alec is decided in 2010.

And admittedly, United States v. Alec

is a non-precedential opinion,

Weatherwax is presidential.

However, Alec is significant in that it addresses

exactly this question, whether a motion for a mistrial

is a tactical decision or a fundamental one.

And in the sentence immediately after

the court's first long site to Weatherwax,

Third Circuit says, although we have never addressed

this issue, every Federal Circuit has ruled the same way.

So not even Third Circuit understands Weatherwax,

which is a Third Circuit opinion to address this issue.

However, even if Weatherwax were controlling,

the state would still prevail.

What's going on in Weatherwax is

the defendant and his family see a juror

walk into the courtroom on the last day of trial

holding a newspaper.

And in that newspaper is a story covering

the defendant's testimony in an unfavorable light.

And they bring that to the attention of the attorney.

And the testimony of the defendant and his family

is that they ask the attorney to do something about it,

file some sort of motion.

So the set of facts you have there,

the question really is, when a defendant comes

to his attorney with a concern,

does the attorney have a duty to consult

a client about that concern?

That's not what we have here.

But in Weatherwax, the attorney briefly discussed

in the courthouse law the issue with his client.

In the Third Circuit said,

although that consultation was brief, it was not perfunctory.

It was enough to satisfy his obligation

to consult his client.

And in this case, I would say the same thing is true.

During that period of time,

between moving for the mistrial and arguing for it,

counsel told his client what he had done

and that was keeping his client abreast of what was going on

and gave his client an opportunity to voice any concerns

or any objections that can talk it through with his attorney,

none of which he did.

So even if Weatherwax controlled this case,

the state still prevails.

What about the note that March 11th note?

Yes, Your Honor.

So it is the state's position as explained in the brief

that the trial court disposed of this issue

on the first prong, the favorability prong.

And it does that in something like thorough analysis

where it really tees up the defendant's argument

and says the defendant's claim is that any evidence

with which he could impeach the victim's credibility

is favorable to him.

The trial court then analyzes the evidence

and says there really isn't any way

you could undermine the victim's credibility with this note

and then it's the state's position disposes of it

as no favorable evidence.

But then the court, for the sake of argument,

assumes without deciding that the state knowingly

withheld the note.

And then it failed.

Even though it had found that it wasn't favorable?

It does assume without deciding.

It's just kind of going on in dicta, I would submit.

Okay.

But yes, it does go on in two or three

very brief paragraphs at the end.

It analyzes the final four prongs.

And in doing so, it assumes without deciding

that the state knowingly held the evidence

and a finding for which the state would say

there is no support in the record.

And then the last prong fails to shift the burden

because if the state did knowingly withheld the evidence,

then the state needs to prove beyond a reasonable doubt

that it was not material.

If the answer to the second inquiry is no,

the burden stays with the defendant.

It's the state's position that even if this court

disagreed with the favorability analysis

which the state does not think it should,

I would agree with Justice Bassett's observation

or at least question,

even if you may have been playing devil's advocate

that is not favorable evidence.

It is just documentation of standard trial prep.

I recognize that it could be used to say,

well, you said you only had two meetings.

Look, you had three or maybe you had four.

I recognize that.

But this court has said over and over and over again

in its case law that favorable evidence

may include impeachment evidence.

And this court means to say that impeachment evidence,

no matter how insignificant its impeachment value is,

is always favorable evidence.

Then the court should clarify that,

but I do not understand this court's case law to say that.

But even if the court disagreed and said,

you know, the trial area in favorability analysis,

excuse me, the analysis that the court conducted

applies with equal force to the third prong,

no matter where you place the verdict.

And that analysis shows that the evidence was not material.

It was of such minimal impeachment value

and the victim was impeached on much stronger fronts.

The defense counsel exposed for the jury

that the victim didn't bring up these court documents

she found to the police or to the prosecutor

until just the Friday before Friday.

They exposed that she never told the police

about the argument that apparently happened between

her getting home from her first job

and her going to her session job.

If those pieces of impeachment evidence

did not cause the jury to think

that she just was not believable,

the fact that she couldn't remember one meeting

from multiple years ago that nobody in attendance

remembered, not the victim witness advocate,

not the prosecutor nor the victim.

That was not going to be weighty enough

to cause a different outcome in the proceedings.

Except that it was a meeting where she admitted

she couldn't remember relevant details.

She couldn't remember small details, Your Honor.

And to Justice Hicks's point,

that was Megan Fox's interpretation

of what she had thought happened based on the note.

I think based on an average person's understanding

of the court process on television,

it's reasonable for somebody to be concerned

about testifying generally.

And then to think that if I don't remember

every little detail,

defense is going to pounce on me

and the jury's not going to believe me.

The fact that somebody wants to be well prepared

does not mean that they're lying

or that they're inconsistent or that they're not credible.

We refresh people's recollections

with documents all the time at trial

and the defense doesn't then jump on and say,

oh, you couldn't remember that?

How could I be to believe you?

There just really was no impeachment value here.

So even if the court disagrees

with favorability determination,

it should affirm on the second two prongs.

And if it is not willing to do that,

then we would agree with the defense

that it should be vacated and sent back to the trial court

to analyze those final two prongs

in something other than.

Speaking briefly to the merger doctrine, Your Honors,

it is not entirely clear to the state

what exactly defendant is arguing should be merged in.

The summary of the argument,

he argues that the kidnapping should merge,

should have been dismissed

because it should have merged into the other charges.

I will admit to this court,

I have never read a case where a very serious charge

like kidnapping merged into a very much lesser charge

like simple assault generally works in the other direction.

But even if it could work in that direction,

like kidnapping is assumed by the simple assault,

the kidnapping here isn't incidental to anything.

And charges are.

I guess I read it as the kidnapping charge

did not have all the elements met.

So that should go away.

And then the other overlapping lesser charges

should be merged.

At least that's the way I'm reading the argument.

So to the first point,

that sounded like a sufficiency component.

Right.

So I read them as different arguments.

I read if we went on sufficiently

in the kidnapping stays,

some sort of charge should still go away

because they merge.

Either the kidnapping emerges into the other three

or the other three merged into the kidnapping.

Speaking first of the kidnapping,

this court explained very well,

illustrated very well in the state,

that she cast an oath when the kidnapping merges.

In that case,

the defendant brings a little girl to a clearing

to commit AFSA upon her as she tries to leave.

He momentarily touches her hand

to try to keep her in place.

In this court said that that momentary touch of a hand

was so incidental to him trying to commit the AFSA.

It's not really its own criminal act it merges.

But in this case,

the kidnapping is not incidental to anything.

Confining the victim was his conscious object.

It was not a means to an end.

It was an end in itself.

It was incidental to nothing.

The other charges.

Well, what about the purpose?

Confining to terrorize.

Is that really what we're focused on?

Not unlawful restraint,

but confining in order to terrorize.

In the sufficiency argument,

yes, that is what we were concerned with, Your Honor.

And speaking quickly to that point,

the circumstantial evidence rule

is that if an element is proven solely

through circumstantial evidence,

it must exclude all reasonable conclusions

except for guilt.

I see my red light is on, Your Honor.

Please finish your point on this issue.

Thank you, Your Honor.

This court has acknowledged

that that is just the inverse

of the reasonable doubt instruction

that it must remove all reasonable doubt.

In this case, the defendant argues

that the reasonable conclusion that was not excluded

was that he intended to save his marriage,

not terrorize his wife.

And to argue that point,

he relies on a couple of specific statements

from the victim in which she states

that the defendant said,

you're not leaving, you're not breaking up this marriage,

we're keeping our family together.

But this court does not conduct

sufficiency analysis looking at evidence in isolation.

It looks holistic.

And if you look at the evidence holistically,

the conclusion that he was trying to save his marriage

is patently unreasonable.

And if you look at his girlfriend's testimony,

I mean, the court will out...

So your point is that that circumstance

that need not be dealt with,

a piece of circumstantial evidence

that need not be dealt with.

Right.

A rational jury easily discard the conclusion

that the defendant is arguing.

Okay.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Mr. Newell.

Thank you, Your Honor.

In my two minutes,

I want to briefly address a few of the state's points.

One, I do think that the defendant

does have a right to the specific jury,

Justice Marconi,

and that's the issue that,

whether I said there was a duty to consult,

and that's the duty that we're asking for here.

Second, the note is favorable,

and I want to go to just as fast its point

about standard witness prep.

We're not asking that any time

that there is a witness prep meeting,

even if it's nothing meeting,

that that has to be disclosed.

Our argument is more specific than that

because what we had was in this case,

the complaining witness,

who's the sole witness for the prosecution,

meets with the prosecutor on Monday.

On Tuesday, she testifies at trial that never happened.

The same day the judge rules there's a mistrial

for failure to disclose favorable evidence to the defense,

and the prosecutor doesn't disclose

that the Monday meeting happened.

The prosecutor knew there was a specific

contradiction to sworn testimony,

and he did disclose that.

So I think that's what distinguishes this

in addition to the content of the note itself.

And then finally, Justice Marconi

on the sufficiency and merger arguments.

Those are alternative arguments

as to merger and double jeopardy.

We think that remand would be appropriate

for the state to elect which charge

if there's a double charging gets dismissed.

But as to sufficiency, yes,

that is specific to the kidnapping.

And we do think that a reasonable jury could conclude

based on testimony about what the defendant said repeatedly

that his purpose was to save his marriage.

We don't disagree that if the testimony is credited

that that was unreasonable conduct,

was criminal conduct would be unlawful restraint,

but it's still not a purpose to terrorize.

And that is our argument.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Court is adjourned.
