Good morning. This is Case 2019-0372, State of New Hampshire versus Taylor M. Kettie.

Mr. Sam Perrow. Good morning. May it please the Court. My name is Richard Sam Perrow. I represent Taylor Kettie.

If I could just ask the Court's permission to reserve one minute. You have it.

I'd like to just briefly address three quick issues and then I'm happy to take questions.

The issue presented in this case is whether the evidence that was introduced at trial by the state

supports the trial Court's decision that the defendant was guilty of driving while intoxicated

and for the reasons I'll discuss, it does not.

In this case, there's no evidence of actual operation being impaired by alcohol.

And the car was stopped for speeding. The officer had an opportunity to observe it for an extended period of time,

a significant distance of at least a half mile.

Can you argue that speeding is in fact erratic operation?

One could in certain circumstances, but speeding really is an ordinary and unremarkable motor vehicle

offense that in most situations has nothing to do with indication of impairment.

Even if it's almost 30 miles over the speed limit?

Well, in this particular case, the officer when asked specifically testified that he had no indication of erratic operation

and he didn't at least articulate the belief that there was anything beyond speeding when he was pulling the car.

Speeding is certainly ordinary if you're just as hex.

Customer.

I'm hoping that's not a question.

So in this particular case, not only was there nothing to indicate that there was some sort of extreme erratic operation,

but there also wasn't any minor erratic operation.

There was no drifting. There was no touching lines on either side.

There was no waving within the lane itself.

And so with the absence of that, the other evidence that was relied upon by the state at trial,

that takes place over the course of an hour that the officer had an opportunity to observe.

Attorney Stamperel, did the officer acknowledge that an odor of alcohol does not tell somebody how much somebody had to drink?

The officer didn't specifically acknowledge that.

The officer here never identified it as a strong or even a moderate odor,

never identified it as coming from the defendant's breath only from about his person.

But interestingly, the trial court acknowledged that in its decision when the judge did reach a finding,

specifically noted that alcohol alone was not a factor that would indicate impairment.

What the officer did testify to was a slight fumbling of the wallet.

He said Mr. Kenny almost dropped his wallet, but of course he did not ever drop his wallet.

Any other evidence of dexterity issues? Like, for example, when you signed the ALF form, did it drop a pen?

It was not. And as I just pointed out, there was certainly an opportunity over the course of an hour

to observe other dexterity issues, but there was not one instance testified to over the course of that hour

other than the fumbling of the wallet, which I think really is offset also by a no problem providing a registration at the same time.

Well, he was unsteady on his feet.

So I'd like to talk about that and I appreciate you pointing that out,

because the language that the officer used to be unsteady on his feet,

it's not a magic word that has this ability to incantate intoxication or impairment.

The officer specifically asked about what unsteady means was very clear that it was not stumbling,

it was not swaying, it was not tripping, using the car for balance.

And so while he used a general conclusory term for a momentary time between walking from the driver's seat to the back of the car,

that was the only observation of unsteadyness ever observed, and it was never characterized by a fact.

It was only stated in that conclusory term.

But he was deprived the opportunity of making a full assessment of dexterity in that your client refused to do the field sobriety test.

Well, I wouldn't characterize it as deprived of an opportunity when an individual who does everything they're legally obligated to do

and doesn't want to participate in field sobriety tests on a February night.

But to your point, the officer is trained in field sobriety tests and certainly is trained in making specific observations,

whether the person puts their feet directly in front of each other, heel to toe, whether they step off a line.

So the characterization here of this general unsteadyness specifically saying,

well, unsteady in this case was not tripping, falling, stumbling, using the car for balance.

That, I think, is very troubling and problematic because it's a very isolated moment and there's no other point in time

when any sort of unsteadyness...

Well, did the officer admit that? That he didn't notice any other unsteadyness throughout his encounter with the defendant?

Was that just an absence of evidence?

No, I believe that he actually did admit that and I'm happy to try to find a portion of the transcript.

I believe it was on cross-examination and I want to say it was on page 29 of the transcript, but I'm not...

So you may have been planning to get there, but how are we to evaluate this evidence?

How standard are you asking us to apply?

Well, to be clear, whether the court applies a direct evidence standard or a circumstantial evidence standard,

it's certainly our position that the evidence was insufficient.

But in part of what I am asking the court to address is what standard to apply in these kind of cases under these facts.

And it would be my position that this was circumstantial evidence that was presented to the court.

Did you make that argument to the court?

I didn't specifically make that argument, but to be quite candid, I don't think we should have to expect trial judges

to be instructed on what the law is and on what the law is that they have to apply.

And while I certainly understand that in the state's brief that they argued that the defendant failed to make a claim

before the trial court that the evidence should be viewed as anything other than direct evidence of impairment,

the state failed to make any claim before the trial court that the evidence should be viewed as anything other than circumstantial evidence.

So I really don't think the issue here is preservation.

I think the issue for this court is when reviewing evidence, how to view it in terms of circumstantial or direct,

but also to provide some guidance to trial courts in terms of this kind of evidence.

Well, and Kelly, we decided that evidence like that here, together with an admission to consuming alcohol

and erratic operation together, could be considered direct evidence.

How would you change that if you had the opportunity to clarify that?

Yeah, so the first important distinction is there's no such admission here.

Direct evidence, this court said in Kelly, is evidence that, looking for the language,

I mean in terms of an instruction to the jury, it's a person who claims to have personal knowledge

and then direct evidence in Kelly is evidence which accepted as true,

directly proves it back for which it's offered.

So I think there are times when, say, there is some extreme operation issue, erratic operation.

The car is weaving over into oncoming traffic or crossing the yellow line,

where that it's direct evidence of...

At what point does it become direct and not circumstantial?

So I think that example, it becomes it's direct evidence of erratic operation,

but it's not direct evidence of impairment until there is that admission to drinking alcohol

or someone in eyewitness observes that person drinking alcohol,

because there could be a lot of reasons that are innocent and not consistent with the DWI.

Somebody drops something on the floor, they're reaching for their phone,

but once you get it coupled with something that you know verifies direct evidence of impairment,

an admission to drinking alcohol.

An admission of drinking alcohol is not direct evidence of impairment.

Admission to drinking alcohol?

Yes.

It requires an inference, doesn't it?

Yes.

It does, but it's, you know, an admission is pretty weighty evidence.

And so one of the contrasts I think to this case is you can also have evidence that has significant weight.

Certainly circumstantial evidence can be weak circumstantial evidence like it is here,

or you can have strong circumstantial evidence such as the case that the state cited in its brief

as the case they're saying is the most similar to this one, state versus Welch,

where there are three independent witnesses who each offer an observation about the defendant being impaired.

The car is seen speeding out of a parking lot, skidding, crashing into a side rail.

The officer when he encounters the defendant sees him stumbling around,

swaying in circular motion, swaying so much he had to use the car for balance

that there is a strong odor of alcohol coming from the defendant's breath.

That's the case.

The state claims is most similar.

I think it's completely different.

In this case, what's the reasonable explanation for your client's conduct that the state didn't exclude?

It's 1130 at night.

He is coming from a music venue and it's a February evening.

And there is no reason that a person traveling at that time after that kind of event wouldn't be tired,

wouldn't be eager to get home.

Are the drumsticks significant?

My partner who's a drummer would always say they're significant,

but I think the issue here is that he's coming from a music venue

and he's had drumsticks and other music equipment in his car.

Did he play at the venue and maybe that's how he encountered alcohol?

That's not in the record.

But again, there's also no alcohol found in his car,

which I think is a significant event as well.

I see that I don't have much time left and I do want to reserve a minute,

so unless there are other questions.

One minute.

Sir?

Good morning.

May it please the court?

My name is Benjamin Mackey.

I represent the state.

I ask that the court affirm the defendant's conviction for DUI.

I'd be happy to take any questions at any time.

I think that the most...

So attorney Mackey, how do you distinguish this case from Lawton

where we reverse the conviction on more evidence of impairment?

So in the Lawton case, there really wasn't much evidence.

The court didn't see much evidence of impairment there.

The defendant there failed to use the directional when turning.

And then all other evidence of impairment according to the court was not distinct.

In this case, there is distinct evidence of impairment.

Well, in Lawton, the defendant admitted that he'd been drinking, right?

The defendant admitted to having one drink.

And although having a drink...

And he failed to the variety test.

He failed to the variety test on that particular trooper's perception of it.

But according to the court and their review of those facts,

the way that the trooper testified to the defendant's failing

was actually not a failure because his clues were not distinct

as required by the NHTSA standards.

So unlike in Lawton where there were no distinct indications

of impairment during the field variety test,

we don't have that here.

We have to look at the other evidence of impairment,

which we do have of his inattention while driving,

his inability to remember how fast he was driving at the time,

his not immediately responding to the officer's lights

as he's required to by law.

In fact, staying in the lane for a period of time before pulling over.

And also despite the fact that the officer waited until there was a place

to pull the under the February conditions to pull the defendant over.

The defendant's unstateness on his feet, his slow, mumble breath.

The persistence of the odor of alcohol from the car to outside of the car

to the back of the cruiser into the booking room,

well into the intoxicizer room and then into the booking room.

The odors maintained with the defendant the entire time.

And then finally the defendant's refusal of the chemical test

despite being told that any refusal can be used against him in court.

He still refuses to take the chemical test.

And there is an instance there that he is trying to suppress evidence of his impairment.

Same inference in Lawton.

Same inference in Lawton.

But in Lawton the defendant was able to come up with a reason,

actually explained that he didn't think that it was going to be a reliable test

because of something that he'd seen on television.

And that's not here.

Interestingly enough, in another case similar to Lawton,

on the issue of the refusal,

the defendant in Stavey Parmenter did actually say the same thing

that she saw on, I believe it was 2020,

that the defendant's, I'm sorry, that the breath test instrument was inaccurate.

The officer then explained to her that it was

and her refusal in that case was seen as probative of her impairment.

And so there's no Fifth Amendment issue with that inference being drawn from a refusal?

There isn't, there's a case right on point and I forget the name

but this court has addressed that and found that there is no Fifth Amendment concern.

So do we need to clarify, Kelly,

since we've established in Germain

that the state need only exclude all reasonable explanations other than guilt?

I don't think that Kelly needs any clarification.

Kelly very much stands for the proposition

that direct observations of a person's impairment is direct evidence of that impairment.

For instance, a person-

Were there direct observations here?

Absolutely.

Or drawing a bunch of inferences?

Well, in this case the defendant's ability,

let's say for instance the unstating this on his feet,

that is a direct observation that his ability to walk appropriately

or walk normally has been diminished in some way.

Need the state exclude reasonable explanations, bad shoes, uneven ground?

Not necessarily for each individual element or eventual item.

It's a totality of all of these items taken together and what that they mean.

So for instance, in State v. Arsenault the court has said that impairment is something that anyone can observe.

So it's, and what impairment means when a person sees it

is the totality of what they're observing.

It's a synergy of all the evidence that they're seeing at that time.

Similar to seeing somebody's looks as though they have a cold,

this person looks as though they're impaired.

It's not that that person needs to know that this part,

that unstating this on one's feet is one of the,

or is a definitive factor that I need to consider,

but it's one of those things that in a synergy of all of the evidence

will lead to the conclusion that that person isn't impaired.

To that point, the idea that it would lead to a conclusion

is less of an inferential jump and more of just a direct observation

of that person's inability to do simple tasks such as walk or speak clearly.

So from the State's perspective, is there any circumstantial evidence here?

In this case, the circumstantial evidence in this case is certainly the inference

of his trying to suppress, the defense trying to suppress

is the evidence of his alcohol content when he infuses the chemical test.

I don't think there's any question about there being,

that being a circumstantial, some certain.

How about the odor of alcohol? Is that direct evidence of impairment?

Again, when taken in that sort of synergistic view with everything else,

yes, it is direct evidence because it draws the entire observation

into one lens.

Don't you have to infer, though, that the individual has consumed enough alcohol to impair him?

I think there's a question about the element of impairment

and then the element of what that person is impaired by.

So in this case, there is no question that the defendant was impaired

and then that impairment coupled with that odor of alcohol

draws, is an inference, but it's not a very difficult jump to say that this person was clearly impaired.

Look at all the evidence that I just listed.

So why isn't it in dispute that he was impaired?

I mean, impaired to drive a motor vehicle, that's the question.

That's not something that's not disputed.

Why was he impaired?

You argue that there is no question that he was impaired,

but I think there is a question that he was impaired to drive a motor vehicle.

That's the issue, really, right?

Well, he demonstrated that he was impaired to drive a motor vehicle

when he was unable to determine that or to see how fast he was driving.

Well, I agree. Many people fail to see how fast they're driving.

But in this case, it was 24 miles an hour over in a 35-mile-an-hour zone.

So that's just less than, that's 11 miles short of twice the speed limit in that area.

So that, again, each individual factor looked at individually may have some innocent explanation.

So you're saying that a collection of circumstantial evidence is sufficient to support

to turn all of that evidence into direct evidence?

No. What I'm saying is that the direct evidence of the person's inability to do a thing

is direct evidence of their impairment, and that's what Stavey Kelly stands for.

Well, there's plenty of direct evidence that the defendant was able to do many things like exit the vehicle,

walk to the back of the car without falling down, communicate with the officer

to the point that there was no confusion about his response.

And I think that that's a question of degree, not necessarily...

There's no question of the impairment. There's a question of the degree of impairment.

In this case, he wasn't paired to any degree with the standard.

In this case, he was impaired when he, again...

So what does that mean exactly? I understand that's a standard.

So if a person consumes a single beer, they're impaired to any degree at that point.

But are they impaired to drive a motor vehicle?

So I just want to make sure I have your question right.

So the question is that a person who is impaired to some degree should be able to drive...

I guess the question is at what level should a person's impairment preclude them

from being able to drive a motor vehicle?

The question is being impaired to any degree.

Does that mean being impaired by alcohol to any degree?

Or being impaired to the point where you cannot safely drive a motor vehicle?

So in the context of the DUI statute, it's impaired to any degree.

So there, it's a person drives a motor vehicle on a way while impaired to any degree

by a substance which impairs the person's ability to drive.

So I think that if their ability to drive, like in this case,

the ability to pay attention to the speed limit is demonstrated by the evidence,

then there is impaired to some degree, or a sufficient degree to satisfy the requirements.

Meaning the explanation for the speed?

The explanation for the speeding.

So a single traffic violation is enough to convict somebody from the DUI?

No, because in Lorton, just a violation of the motor vehicle...

sorry, motor vehicle violation for the signal was not enough.

And it really depends on the surrounding circumstances,

as to whether or not there is enough to convict a person for a DUI,

particularly in the matter where there's that persistent odor of alcohol

and then demonstrating...

And again, the Trump courts allow you to evaluate the evidence,

the credit way, the evidence if you will.

And the state's only obligation is to exclude in totality

a reasonable, alternative, innocent explanation,

not each and every factor.

That's correct.

So that's exactly...

that is my point, that it has to be a...

in a whole...

down what I want.

So there has to be no reasonable alternative unifying theory of innocence.

Only the...

that unifies the facts of the case to get through that circumstantial evidence standard.

I see I only have a few minutes left if you have further questions.

Were you quoting from Kelly?

When I just said the reasonable alternative unifying theory of innocence.

No, that was something that came to mind while reading Kelly.

There's nothing further?

Thank you.

Thank you.

Mr. Samper, you have one minute?

So just some very quick points.

One, in Lorton, evidence in the specific items of steadiness far exceed what was observed here.

But also this issue of inability to remember speed.

I don't know of any case that stands for the proposition that it's evidence of impairment.

I should also point out to the record here that the speed limit directly before you get to Durham,

this is in the record.

New market is 45.

So I'm not suggesting my client wasn't speeding,

but the extremity that's being addressed here is not the extreme that I think is portrayed as.

This was part of 108 from New Market to Durham.

Correct.

Not north of Durham.

Heading to Durham.

And not pulling over immediately.

I've never been an issue in this case.

My client complied and pulled over.

And in fact throughout the encounter was polite and cooperative with the police.

The last thing I would say is advancing is a theory here that one glass of wine or one beer is sufficient to demonstrate impairment.

I don't think this court has ever held that.

I certainly would encourage you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

They come forward here.
