Matter before the court is David Borneval and Eileen Borneval. It is case number

two zero one nine zero five three seven. It should be noted that the Chief

Justice, as much as we love to have him in the building, is disqualified in this

case. The Mr. Borneval is represented by William Graemer. Did I say that

correctly, sir? Thank you and I understand you have reserved two

minutes for rebuttal. Correct. Eileen Borneval is represented by Kevin

Rossio. Mr. Borneval, Mr. Graemer, whenever you're ready, you may proceed.

Thank you, Your Honor. Good morning. May it please the court, William Graemer on behalf of the

repellent, David Borneval, and this matter is before the court on cross

appeals by the parties from the decision of the circuit court family

division that divided the parties assets pursuant to entry of a divorce

decree. And Mr. Borneval has brought three issues before this court this morning.

First is whether or not the court aired and finding that two family trusts which

were funded and established by Mr. Borneval's parents were properly

characterized as marital property to RSA 458. Second, Mr. Borneval is asking

that the court take a two proposed findings of fact which were submitted by

Mrs. Borneval's counsel prior to trial. They were marked as granted by the court

and specifically I'll refer to them as findings 46 and 47. Third, Mr. Borneval

is requesting that the court vacate that portion of the lower court's decision

which awarded certain personal items and effects to Mrs. Borneval which

were located in the marital home. With respect to the first issue, your honors,

there are two trusts involved here. There's a life insurance trust which was

created actually prior to when the marriage occurred 1991. It was established

by Mr. Borneval's father who was the owner of the Borneval automotive

dealership. He created or funded the life insurance trust for each of his four

children with cash as well as an interest in land that was owned by the

dealership. And separately there's what was referred to as the GST or a

generation skipping trust which again Mr. Borneval's father created and was

funded upon David Borneval's mother's passing in 2008. If we agree with you

that the trial court aired in finding that these two trusts were marital

property, is there anything that would prevent the trial court from readjusting

the the apportionment of the marital estate given that your client got

63% of that? No, your honor. In fact, if this court finds that those trusts are

not marital property and takes them out of the bucket, so to speak, then it

would need to be remanded for the court to then decide of the remaining

marital assets, how should those be equitably divided between the parties?

And of course, even if this court finds that they're not marital property,

they can they could be considered when the court does its overall division of

those assets. Here there was no dispute that as written, in fact the court

conceded this that on paper, these trusts are what typically we refer to as a

good lander trust. They had the requisite language that said any

distributions are solely within the trustees, uncontrolled discretion,

that's for both of these trusts. These types of trusts under both

New Hampshire and Massachusetts law, which Massachusetts law was used here because

of a choice of law for the trust documents. Do we need to reach that

decision by the way? No, we're not challenging that the court was proper

to rely on the authority from Massachusetts, which is very similar, if

not identical to the way New Hampshire analyzes these types of trusts in

terms of whether or not to pull those assets into the marital estate.

And the case law talks about considering various factors such as how the

parties how the parties view that trust during their marriage, history of any

distributions, whether that trust and the funds were part of the fabric of

the marriage is referenced in the DL case from Massachusetts. And as was

the primary focus here, whether or not the beneficiary spouse exerted

sufficient amount of control over either the trust or the trustee, such that

that line between marital property and trust property is blurred and the court

then pulls those assets into the marital estate and the court here largely

focused on these interactions and these incidents that occurred between

David Borneval and David Post. David Post was the longtime family accountant.

He was the independent trustee. In these incidents that the lower court

cited to resubmit are not sufficient evidence of what the court said was so

much control or so much sway over David Post's decisions as a trustee.

And I would focus in on the court, the trustee's decision to distribute

trust funds out to Mr. Borneval. None of these incidents, whether there

was accountings that have been repaired, in fact, they had been but then

stopped. The party's daughter had requested accountings during

dependency of the divorce was the first time that request was made.

Well, isn't this issue really about credibility and the way to evidence

that really belongs to the trial court in the first instance?

I think it is, Your Honor, and I'm not going to sugarcoat or challenge the

the way the court viewed Mr. Post's behavior or his actions, but none of

those incidents and this is where I would direct the court's attention.

None of those evidence Mr. Borneval exerting control for the purpose

of having assets distributed to him during the marriage.

There's not a single example of where Mr. Borneval asked that trust funds be

distributed to him.

What about the 2014 $150,000 distribution that Mr. Borneval apparently

advised Mr. Post that that's what he should do.

Is that an incorrect assessment of the evidence?

It is because that is generated or initiated by David Post.

For some reason, he decided that when one of the Borneval's siblings who had

passed away, his daughter, who did have a right to compel distributions,

she asked for funds to purchase a home, I believe.

Mr. Post decided if he was going to give one sibling or that

sibling's issue a distribution, he decided he would treat all four

of the Borneval's siblings equally in that they each take

Did he consult your client with respect to that decision at all?

He consulted with him with regard to how he wanted that distribution,

whether it was cash or in kind.

There was the option if you took the cash, there'd be tax implications.

If you took the securities in kind, they would simply be moved over

to an account with no tax until they were sold later.

And in fact, your Honor, that $150,000 was transferred in kind

and it sat there all the way up through the time of trial.

Those funds had grown passively, appreciation in the market to $199,000,

which was listed, stipulated as a marital asset.

It was an account in the party's joint names.

But simply having the trustee consult the beneficiary doesn't

remove the spendthrift provisions or the responsibility of the trustee

to make his or her own independent decision.

Correct? Correct.

In fact, and under the case law in Massachusetts,

reference in our brief, there is that fiduciary duty here.

There are other beneficiaries aside from Mr.

Borneval. There's those two children under the life insurance trust,

under the generation skipping trust.

If those funds were not to be able to pass down to Mr.

Borneval's children, they actually go back up the line

and over to the other siblings.

These were trusts created that they are generational in nature.

They're established by Mr.

Borneval's parents to benefit all of their children and their issue

for many years to come.

Mr.

Gramer, what percentage of the value of the two

trusts came into the trust after the divorce proceedings had started

and how should that affect our analysis?

It's about 95 percent, Your Honor.

It's important to understand that the generation skipping trust

was not even established, or I should say the sub trust

for David Borneval's benefit did not get created or come into being

until 2018 after the divorce was commenced.

The life insurance trust again had held a second to die policy,

and that wasn't funded largely until Florence Borneval passed in 2018.

And that's when those trusts became of significant

value, and I think the timing of that is important

when you look at whether they're marital property or not,

who they should be awarded to.

Monies that were created through marital efforts of the parties.

And lastly, on the trust issues,

unless there's additional questions, I don't want to get to my other two points.

The Caruso decision, I think, is important to distinguish

because I submit there's not evidence here that David Post

was simply a yes man, which is what the case refers to in the Caruso.

In Caruso, there's a couple of factors that distinguish it from our case.

During the marriage, those trust funds in Caruso were actually used

to pay the party's personal and household expenses.

The trustee apparently seems implausible,

but he didn't even know until the time of trial

that he was an independent trustee.

The husband generated largely his income

from utilizing these trust funds for his development projects

and actually borrowed money from the trust to create a subdivision.

So there was a lot of evidence in that Caruso decision

where the beneficiary spouse was actively managing

and using these trust funds for his personal benefit during the marriage,

which is just not the case here.

Other than those two distributions,

neither of which Mr. Borneval asked for,

there wasn't a single distribution of funds requested by Mr. Borneval.

It wasn't part of the party's marital lifestyle and their expenses.

They had significant other income and assets of their own

to meet their own living expenses.

With respect, I'm running short on time,

with respect to findings 46 and 47, your honors,

these findings reference apparently the way they read that there was,

it implies that there was this investment account

that was somehow created by Mr. Borneval

and secreted from his wife during the marriage.

First of all, I don't know how that's relevant to the case

because the party's actually stipulated to every asset in its value

prior to trial.

There was no claim that assets were secreted or dissipated

or that Mr. Borneval had not disclosed something on his financial affidavit.

That these two findings are not even referenced in the court 16-page narrative decision.

And if you look at the actual testimony,

Mrs. Borneval never even uses the word investment account.

She described, as did Mr. Borneval,

that Mr. Borneval's pay went into a separate account.

She then called it a checking account from which he would deposit his income

and then transfer funds over to the party's joint account

where they paid household expenses.

Those findings, and Mrs. Borneval doesn't even cite

how she's prejudiced if they're vacated.

On reconsideration, we asked the court to vacate those findings

because they impacted Mr. Borneval's employment as a financial advisor

and they caused issues with regard to his reporting requirements.

And in the appearance that he had an investment account that he didn't disclose

or that he didn't invest funds, as Mrs. Borneval wished,

as though he was her financial advisor and unrelated, this is a married couple.

So those findings, they weren't relevant to the court's decision.

They weren't relevant to any of the marital assets.

And we'd ask that in the interest of justice

and to avoid an undesired or unintended consequence

on Mr. Borneval's employment that they'd be vacated.

The red light is on, Mr. Grammer.

Your third argument, which you did not reach,

is very clearly articulated in your brief

and you still have two minutes if you feel you need it.

So thank you very much. Mr. Rossio.

Thank you very much. May it please the court?

I am Kevin Rossio. I'm the attorney for Eileen Borneval,

who is the respondent in this matter.

This case is unlike most cases that come up on divorce

for a variety of reasons, primarily because most cases

that come before your honors, it's usually a situation

where one spouse is primarily the financial earner,

why another spouse is primarily the homemaker

or put more effort into the kids.

That's the exact what did not happen in this case.

The court was clear in its decision that up until 2000,

prior to 2011, so the first 18 years of this marriage,

Ms. Borneval was the superstar of the marriage.

She enrolled and she worked much harder than Mr. Borneval.

The court found a significant disparity.

That's 75% of the marriage the court found

that she contributed not only more to the assets,

but also to the home and to the kids.

And so to get a decision here that she gets 30%

of the marital assets is unlike anything

this court has ever upheld before.

And for that reason, we're asking for be reversed.

To address the issues of the trust,

the two luck insurance trust and the generation skipping trust,

the court was right in finding that in this case

that these were marital assets.

The court used Massachusetts law,

which is not contested in this case,

using the flowery decision.

And under the analysis,

let's take the generation skipping trust.

We disagree with the appellant's position.

These accounts became funded where upon Ms. Richard

Borneval's death, they segregated into four separate

trusts for each of the kids.

And then it would be paid out once the mother died in that case.

Under Massachusetts law, in the case of Rommel,

the court has found that where the beneficiary

or the trustee in this case, Mr. Borneval,

reserves a, has a power of attorney,

sorry, a power of her appointment,

that that is a indissure of property

and therefore is a marital asset.

That's undisputed.

And in this case,

Mr. Borneval has the sole right to name anyone

the beneficiary of the generation skipping trust

with the exception of him, his creditors, or his estate.

And given that under Rommel,

which had a very similar power of appointment.

Isn't that exactly the language we look to

in determining whether it's a so-called spendthrift trust

is the power of appointment is limited

and avoids creditors and the beneficiary himself?

So under Massachusetts law, which governs this case,

that's different in Goodlander,

which, which this court had said under those instances,

and the instances that that's similar to here,

it's not a marital asset.

That's predicated upon the enactment of the uniform trust code

prior in Flaherty, in Flaherty,

it's a very similar case to ours, a 23-year marriage,

with the exception is the spouse in that case,

one was the homeowner, one was the financial owner.

Ms. Faraday, Ms. Faraday in that case,

didn't have the same level of contribution

as Ms. Borneval,

who was not only the financial superstar,

but also the homemaker.

But in Flaherty, this court prior to the 2000,

the enactment of the new trust code indicated that,

no, in that case, this trust had only been created

a year and a half before divorce.

It was, it had a present interest,

present possession wasn't applicable,

meaning the husband wasn't receiving anything.

He was only going to get a future interest,

which is vested, which is exactly this case.

And so under those instances, under Flaherty,

this case, this trust is exactly what

it was the definition of marital property,

because the Massachusetts trust code does not limit it

in a case where there's this sprinter of provision.

So I think the good lander is not applicable.

As for the life insurance trust,

not only was the court right in developing the inferences

that it did, that the trustee, David Post,

remember, there were two.

One trustee was allegedly a trustee since 2008,

but didn't know until 2018.

Almost 10 years.

He didn't know he was a trustee.

So he had no involvement in the trust,

which left it to David Post,

who, as Judge Doven pointed out, in 2014,

took the advice of David Barnable.

And that inference is drawn from the fact

David Post writes a letter in 2014,

saying it was overfunded.

Well, David Post testified he didn't check the statements.

The only way he would know was overfunded

would be through David Barnable.

So when the court found that David Barnable

was the one who suggested the change in 2014,

that was because Mr. Barnable was the one who indicated,

not Mr. Post, because he wasn't even looking at the statements.

That's not contested either.

So, but beyond the fact that Mr. Post

was just the yes man for Mr. Barnable,

section 410 of the Massachusetts Trust Code

indicates very clearly that when the trust

purpose is no longer remaining,

the trust is to be terminated to revoke.

And it was very clear, unquantivated evidence,

the purpose of this trust was to provide Mr. Barnable

and his siblings

money for the estate when their mother or the last parent died

because at the time that the trust was created,

they were caught up in auto franchises and real estate.

They expect a significant tax.

And so they created this trust

to help pay the tax for the children.

Well, once mum died in 2018,

that purpose was no longer there.

And so therefore that trust became

voidable or void at that time.

So to indicate that the trust

is an amount of property is to ignore

the clear Massachusetts law in this case under Caruso.

Yes, there was a situation where

the father or the husband in that case

would tap into the money.

But that wasn't critical to the court

deciding whether it was a marital asset.

That was, I was only referenced to what

was going to be divisible.

Now, when it comes to being divisible,

New Hampshire law differs the mass.

And under Flaherty, Massachusetts law

governs whether it's a marital asset.

But New Hampshire law governs

whether it's divisible.

And in this case, the court found that

over the 18-year, over the 24-year marriage

that Ms. Bonneville contributed

2.4, almost 2.4 million dollars more than the husband.

That the first 11 years of the marriage,

he had 10 jobs, including losing a job

when his father fired him six weeks after marriage.

Ms. Bonneville testified that she had a,

she was newly married with a house and a mortgage

and therefore had to carry the weight.

And as the court found, she did carry that weight

disproportionately for 18 years.

But the trial court also found that trying to divide

and equitably divide that the trust was a legal nightmare

that would result in future litigation.

And I think the court in that did not put

enough emphasis on what the Flaherty court did.

It's very simple.

That the Flaherty court said that in the future,

any payout, she gets her proportionate share.

That's not a legal nightmare.

And so I think the court, when it did that,

just misapprehended what the court did in Flaherty.

And Flaherty is not the only decision.

Lawler is also another decision where this court divided,

this court found that it would be highly inequitable

for the court not to divide

an inheritance that the husband was going to receive,

it was stuck in probate.

He was going to receive it within a reasonable period of time after.

And the court found it would be equitable not to find that.

And Mr.

Mr. Rossio, are you asking us to redefine the equities in this case?

No, I'm not asking you to redefine the equity judge.

What I'm saying is that the court committed abusive discretion

because what the court's reliance on was Henderson.

The court relied on Henderson.

And this case is completely in opposite of Henderson.

And Henderson, that was a nine-year marriage,

as opposed to a 24-year marriage here,

where the court didn't divide the gifted property,

inherited property from the mother.

This marriage is two and a half times longer.

Henderson didn't have two kids like the Bonneville's did,

which the court found just significantly disproportionate

fell on the mother for the kid.

As the testimony was, father was unemployed.

She would take the kids to daycare and handover,

and then pick them up and take them home.

She's the one who did their doctor's appointments

and their dentist's appointments.

The findings and facts are very clear of what the court found.

And in that instance, to ignore the fact that in a marriage

two and a half times longer,

with kids which the wife contributed significantly to,

and unlike Henderson, Ms.

Bonneville in this case contributed almost $2.4 million more

in assets than the rest of the year.

You don't dispute the fact that your client received nearly 80%

of the assets that were accumulated

during the course of the marriage,

aside from the trust, right?

No, I don't dispute that, Judge.

And I think what the court misapprehended in this

is that it looked at that this trust wasn't

part of the marital estate.

Well, it was. There was three transfers.

One in 2006, which went to the niece.

And at that time, they used the money as part of the marital estate.

And then in 2014, they then again used that money.

Sorry, he kept that money in an account.

But remember, it's important.

At that time in 2014, the appellant will have you

believe that this money belongs to his children.

Well, first of all, at the time of 2014 transfer,

Leah, the daughter, was 20.

Why didn't she get $150,000?

Because the testimony of Mr. Post is clear

that the money belonged to the kids,

including Mr. Bonneville, David Bonneville.

That was very clear.

There was no ambiguity about where that money was going to go.

And the concern as we raised at the trial court

was with the Generation Skipping Trust.

When the mother died in 2018,

Marvin Fay replaced her as co-trustee with David Post.

They didn't have Leah Bonneville sign the consent.

They had the son sign the consent.

Mr. Bonneville, the testimony was very clear.

He's disenfranchised with this daughter.

He doesn't communicate with her.

And it's very clear, very concerning

that he will exercise his power of attorney,

sorry, power of appointment, to give the son to Michael,

or maybe his new spouse.

Or in the case of the Life Insurance Trust,

he has the power to amend and revoke

with the trustee's consent.

Well, the trustees were very clear.

The money belonged to David Bonneville.

It didn't belong to the kids.

Mr. Othio, before your time expires,

do you object to striking those two ostensibly offensive findings

of fact?

I do judge.

This was not held in secret.

Ms. Bonneville tested very clearly.

If you look at the transcript on trial transcript page 213,

lines 10 through 13, she tested very clearly

that the money was put into the principal account,

which is an investment account.

That was the testimony.

There wasn't cross-examination with any statement

saying that it wasn't, that it wasn't put in there.

He did that by motion to reconsider,

which the court said, no, it's too late.

And so now to do it on appeal is improper.

He never raised an issue that it would cause a problem

with his job.

He got arrested for assault.

That didn't impact his job.

As far as the claim that he wasn't a fiduciary to his wife,

he was.

He managed her trust.

She had to file a complaint in order to get information

produced because he wouldn't produce it to her.

And so is there any dispute that both parties knew the funds

went into that account?

It wasn't a secret or information withheld from your client?

She didn't say it was a secret.

She said that he told her it went into the principal account

because he claimed that it hadn't wrecked.

He, because of his job, he had regulatory authority

and he had to show, I don't know.

The only thing he would put into her testimony,

the only thing he would put to the household bills,

because he was a 1099 employee, was his own quarterly tax

payments.

All the household bills were paid for her income,

including when she exercised stock options

and gave it to him to invest.

He took $50,000 out to approve the house

that he was awarded.

Mr. Roscio, before your time expires,

could you just talk to the third issue?

Why does it make any sense for your client

to have the guns rather than Mr. Borneville?

Well, given in the light of the fact that

what the court order gave him, 63% of the marital estate,

she got 37%, that has a monetary value.

She could buy her out if he wants the guns.

He wants to buy her at fair market value.

She'd be willing to do that.

She never denied him that opportunity,

but if the court's going to affirm a 63 to 37 decision,

then she shouldn't walk away from the value of those guns.

If he wants to buy them out at fair market value,

then so be it.

What's the fair market value?

A revision to the order saying that she gets the guns

or the value, you don't have any objection to that.

That's what we offer, Judge Schultz.

So we're fine with that.

Thank you.

Just in my closing remarks,

I know I got a couple of minutes left.

When you looked at the findings of fact

that the court granted on the husband's appendix,

starting on page 23, and you look at specifically

page 25 through 26, you'll see the specific findings

the court put towards mom's contribution to this marriage,

as well as both financially as well as to the kids.

And like I said, it's not at the beginning of this brief.

This case is like any other where the court held the person

who contributed significantly disproportionately

both to the income and to the financial growth of the assets

as well as to the household, a 30% award of property.

Thank you very much, my red light is on.

Thank you.

Mr. Gramer.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Just a couple of points very quickly.

With respect to the issue of the personal property of guns,

Mrs. Bornewell herself has said in her brief

that they have minimal value.

Yet she claims that she needs to sell those guns

in order to buy furniture for her home in Colorado.

And I submit that it's a disingenuous argument to advance.

Light of the fact that neither of the parties

put in evidence of value of these particular items,

they weren't on their financial affidavits.

Mrs. Bornewell didn't put her jewelry down.

She admitted on cross-examination.

She didn't disclose her Rolex watch and so forth.

And I think when there's an $8 million marital estate,

including trusts and inheritances that's at issue,

you know, the focus of the parties and then subsequently,

I think the court was not on these personal property items.

We did address it in trial exhibit 13.

Mr. Bornewell, rather than take the court's time

to walk through every item of personal property,

we submitted a written exhibit, which was uncontested

and allowed and he talks about why those guns

and other personal items in the house

ought to be awarded to him.

The court apparently overlooked it.

It was never referenced in the decision

and we submit an unsustainable exercise of discretion

to simply just grant her that identity

with no analysis as to why she should be awarded.

So what would you have us do remand it back

to the trial court to open the issue

of the personal property again?

I think you could do that.

You could remand it on the issue of the personal property.

With respect to a couple of comments

Attorney Rossio made, when you look at findings 46 and 47,

he referenced this $50,000 money that he allegedly took.

That's that set forth in finding number 55,

which was actually denied by the court.

And if you look at 55, it reads similar to 46 and 47.

So not only do we have a record that doesn't support

any type of investment account,

what she testified to on page 213

was that he had his separate checking account

with his name on it.

That's what Mrs. Bourneville said.

She never said investment account.

And so we've got testimony

that doesn't support those findings.

We've got conflicting findings.

And most importantly, they're irrelevant

to the entirety of the court's decision.

For those reasons, we'd ask you to strike those findings

and also remand on the personal property.

Thank you.

Thank you, Mr. Gramer.

Your red light is on.

Thank you both, counsel.

Case submitted.

Courts in recess.

Thank you.

Thank you.
