Good morning. Good morning, Your Honor. The matter before the court is state of

New Hampshire versus Heath Fitzgerald. The state is represented by attorney Greg Albert,

and the defendant is represented by attorney Michael D Ramzel. The record should reflect

that Justice Hans Marconi is disqualified in this case, that Justice Jim Bassett is disqualified

in this case, and that Justice Nado is sitting in his place pursuant to RSA 493-2-A.

Mr. Ramzel, I understand that you have reserved one minute. In case I forgot,

this is case number 2019-028-0. Ramzel, whenever you are ready.

May it please the courters. My name is Michael Ramzel, and I appear on behalf of defendant

Keith Fitzgerald. It is well settled that a criminal defendant has a right to rely on

his counsel's examination of the evidence, the facts, the circumstances, and the law,

and then to rely on counsel's informed opinion about whether to plead guilty

is almost beyond dispute. That did not happen in this case. Mr. Fitzgerald did not receive

competent evidence about the state's plea laws. And counsel did not explain all of the evidence

in the case to Mr. Fitzgerald. In particular, he did not explain

that the state would use to pitch him and to impeach him if he testified during the trial.

Also did not explain the charge. In fact, he admitted during the hearing in this case

that he did not explain the sentence of the enhancement of Mr. Fitzgerald.

In those circumstances, it could not be that he explained Mr. Fitzgerald's penancing exposure.

Mr. Ramzel, does the record reveal the circumstances under which Mr. Fitzgerald's first counsel withdrew?

It does not, Your Honor. And he was only there for literally a few days. And so,

but I don't know the answer to that question and the record does not reflect it.

Thank you. I think that what Judge Smuckler found was that no matter what, as you have

recently alleged, it didn't make any difference. Can you respond to that?

Okay, Your Honor. Judge Smuckler found that Mr. Fitzgerald could not or did not

satisfy the second prong of the four prong test for whether he was prejudiced by counsel's deficient

performance. And that prong is whether the court would have accepted the terms of the plea offer.

He suggests that Judge Smuckler was wrong, both in the standard and he was wrong about whether

Mr. Fitzgerald had been a reasonable probability he would have accepted the terms.

So what's the objective evidence that Mr. Fitzgerald would have accepted

the the state's plea of basically four years of incarceration, two at home confinement,

and two in the House of Corrections? Okay, Your Honor. I want to make sure you're asking

what the objective evidence was about Mr. Fitzgerald or about Judge Smuckler didn't find that Mr.

Fitzgerald would not have accepted it. In fact, he accepted defense counsel's testimony about that.

What Judge Smuckler found is that Mr. Fitzgerald didn't accept the terms. I'm happy to answer

either or both of those questions. But if it is, in fact, what the objective evidence

that Mr. Fitzgerald would have accepted is that first, every substantive pleading filed by Mr.

Fitzgerald, it was pled that he would have accepted the terms. That's what the state's argument is,

however, is that Mr. Fitzgerald didn't actually testify to that. Not the test, Your Honor.

First, there's no evidence to demonstrate he would not have accepted it. More importantly,

Smuckler had, at the sentencing hearing, advised Mr. Fitzgerald during the

Senate to not believe Mr. Fitzgerald any topic. So his testimony would not have been helpful at the

hearing. Instead, what was produced was that there was an email while the plea offer was open

from defense counsel to the state's prosecutor saying that Mr. Fitzgerald

was considering a plea to some incarceration. Then there was defense counsel's own testimony.

Defense counsel testified that Mr. Fitzgerald relied on him regarding sentencing expectations,

testified that Mr. Fitzgerald listened to him, relied on his opinion that

the most trial Mr. Fitzgerald was likely to only receive a three-year sentence.

And think about that for me. A three-year sentence is actually a one-year less

period of incarceration than the state was offering for total confinement. The plea offer was

here's an helpful correction that followed by two years of home confinement. I suggest

no defense counsel competently would have offered that evidence. Defense counsel went on to explain

that had he appreciated Mr. Fitzgerald's actual sentencing exposure,

would have more strongly advised Mr. Fitzgerald to accept the state's plea offer.

Mr. Ramsdale, can I interrupt for a second? I have to apologize. I can barely hear what you're

saying and that certainly is not your fault. It's the fault of the algorithm that produced

WebEx. So what I would like to know first is was Judge Smuckler the trial judge?

Yes. So was the trial judge, he was not however the judge at settlement conference,

which was continued expressly for the purpose of Mr. Fitzgerald to consider the state's,

the state revised its plea offer downward during the settlement conference. That was

continued by agreement of the parties and Judge Fawver who was aware of the plea term because

was the judge who, can you still not hear me your honor? I noticed your shaky ear.

I can hear you now. Thank you. Okay. Judge Fawver entered an order that the parties had

drafted that the settlement conference would be continued expressly for the purpose

of Mr. Fitzgerald to consider the state's lowered plea offer. And the order that came out of that

is telling because it wasn't scheduled for a second settlement conference. It was scheduled for

a free sentencing available date. So while Judge Smuckler ultimately tried the case,

Fawver knew the plea terms, scheduled it for a plea and sentencing hearing. Again,

the standard is whether there's a reasonable probability that the court would have accepted

the terms and I suggest to you those orders under those circumstances

far more than demonstrate to say reasonable probability. Well, it suggests that Judge

Fawver would have accepted the terms. That's correct. But Mr. Fitzgerald doesn't have the

burden of proof is not to show that a particular judge would have accepted the plea terms. In

fact, at the time that the plea offer was available, it wasn't involved in the case.

Judge Fawver was and Judge Fawver knew about the state's revised terms.

Say reasonable probability that the court would have accepted the terms of the plea.

Does the settlement, the settlement judgment process, does it give us more information that we

might otherwise have an enormous amount of plea setting regarding whether it would be accepted?

Judge, I apologize. I could not hear the first part of what you said. I heard the last few

words and I didn't get any of it before that. Whether the settlement conference process changes

to the end of this doesn't give us more information than we might otherwise have in a

plea setting. I think that's very definitely true. I think ordinarily what happens is there's a

dispositional conference or something else that happens early on in the case and then there's a

final trial conference, a pretrial conference, which is usually that's the deadline for a plea

and the court doesn't have any involvement until then. The settlement conference here is exactly

what allows more than a reasonable evidence of more than a reasonable probability that the court

would have accepted the plea terms. Otherwise, there'd never be any way of actually establishing

whether the court would have accepted the plea terms. Now the Supreme Court, the United States

Supreme Court indicates that given that 94 to 97 percent of cases are resolved by pleas, if you've

got a counsel who are experienced and have an idea, have likely know what the court would accept

and they've negotiated the plea that in the absence of evidence to the contrary, that satisfies

it. But here, because we had a Superior Court Judge involved, because he knew the revised

plea terms and because he said it for a plea and sentencing after Mr. Fitzgerald had time to consider

the new offer. Well, what's the proper analysis? Do we have to determine whether the trial court

would have accepted the plea at the time or whether our trial court would accept a plea

after your client testified and perjured himself during the trial?

No, Your Honor. I'd suggest to you that it's just not reasonable to think that the timing is

after the evidence has already been in the case. Generally speaking, the court won't accept a plea

after the plea. Let me interject with another question before your time runs out. I'm interested

in the application of Blatler to your case. Let's assume we agree with you. Are you suggesting

that we send it back to the trial court for resendencing?

Thank you, Your Honor. I believe that if the court debates in a controlled position that

faces cited in my brief, say that the remedy here is Mr. Fitzgerald is one of these rules

obviously made for cases as well. But the remedy is you don't want, on the one hand, the court shouldn't

be in a position where the image is in a defendant, shouldn't put the case in a position where

in many cases, by the time an appeal is decided, the state wouldn't be able to

do this case again in a second trial. And so, what would be decided in the same position

that he would have been in absent the ineffective assistance of counsel? And that is,

the sentence is vacated in the case of degree number two, the Superior Court, with instruction

seen in the sentence consistent with the terms of the plea offer. That puts everybody in the same

position they were in at the time the error was made. And no other remedy does that.

I think we lost Justice Nato. I can hear you. Okay. Yes. Okay, so I don't, my screen is

doing weird things, but I can, if the court doesn't have any questions, I can see I only have 30 seconds

left anyway. But, but I would have one more question, Attorney Ramstell, on your second issue with

respect to the jury instructions, given the fact that we have already held that that was not plain

error, assuming it was error. And that is really an open question whether or not

uh, sentence enhancements need to be included in the original indictment. How can that then be

evidence of ineffective assistance of counsel?

May. Sure. Please. Because it's a different standard. It's not the plain error standard.

The question here is whether or not Mr. Fitzgerald's counsel provided competent

representation. And it when he did not move to dismiss or object to it, particularly when

as he conceded during the post, during the hearing, the appeal did not go over the enhanced

penalty statute with Mr. Fitzgerald. It's a different legal standard. And I'd suggest to

you that the that Mr. Fitzgerald has demonstrated ineffective assistance to counsel on that issue.

I'd also suggest that the way the issue was framed was adequate notice.

That's not my argument. That's not my argument at all. I believe it's a

fundamental issue not to raise the issue. And that kind of fundamental error not only demonstrates

ineffective assistance to counsel, but if the court grants you a leave on that basis,

in this case, then the whole conviction. And you get something to try out.

Okay, counsel. Thank you. You still have your one minute. Thank you. And I will mute my microphone.

Thank you, sir. Mr. Albert. Judges, before we continue, we're getting a little bit of feedback

from you, Judge Donovan. So if the judges, if you could please make sure that you put it on mute

unless you're talking. That's the problem. What's that? I don't think that's the problem.

I can I can barely hear as it is. Well, I'd like to know for the record,

this is the first time that Attorney Ramstell has been muted in history.

Yeah, hold on a second. You'll have your full 15 minutes. We need to

correct some technical difficulties. Very well. Okay, so make sure that if you are not talking,

please mute. And you can have papers around because I think we're getting some feedback somewhere.

So just be just if you could be just aware of that.

So thank you, Mr. Albert.

My screen has frozen again, but I just there's no way for me to mute because those

are whiteed out. But I don't I've been muted the whole time. Still was getting the feedback.

And I keep getting this pop up saying Cisco WebEx meeting is not responding and I'm clicking

wait so I can still hear everybody. All right. Are we ready? Mr. Albert? Go ahead.

Thank you. Good morning. My name is Greg Albert represent the state of New Hampshire and ask

that the court affirm the trial court's decision. This is a case of buyer's remorse.

The defendant chose not to resolve his case. And he and he chose to continue with the trial

and because he continued with a trial, ultimately he was sentenced to an amount of time that was higher

than what the state's last plea offer is that at most meets one element under Laughler.

The trial council was effective both in the plea bargain advice and not objecting

to the jury instructions are not moving to dismiss. Don't you think that the settling

judge would have accepted the state's lowest offer? There's no evidence of that judge.

The only thing that judge father did was two ministerial acts, which was continue the case one

and continue the case a second time for plea and sentencing. What typically happens and what is

very common in the trial courts is that the judge who will make a decision about whether or

not to accept the plea would give something on the record. It may be maybe written,

maybe orally, it happens during dispositional conferences. The reality is there is some

indication and in fact, if you look at some of the cases that have looked at Laughler

after the Supreme Court decision, Ebron v. Commissioner and McMillian v. Commissioner,

both Connecticut cases, in both of those cases, the trial court gave some indication

that it would accept it. For instance, in McMillian, it said that it would accept the

proposed plea with a small change. In Ebron, it was actually the district attorney who said

that, given his experience with the court, that the judge would have accepted it. So it was

actually the prosecutor who testified in the habeas hearing that indicated the court would

have accepted it. So all he did was agree to continue it twice.

About the settlement conference process, isn't it true that the settlement

judge, the role to get the parties to reach a resolution and if that judge gets

for plea and sentencing, isn't that some objective evidence that the judge would have accepted the

plea? No, I don't think so because we, I mean, it is some level of evidence, I suppose, in the

sense that the point behind the settlement conference is to attempt to reach a resolution,

but that's not the end all be all. The reality is the judge had not heard from

the victims, had not heard the full offer of proof that the state would have given,

had not heard all of the evidence that you might get in a typical...

Does the record reflect whether the victims were satisfied with that level of sentencing?

So there is nothing in the record, the settlement conference is not in the record,

the transcript of the settlement conference is not in the record. They never got to

a plea and sentencing because immediately following the settlement conference,

the state restated its offer of two years in the House of Corrections followed by two years

of administrative home confinement and then that was flatly rejected with a no-time misdemeanor

counteroffer. So we never got to that point. There's nothing, the settlement conference is

not in the record that the transcript has gotten. In fact, it was noted only as an ID

during the motion hearing, the motion for an effective assistance of counsel.

Do you agree with the defense that Judge Smuckler found that the defendant would have

accepted the plea offer? I don't. I mean obviously the focus for Judge Smuckler was on

prejudice and the lack of prejudice. I think he paid less attention to that

and more attention to whether or not the court would have accepted it. The reality is

there's no evidence that the defendant would have accepted it. What you see in the appendix,

the defendant's appendix, is that the defendant continued to profess his innocence.

He made note in a number of cases that he was feeling good about this, that how can this be

unauthorized, if the defendant says that he has legal rights, that he was advocating for his

innocence even with his own trial. Well, wasn't there some evidence that he would have considered

a plea provided that he could continue working freely? There was a letter sent by his then

trial counsel that he would have accepted a sentence with absolutely no incarcerated time.

That was an exhibit that was sent out to potential funders of the restitution. But yes, I mean,

to the extent that he might have considered that, but that wasn't the honor on the table.

The honor on the table was two years in jail, followed by two years in the administrative

home. The evidence is actually completely countered that he would have accepted that,

because immediately after the settlement conference, and immediately after this,

we're attempting to meet a resolution, he responds by saying, I'll do the same thing again,

he's suspended misdemeanor offer. So there's no evidence that he would have accepted

the offer that the state provided. And in fact, the emails that were provided in the appendix

all indicate that the defendant continued to profess his innocence the entire time.

He was not saying to his counsel, look, if this is a good offer, we can talk about it,

and I can make some decisions. He kept saying, I was authorized, my dad authorized me.

And in fact, as trial counsel said in the motion hearing, all of the timeline that the

defendant gave as it related to authorization of his father and how the withdrawals occurred,

those all made sense to trial counsel, and they were all consistent with the defendant

continuing to plead innocence all the way through his trial counsel.

How much money was it that the defendant actually stole?

So the total number, if you include out of state, was in the 700,000 range.

The amount that was prosecuted was about 409,000.

So isn't it per se an effective assistance of counsel if you don't convince your client to

accept a non-prison sentence as a matter of law? Can we find that that's an effective?

Not at all. So clients have the ultimate decision. Mr. Fitzgerald professed from

the very beginning that he had authorization from his father to take his money,

and that he was innocent and he continued to profess that innocence.

Did he ever have any written evidence to support that claim?

That he had the authorization? Yes.

So what Mr. Fitzgerald said, at least in emails to his counsel, and what we know from

his trial counsel's testimony in the motion hearing, is that it was all verbal in the sense

that Mr. Fitzgerald gave a timeline as to what it happened and that he said he would provide

an accounting of the finances, but never in fact did so to trial counsel's knowledge.

I guess I agree with the attorney, with Justice Donovan. Isn't that just

completely unbelievable by any stretch of the imagination?

Well, it didn't appear to be to trial counsel. One of the things that trial counsel did

was he looked at other family court and estate proceedings, which is where the family,

Mr. Fitzgerald's argument, at least to trial counsel, was that the family had it out for him,

and because of that, there had been a series of estate cases that that had happened prior,

and so trial counsel looked at some of those things and it supported the opinion that, in fact,

the siblings of Mr. Fitzgerald did have it out for him. Could it have been a stronger push

for to take a plea? Certainly, but that's not the standard, and ultimately the decision

rests on Mr. Fitzgerald, not on trial counsel. The trial counsel looked at other cases, looked at

his own cases, sexual assault cases, looked at human trafficking cases, and other violent

felonies. He looked at the sentences that people are getting, and he reasoned, look,

given my experience seeing these other cases, seeing what I've seen in the news articles

related to the cases, that's a reasonable resolution, and Mr. Fitzgerald, I believe that if you

are convicted that there will be mitigating circumstances. Ultimately, he was wrong.

Mitigating circumstances? What mitigating circumstances?

So the mitigating circumstances that trial counsel believed existed were to show his

relationship with his father, and that, I apologize, Justice Six, are you asking a question?

No, I'm not. I'm listening to you. Oh, very well. I thought I might have lost audio.

So the trial counsel said that his relationship, the Mr. Fitzgerald relationship with

his father, he would show the amount of time that they spent together, the good relationship

that they had, the trips that they went on, the things that his father, the victim, had allowed

him to do over that period of time, and that if he were convicted, that it would show some

level of mitigation in the sense that Mr. Fitzgerald would make him authorize that

particular case. Well, was trial counsel aware of the fact that his client had established

a charitable foundation that did not provide any charitable revenue to anyone other than himself?

The record's unclear on that. There's nothing in the record that shows trial counsel's knowledge.

What trial counsel said is not, by the way, that he didn't review any of the documents

with Mr. Fitzgerald prior to his testimony. The trial counsel certainly had to be aware

that his client was acting under a power of attorney individually where he was supposed

to be acting severally with his sibling. All you have to do is read the document.

Yes, sir. And did trial counsel acknowledge that he didn't review that with his client?

There's nothing in the record that said whether or not he reviewed that specific finding.

The question during the motion for ineffective assistance of counsel was whether

trial counsel had gone through all of the documents. And when the questions were asked on

cross-examination by appellate counsel, there was a specific question about whether or not

he had gone through that particular document. What trial counsel said was, I know that I

went through some, but I don't believe that I went through all of them. But there was

never any sort of indication that, in fact, he had either gone over or not gone over

particular documents. Suffice it to say, trial counsel believed the statements that Mr. Fitzgerald

made that he was authorized. Mr. Fitzgerald made the choice to continue to trial and not take a

plea and to reject the state's last offer at the end of the settlement conference. The question

that an opposing counsel brought up during his argument was, is there ever a scenario

to establish whether a trial court would have accepted the particular plea bargain that was at

issue? And opposing counsel seemed to indicate there wasn't. It's in fact not what the case

law is that follows Laughler. McMillian, which is a case out of Connecticut,

McMillian v. Commissioner, the court compared the pretrial offer with what the ultimate sentence

was and determined whether or not it was proportional. So in McMillian, the defendant was

ultimately sentenced to eight years in prison and the offer was five years. And so

the habeas court said, well, that is within range of a pre and post trial

resolution. And so that gives a reasonable probability that the court would have accepted it.

Ebron v. Commissioner, the district attorney who made the offer and spent decades with that judge

said that. And the other Connecticut cases and talk about the court actually making some

level of statement, some level of affirmative statement, not just that they signed two motions

to continue, but yes, those terms seem reasonable. Superior court and district court judges do

that on a daily basis. They make judgments having listened to both sides.

Two minutes. Thank you, judge. And they say whether or not

they would accept that that is a common aspect of the plea bargaining piece. And that's how

trial counsel knows going into a plea and sentencing hearing, whether or not it would

be accepted. We're not even close. We never even got to a plea and sentencing because

immediately upon getting that last offer essentially restating the same offer,

it was immediately rejected. I'm happy to talk about the second issue if the court has questions

about the issue related to indictments and grand jury. My first question would be,

do you agree with the defense that the remedy here, if we agree that the counsel was

ineffective with respect to plea negotiations, that the remedy should be that the defendant

is sentenced to the last offer issued by the state? I agree in so much as the defendant

would go back before the trial court, but Laughler v. Cooper says that you go back,

the judge doesn't lose his discretion. He can accept the state's last offer.

He can keep the offer, or excuse me, he can sentence the defendant

as he did post trial, and he can also do something in the middle.

And by the way, to answer your question from the counsel's argument, Laughler said the trial court

post remedy or at the remedy stage is not required to essentially ignore all of the past

evidence or all of the evidence that post dated the rejection of the plea.

They can look at all of the things like whether or not Mr. Fitzgerald wanted to accept responsibility

and the fact that he perjured himself and noted in two cases that he had perjured himself both in

bankruptcy and in the family court, and the court is not required to unhear those things for purposes

of the ultimate resolution. Thank you. Mr. Ramsdale, you have one minute.

Judge, I would ask the court to be allowed to supplement the record by submitting a copy of the

settlement conference transcript. That transcript, which the state objected to at the hearing,

and it wasn't an issue at the hearing. It didn't become an issue until after the hearing,

but I suggest to the court that that transcript plainly shows that Judge Fowler would have

accepted the plea. And the state's position was they just needed some, the reason they revised it

is the victim's family said that we need some incarceration. And so I would ask to be able

to submit that to the court. The only other point I'll make is it cannot be

that defense counsel who doesn't do any kind of West law or Lexus research, doesn't contact the state,

the federal defender, the public defender, instead just does a Google search of

newspaper articles has competently researched potential sentencing exposure. My time is up.

Thank you very much, counsel. Thank you for your submissions. If you think of any way that we

can make this more convenient for counsel, would you please let Mr. Gudis know? And we

now close out. The court is adjourned and the case is submitted. Thank you very much.
