Council may come forward in the case of Tormio Industries v. State of New Hampshire.

This is case 2019-0121. Tormio Industries v. State of New Hampshire.

Good morning. May it please the court. My name is Emily Gehring representing the Department of Transportation.

I intend to use my time this morning to discuss the counterarguments that were raised in Tormio's brief, but I welcome you to ask questions at any time.

This appeal appears to be complicated because it was a complex appraisal assignment with multiple economic units, but the actual appeal is very narrow and very straightforward.

Both parties agreed to the highest and best use of the property before the taking.

The only disagreement that remained at trial between the two parties was the value of the single-family residence after the taking.

The trial court disregarded the uncontradicted expert testimony of both parties by supplanting its own opinion of highest and best use before the taking and then using that as the sole basis to adjust the award of just compensation.

Did the parties agree on the highest and best on the value before taking of the residential parcel?

It's a little bit of a complicated question. Tormio submitted two appraisals.

The first was the restricted appraisal, which agreed wholly with the state's appraisal about the value of the residence before the taking.

That was before the BTLA. By the time we got to the Superior Court, they had submitted a more elaborate appraisal report that had a slightly different determination of value for the residence before the taking.

They were close.

They were close, and most importantly for purposes of this appeal is that both parties were agreeing to the highest and best use.

The state is only appealing that portion of the order where the court decided to supplant its own opinion of highest and best use, which then adjusts the award of just compensation.

And what was that? What was their opinion?

The court's opinion or the state's and Tormio's opinion.

The court believed that the property could have been subdivided before the taking.

What difference does that make?

It makes a monumental difference from the state's perspective.

If the state's valuation was contingent upon the fact that you could not subdivide before, but you could subdivide after, and by subdividing the residence away from the light industrial building, it was more valuable after the taking than before.

Did the state ever pin a number on the allegedly unsubdividable property before?

Certainly.

So this state found that there were $70,000 in damages for the whole property.

So that's looking at the light industrial building and the residence.

Which was exclusive of the residential property.

Exactly.

So those damages were purely to the light industrial building.

Then the state's appraisal found that because that residence was more valuable after the taking by $35,000, that $35,000 was used to offset the $70,000 in damages elsewhere on the property.

The number, I think of the numbers if I remember, 190 and 155.

So 155 was a value assigned to the lot under the condition that it could not be subdivided.

Exactly.

How did they value its lack of separate lotness?

So the appraiser went through the three different valuation methods, income approach, cost comparison, and I'm sorry, cost approach, and then sales comparison approach.

In each of those, the court walked through trying to find comparable sales of the cost to build this.

That's how they got that before valuation where it wasn't subdivided.

So what was the basis of the state's expert's opinion that the property could now be subdivided?

Once the taking occurred, what used to be a small single-lane travel driver was now a two-lane paved road.

So the single-family residence then had enough frontage that it could have been subdivided pursuant to Plastow's subdivision regulation.

Without any variances?

They would likely still need a subdivision waiver in the after scenario, but the lot itself would meet the...

Actually, no, I'm sorry, let me take that that answer.

Because they would have the adequate frontage, I don't believe they would need a waiver after the fact.

And that's why the property especially benefited.

It's so speculative beforehand to say they could have gotten a waiver, but then after the fact they would have met the criteria.

How did the trial court get to the 90,000 figure?

Which 90,000 figure?

I'm sorry, what did the trial court award?

The trial court awarded 70,800.

On what basis?

So the trial court said that you could subdivide before and you could subdivide after.

So that residence remained the exact same in value.

And then the only damages that we would be looking at were the impacts to other portions of the property.

Owned by the taxpayer?

Exactly, owned by Toria.

Which are excess lands to the residential portion?

So there's three economic units is how you can think of it.

There's a single-family residence.

There's an industrial building.

And then there's a large acreage of surplus land that is undeveloped unused land.

So why isn't the trial court's order sustainable vis-a-vis the excess land only?

I'm sorry, I don't think I understand your question.

I don't understand this case.

The only issue that the state is taking with the order is that there was no way the trial court could have come to the conclusion

that that residence was subdividable before the taking.

Mr. Coleman agrees with you basically that the court couldn't do that.

But then he says, but there's enough in that court order so that it can be sustained.

There are enough facts in there so that we can reach the same conclusion on the basis of that record.

Why is he wrong?

Certainly.

So I'm glad you teed that up because that's what I'd like to discuss with you today.

So in Torino's brief, they say that you could look at the income approach,

and that would give you the same before and after value,

or you could look at the fact that the property could be condominiumized before

and then subdivided after, which has the same practical effect.

Nothing in the record supports either of those arguments.

So looking first at the income approach, most importantly,

both appraisers testified that the income approach is unreliable

and should be given little to no weight in this type of assignment.

We already know that it's not a credible valuation.

For the residential property.

For the residential property because it's not a typical investment.

Did they both calculate an income approach and arrive at a similar number?

They didn't.

And so the state's appraiser never bothered to come up with an income approach

for the after because it was so unreliable it wasn't worth going through that.

So you can't rely on the state's expert to say it's the same cost before and after

based on income because there is no after income.

Torino's appraiser did calculate the income approach before and after

and found that there was a $25,000 difference using the income approach

before and after.

More valuable after or more?

It's more valuable.

I'm sorry, it's less valuable after the taking by $25,000.

Is that because it has to be condoned?

No, it's two separate issues between the income approach

and the condominiumization.

It rents for the same amount, but it's less valuable because there's less land.

It's less valuable based on the appraiser's calculations,

but the rent really doesn't factor into the question

because there's no evidence that that rent is fair market value.

Another appraiser looked to see if what Mr. Tormio was charging

is actually reflective of what the market could support for a charging rent.

But then also there's a difference between the rent that Mr. Tormio

wants to charge and what the actual value of the property is.

Didn't Mr. Leisinger opine that the residential property

increased in value by $35,000?

He did, purely by virtue of the fact that it could be sold separately.

So that's looking at the sales comparison approach.

And he factored in that a single family residence

is easier to sell when it's just a single family residence.

If you need to find a purchaser that wants a light industrial building

five acres of unusable land and a single family residence,

that's going to be a heck of a lot harder than just selling a residence as a residence.

So take me to how the trial court valued the taking of this

unusable land or excess land and valued it at $70,000.

So it's the light industrial building that had $70,000 with the impacts to it.

And the trial court accepted all of the state's findings,

but for the question of whether or not you could subdivide the residence before.

So the trial court took the state's appraiser at face value for the impacts

that were reached to the rest of the property.

Which was the surplus property in the industrial building.

Exactly.

Which was a loss of $70,000 in value.

Exactly.

Your quarrel is that the court assumed that the property could be subject to

variances prior to the taking and therefore that those assumptions

are things that you can't do essentially, right?

That's exactly what the state's issue is,

is that the trial court didn't have the discretion to step in as an expert appraiser

and issue this opinion that the property could be subdivided.

Neither party intended to litigate that.

That wasn't a controversy between the two parties.

Why can't the award stand without the issue of subdividability?

Without considering it?

The order can't stand because as Tormeo has raised in their brief,

there's these alternate grounds that you could uphold.

We've already just talked about the outcome approach.

The other argument that Tormeo's made is that the property could be condominiumized

before, which would give you sort of separate identities to the residents

and the light industrial and that afterwards you could subdivide to have

this impractical effect.

But the value of a condominiumized property is not the same as the value

of subdividing.

Was there evidence to that effect?

There's ample evidence to that effect.

So in the state's appraiser, the Lydinger report,

Mr. Lydinger did not value the property as a condominium before

because he found the market conditions didn't warrant that.

There is no before and after value condo based on the state's appraiser.

If you look at Tormeo's appraiser, he did go through the exercise of

what would this property be as a condo before?

What would it be as a subdivision after?

And using every single valuation method,

he found that there was a difference in value and a pretty substantial difference

as well as $25,000 and as much as $160,000 difference.

So again, there's no evidence in the record that would have allowed

the trial court to say the value is the same before the taking

as after the taking, whether you're looking at the income approach,

whether you're looking at this theory of condominiumization

or the sort of unsupported opinion that the property could accept.

And making this a condo under these circumstances

would be condominiums are complicated enough

when you've got three people who've got two-bedroom apartments,

but here you'd have a condo that's one of them's a residential building

and then the other's a light industrial building

and those would be the two members of the condominium.

That's exactly what the issue is.

That's the complication of why somebody might not be so keen on paying as much.

Chris, I say that's why it's less valuable as condominiumized property

if there's a subdivision after the taking.

You actually have two separate economic units

and people can take those screen clear of anyone else.

As you just pointed out, most people probably don't have joint ownership

of a light industrial building, some odd surplus land.

So say we agree with you, what do we do?

Remain to tell the trial court to go through that exercise?

I don't think that's necessary.

I think it would be proper for the Supreme Court to reverse

that singular portion of the order where the court supplanted its own opinion

by reversing that portion of the order.

The only thing you're left with is the trial court's findings

that it agreed basically with everything that the state's appraiser had to say

but for the issue of subdividability.

There's often the record that then if you take the state's appraisers,

values which in all other regards the trial court agreed with

you would find that it's $35,000 in just compensation.

And that's what the BTLA had found as well, right?

That is what the BTLA had found.

I don't know what it's worth.

The trial court wasn't able to look at what the BTLA found

but it would be consistent.

So you're saying we can go into the record

and pull apart the appraisal enough so that if we pulled out that error,

if we agree with you and your fellow counsel,

that it'll become apparent to us that the real answer is $35,

and we shouldn't send it back for the trial court to look at it again.

So if you reverse that singular portion of the trial court's order,

the only thing you're left with are the trial court's findings

that we reject Torameo's valuation of the residence

and it fully agrees with the state's appraisal report.

So I see that my light's on.

If there's no further questions, I'll conclude.

Thank you.

Thank you, counsel.

May it please the court?

My name is Sumner Kalman.

I am the appellee and represent Torameo Industries.

If the court wants to know all of the salient facts instantly,

I would recommend looking at an exhibit that is in the notice of appeal,

I believe the notice of appeal, it's SA017.

It's a plan that is captioned condemnation plan.

The facts are pretty important here.

I will tell you initially that I was not enthusiastic

about the trial court's decision.

I had not known what the B movie was before I read the decision.

I educated myself on the B movie.

Basically, if you look at the plan, you will see that before the taking

and what was required here was the statement that was built

a 50-foot-wide class 5 road over an 11-acre parcel

owned by Torameo Industries Inc.

On this 11-acre parcel, there was a single family residence

that enjoyed the benefit of the 11 acres,

and also much further down on this previous driveway

is a 4,000 square foot steel building.

It had been used as a construction site.

It now is used by Proquip, which is a company that rents equipment.

The issue, I think, in the case, notwithstanding the appraisers

and the rest of it is, did the State act reasonably

when it chose under the circumstances of this taking

to not include the House and the.36-acre parcel

that was left for the House to sit on after the taking.

Was that argued below?

When you look at the Court's decision,

this is where the B movie comes out.

Tell me what the B movie is.

I think it's a Seinfeld cartoon of some sort,

and the theory, and I'm relying on what I've read since,

is that a B, as I'm understanding it,

I'm the wrong person to explain the B movie,

but I'll take a shot at it, it is that if a physicist,

whoever does these things, or a mechanical engineer,

whoever figures out a B under those rules, cannot fly.

So the B movie here is, I guess, an analogy.

Our argument was, when you look at this exhibit,

you'll see that this is a single-family house

that was on an 11th-capacitive land

after the taking was on a.36-acre lot.

Part of that was encumbered by an easement.

The entire side yard of the property was eliminated,

and in its place was put a Class 5 town road,

and you'll know that the well after the taking

is, I believe, 2.8 feet from the edge of the road,

and the house.

So how do we get to an affirm?

How does the trial judge get to $70,000

without speculating?

Our argument was that we can rely on the state appraiser

to tell us what that house was worth,

but instead of being subtracted, it should be added.

In other words, the state, under these circumstances,

has left us with a parcel of land and house

that is not marketable.

No one is going to mortgage or buy a house

that is as well as 2.8 feet from the side of the road.

So how do you get to $70,000 without speculating?

I'm not sure.

You think the trial court relied entirely on value adjustments

not related to the house.

Well, you're saying that the house has no value now, right?

Yes.

But if the house has no value now,

then how can you ask us to affirm what the trial court did?

Coming my losses, Judge.

In other words, I know the history.

The history of this court, as I understand it,

and I don't need to lecture you on it, you can lecture me on it,

is when a case doesn't have a clear issue of law

or one can argue that the court made an erroneous assumption

or basis of law that this case should be reviewed and reversed.

This case is fact-driven.

In my experience with this court,

when it has reviewed fact-driven decisions,

especially where the court heard the testimony of the appraisers,

the court took a view of the property,

I don't agree with the court's decision,

but I'm a realist and I'm a little bit ahead of the game.

I mean, I started at $500, got at the $35,000,

got at the $70,800, maybe it's...

Yeah, I get what you're saying.

So why are you saying to us that the house has no value?

That argument's kind of...

Well, it didn't work.

I lost that.

You lost that.

So now we're talking about...

So yeah, I'm not complaining.

We're talking about the difference between a $35,000 gain in value

that Mr. Leidinger said the house had and no change in value.

That's the game, that's the delta we're arguing about right now, right?

I think you are.

Okay, so arguing between $35,000 and $70,000.

Just so you understand, Your Honor, this is not enthusiastic.

I had to make a decision

whether to take an appeal on my own.

And I looked at it and said I didn't.

I mean, I'm just here defending my $70,800.

I had one hard fought and...

Is there any basis in the record to establish

that the value of the property did not change

with the dirt road being converted to a Class 5 town road?

I don't think so, but the court did.

So that's the decision that we're dealing with.

But it still can be occupied, still can be rented.

As long as the well doesn't fail.

Right.

And as long as someone is willing to live in a house right now,

understand when this case was tried,

that house had not been, you know, subject to this road was fresh

and it was just built.

We don't know, wells take time to pollute.

The state law requires a 75 foot radius to protect the well

from pollution.

That would be a later claim, if you will, if the well fails.

Well, if it failed, but we're not going to get very far with it.

Right now, the practical point in our appraisal

spoke to it, apparently not convincingly enough

for the trial court.

But our position was if you tried to go out

into the secondary market, do a certified pot plan

of the single family home and sell it separately

on a.36 acre parcel that setbacks well-radiated zone

requirements of the town, all the kinds of information

you would get in a certified plot plan.

And if you were to do a certified plot plan

of this particular property, our position was,

and our expert's opinion was, though not satisfactory to the court,

that you just couldn't get a mortgage on this property

because no bank would touch it.

Mr. Coleman, let me ask you this.

I know you're arguing this with some lack of enthusiasm,

but you're saying, well, the trial court couldn't do what it did,

which was hypothesize a waiver and variance.

Everybody seems to agree on that.

That's correct.

But there are all these other facts in the court order

that would allow us to affirm the trial court

on alternative grounds, right?

And isn't one of the premises of your argument

that condo ownership and fee ownership essentially

have the same value?

Don't we have to accept that premise in order

to do what you're asking us to do?

Well, let's play along with the judge here on the trial court

said that that was an element in the decision

that you could get a variance

and you could have done the subdivision before and after

the taking.

I do believe, and I agree with the State,

that that is a very speculative decision for the court to take.

But reading this court's decisions also,

when it's a fact-driven case, this court has said

even if the judge messed up in the decision,

if you would have gotten the same result anyway,

then you're not going to reverse the decision.

And the line I've heard in this court was no harm, no foul.

Right.

But factually, aren't you asserting,

in order to get to where you want us to go,

aren't you asserting that the value of the,

let's say there wasn't waiver and there wasn't a subdivision,

that the value of the property condoized before,

as a condo with the residential property

and the light industrial property,

that that value equals the value of that property

as a subdivided lot now that the roads through there.

Isn't that...

I don't know the answer to that question.

Okay.

I didn't think it was a big issue.

That's why we never litigated it.

We didn't see that.

The court found that to be the issue.

Right, so you say there's nothing either way on that.

Except to say that if the court made its decision

based on the understanding that it was not subdividable,

if it was subdividable before,

and right now it's been subdivided,

if we had done a condominium of it,

when an 11 acre parcel,

we could have cut out a lot, a unit in that case,

which would be much more marketable.

In other words, we would never do it

the way the State ended up giving it to us

with a.36 acre lot

and a well located so close to the road

and the house so close to the road.

Are any discussions about relocating the access

probably on, like moving it a little bit?

The State of New Hampshire is not very open

to discussions of that sort.

You know, my personal experience,

having been around so long and done this so long,

is the State would come to you and say,

well, how do we do this in a way

that's least offensive to you?

That didn't occur in this case.

And they kind of were ham-handed about it.

Like, that's the way it is, and that's it.

That's why we...

The original award, Your Honor, was $500.

Just the land area they took

for a 50 foot wide road

along the entire spine of this property,

$500.

I had to go to BTLA to get $35.

I had to go to Superior Court to get $70,800.

So that's why the position I'm taking is,

and I'm surprised that the State brought the appeal.

I mean, I was the one thinking,

I should bring the appeal, but in any event,

I am mindful of the Court's case law on this subject,

and I thought, I don't think I want to take an appeal

and risk the $70,800 if I'm, you know,

just based on a difference of opinion on the fact that...

So if we're not just going to affirm

and say, well, there are enough facts in there

so that even though the Court couldn't do what it did,

we can affirm the $70,000,

$800 award,

what should we do,

send it back to the trial court on this issue?

It seems that the whole dispute at this point

is about the value of the residential property

after the taking and the new road.

Is that right?

Well, I'm relying on the Court's order

trying to follow the Court's reasoning in this case,

and he seemed to think that a pivotal issue here was

that you could have gotten the variance before

and you don't need this now.

Right, well, we're putting that aside, so...

Well, we put that aside, then I guess,

I don't know how we can put that aside.

My argument was...

But you're saying we can affirm anyway,

so that would be putting it aside.

You're saying that's not a...

It doesn't fatally infect the Court's decision,

we can just affirm it.

I think the decision is something,

is it in there somewhere?

Did the finder of fact find it somewhere?

In that record, apparently he did.

And on that basis alone,

for me, the second guest of the Court,

I'm here saying basically...

So what should we do?

What do you think we should do?

Should we send it back to the trial court?

Well, you don't want advice from me on what you should do.

Well, but...

So if we're uncomfortable with what the trial court did,

we agree with both of you

that it couldn't do what it did.

Should we send it back to the trial court

and say do it again?

Try again.

Is that what you're asking us to do?

The mistake is asking me here, honor.

I mean, I would say that to a sponsor,

you should determine that the house had no value

after the taking because of the size of the lot,

location of the well,

and the non-failability of our saleability after...

So you're inviting us to make our own assessment

of the value of that house?

You've invited me to advise you,

but I think you should do.

That's a mistake.

I think it's a muddle,

and under the circumstances,

traditionally,

when there has been a fact-driven case that's a muddle,

the court has refused to touch this court

and say the trial judge was there,

he heard the evidence, he took a view,

he knows better than we do,

and just, you know,

don't reverse it, just affirm it,

and let's all move on.

Thank you, counsel. Case to matter.

Thank you, Ronnie.
