Good morning. The matter before the court is state of New Hampshire versus Richard Sulea.

It is case number two zero one nine zero six five three. The state of New Hampshire is represented

by attorney Elizabeth Woodcock. The defendant Mr. Sulea is represented by attorney Thomas

A. Bernard. Mr. Bernard has reserved one minute. And when you are ready, please proceed.

Thank you, Your Honor. May it please the court, Thomas Bernard, on behalf of Richard Sulea. As

the court just mentioned, I have reserved one minute for rebuttal. I plan to make three points

this morning. First, the right to an impartial jury is central to the right to a fair trial.

And second, to protect this right, at the very least, prospective jurors must commit to set aside

their personal experience and to render a verdict based on the evidence. And here,

LG and BP were unable to make that commitment. And third, if a prospective juror is unable to

make that commitment, then deference to the trial court is limited. The right to a jury

trial and a fair jury is protected by several constitutional and statutory.

Can I interrupt you for one second? You said if, I apologize, but you said if I'm paraphrasing,

but if a prospective juror is unable to make that unconditional commitment, there's no longer

any deference to be afforded to the trial court. I don't understand how that could be,

given the fact that the trial judge is staring the prospective juror in the face.

Yeah. So it's not that there's no deference, but deference is much more limited.

In offshore, this court said the trial court's determination of the impartiality of jurors

selected, essentially the question of demeanor and credibility, is entitled to special deference.

So if you have a juror who says, I have this personal experience or I have this personal opinion

and I can set it aside and render verdict based on the evidence, then in that case,

it is a question of demeanor and credibility. Is that juror being sincere? And the trial judge is

in the best position to judge that. The trial judge can view that prospective juror's body

language and tone of voice. But if the prospective juror is unable to make that commitment at all

or unable to make that unqualified commitment, then it's no longer a question of credibility

or demeanor. So those reasons for affording the trial judge special deference

are diminished. So are you looking for a bright line rule that whenever a prospective juror says,

I'll try my best, that's not good enough that juror cannot sit? I wouldn't say it's a bright

line rule. I think you still consider the other factors involved. So you could have a juror

who, for instance, is constantly trying to come up with excuses for why they shouldn't serve.

And then finally, they say, look, I saw a story on the news a few years ago about

an alleged sexual assault and I'm so rattled by that that I can't set that aside.

In that circumstance, I think a trial court could sustainably find that the juror was

being insincere and just fabricated this problem. But that's not what we have here.

LG and BP both had personal connections to allegations of sexual assault. And I don't

think there's any question that they were trying to get out of jury service or that

they had some ulterior motive for feigning the impact of these experiences.

Can you clarify with respect to BP, she indicated she would have a tendency to believe

children, but I don't find that she related that in terms of whether she would believe them

more than adults. I don't find that. So can you sort of made that comparison or was that

extrapolated from that? It's inferred. She didn't explicitly compare the credibility

that she would grant to children to that which she would grant to adults. But when she was asked,

you know, would you tend to believe children, she said, yes, I would tend to believe children.

If it were equal, she would have said something like, well, I tend to believe

everyone, I'm a very trusting person or something like that. So the fact that

she singled out children as worthy of belief, I think fairly implies that she believes that

that children are more worthy of belief in general than adults.

Mr. Barnard, is our review limited to the transcript or the proceedings regarding

at jury selection? In other words, do we look into the trial record at all? Because my

biggest concern is SL, who had a relationship with, this seems to me a pretty critical

witness for the state. And in that instance, it really has a lot to do with the import of

that particular witness. So are we allowed to look at the trial or are we just limited to

the jury selection proceedings? Yeah, no, I think the court is permitted to look at

the trial. If you for instance, we'll take SL for instance, you know, who had

a relationship with a specific state's witness. Well, if that witness winds up not

testify, then even if it was error for the court to to seat the juror,

it would wind up being harmless error would wind up not being prejudicial,

because the witness that that juror might have a bias towards never testifies a trial.

So I don't want to say that that events at trial can never influence whether it is

reversible error for a court to deny a forecast challenge.

Ms. Woodcock says that the police officer's testimony was highly benign in this case.

Well, if it was not, the police officer was the person who conducted the pretrial interview

of the alleged victim. But I'm sorry, go ahead. No, you go ahead.

And he did offer testimony about her demeanor during that interview. He said that she teared up

and he said that she I think he said she seemed sort of shaken off something like that.

So in in Salloway, this court held that that is independent substantive evidence that

an individual was sexually assaulted their demeanor. So this was, you know, this was important

evidence. And that officer officer's carrier officer carrier's credibility was at issue.

It was a lead detective, right? It was his case.

I believe that's right. Did this case was a defense of this case tied somewhat to the

state's investigation and that limited evidence that the state really uncovered other than the

victim's testimony. I don't I don't recall whether the defense argued that there was more

the police could have done or that the police, you know, acted improperly in their investigation.

I'm not sure. Mr. Barnard am I correct that in regards to LG, the issue is the

jurors experience at school, not the relationship with former officers.

Right, right. But what the juror says about her relationship with former police officers is, I

think, important because she had a son and an ex boyfriend who were former police officers.

And she was unequivocal that that would not affect her ability to be fair and impartial.

She made that commitment, you know, with respect to her son and her ex boyfriend.

So this was somebody who knew how to make that commitment if she wanted to. This was not somebody

who generally speaks in ambiguous terms. But when it came to her experience involving an

allegation of sexual assault, the language that she used changed entirely. So I think that contrast

is relevant in evaluating her inability to make that commitment with respect to her experience

with an allegation of sexual assault. It seems to me that you're putting an awful lot of

weight, word choice by lay people who are in an extremely pressure-ridden environment,

standing up with a judge and a bunch of lawyers in a huddle, a situation they've never been in

before. And then to parse it between to do your best, that's not okay. And oh yeah, I can do it.

That's okay. That seems to me to be putting a lot of weight on something that maybe shouldn't

bear that kind of weight. Well, I have three responses to that. The first is to reiterate

what I just said with respect to LG. She knew how to use how to make that commitment if she

wanted to. The second is that this distinction that I'm making was the distinction that this

court made in town. In town there was a potential juror who was the victim of sexual abuse when asked

if she could set aside her personal experience. She said she was not sure, but she promised, quote,

I would try. And she said something else too. She said, I need to do this. I think those

are the magic words that should have gotten her excused.

Right. I think I need to do this is troubling, but I still think the core problem in that case

was this inability to make this commitment. We have similar words here from LG. LG said,

I would do my best here to do what's right and answer honestly to my heart.

And the problem with that is that doing what LG thinks is right and answering honestly to her heart

might involve incorporating the experience it's had involving an allegation of sexual assault

rather than setting it aside. Aren't we speculating there?

Well, I don't think we're speculating here any more than the court speculated in town

when it said that the juror's statement, I need to do this, suggests an agenda or a buy.

Well, but the juror in town was an actual victim of a sexual assault, right?

It was. Yeah. Pardon me for acting like a trial judge, but you never sit one of those jurors.

Well, one point the state makes in its brief that I agree with is that the fact

that somebody has been the victim of a sexual assault doesn't automatically disqualify.

Every juror needs to be considered on an individual basis. It's possible that somebody

may personally have been the victim of a crime, but still be able to separate that out.

And it's possible that somebody else may just have a more tangential

connection to a crime but yet be so affected by it. Some people are just more inherently affected

by things than others. And LG expressed a sort of a qualitative analysis that the victim she

was referring to or the child she was referring to wasn't adequately advocated for. Yes. Speak to

that. Yes. Yeah. So I think that that explains why this could have a lasting effect on LG,

even though she wasn't personally the victim, that the prior experience she had was not an

experience in which she saw justice served. This was an experience in which justice was denied,

in which the system failed. And that creates the possibility that she sees this case as her chance

to make sure that the system doesn't fail here. It seems to me that we've got the goalposts here,

our town and Tbaldi. And as you're arguing, this is closer to town than Tbaldi and the

state's arguing the other way. Shouldn't it be part of our thinking, I mean sexual

assault cases, I think, are different, emotional, they're more emotionally charged than

felon and physician cases or something. Should that enter into our analysis about jury selection?

I think it can, to the extent that it becomes much more plausible that somebody's

personal experience would affect them in the long term. So if you have somebody who says,

look, 55 years ago, my husband was the victim of a property crime. And I'm just so

affected by this that I don't think I can set that aside. I think the court would be right

to be skeptical of that claim. But if you have a juror who like BP says 55 years ago my husband

was the victim of a child sexual assault, then I think there's much less cause for skepticism.

That's the type of event that is going to stick with somebody and stick with somebody's

relatives much more than a crime that a different type of crime. And I do want to make

the third point that I had in mind to Justice Bassett's earlier question of, are we parsing words

a little too much between I'll try and yes, I'll do it. And that's that my argument is not that

if a prospective juror says, well, I'll try or I'll do my best or I don't think that experience

would affect me that they they have to be struck right there. No further questions. Certainly the

trial court can ask further questions, say, look, you know, I'll try isn't good enough

and not asking if you'll try. I'm sure you will. I'm asking if you're able to make the

commitment that you'll do that and clarify what the juror means. So if you have somebody

that's just not used to lawyers and not used to this formal setting, the questions from the

judge can clarify exactly what that juror means. Thank you. Your light is on. You still have one

minute. Thank you. Thank you, Your Honor. Elizabeth Woodcock to the state of New Hampshire.

I think that sometimes when we look at transcripts, we are looking at them without

really seeing the people who are making the statements that are being recorded.

Jury selection is, I think, really one of the more interesting and probably

stressful processes for the jurors themselves. They're here. The lawyers, the judge,

have all done this before. The prospective jurors, on the other hand, usually haven't.

And I think that they're up at the side bar. The court is asking the juror

sometimes very personal questions. And the more personal the questions get,

the more hesitant the person becomes to answer them. It's human nature. So that when the, when

LG is asked, are you related to any police officers? And she says, my son and my ex.

And she makes it pretty clear that she doesn't think much of her ex. She's pretty,

she's pretty confident in those answers. But then when you begin to ask the questions, well,

how do you feel about you? You've worked in a school. How do you feel about children and

sexual abuse? Of course, that begins to make her feel probably not less confident in her

certainty that she can be fair, but less certain. What is the right answer?

Um, you know, any one of us standing there, well, how do you feel about children and

sexual abuse? Any one of us would say we thought that that was horrible.

Doesn't that make it all the more important as Mr. Barnard was saying that the court,

particularly in a sexual assault case, follow up carefully and ask about a commitment so that

it's not just, well, I'll try. I'll do my best. Isn't it incumbent, particularly in this kind of case

that you got that you're up there in a situation they never been before for the

court to have the responsibility to say, Hey, you know, what does that mean? And to tease out

the nuances? Well, I think that your your question, Justice Bassett drives my point home

because you put a certain tone of voice on I'll try. You made it sound as if the person was

very unsure, but there are other ways of saying I'll try that can make it sound very different.

And I think that what this juror was doing was she was working,

working through the best way to answer the questions. Of course, you can't say with

100% certainty that you will walk into a jury room and have only listened to the evidence.

And that's not what jurors are asked to do. This is a juror who it seemed to me from reading the

transcript probably didn't have a lot of experience with the courts and was trying to

give answers that were not misleading to the court. She did take the opportunity to evaluate

the effectiveness of the advocacy for the child in her experience. So would it be appropriate for

that juror to be sitting there watching the prosecution and evaluating whether in the case

before her, it was being properly handled? I don't think that that the I did not read this

this way, your honor. I think that the way that I read it was that the juror felt that

the child had not been advocated for so that there was no resolution.

And can I interject right there, Ms. Woodcock, so we can get what I think is a complete picture?

Wasn't there also evidence in the transcript that she said that the child was not properly

advocated for in part because it was a family member involved? Correct. Okay.

Then doesn't that drive home Justice Hans Marconi's point? We have a family member here.

Well, so frequently they are family members, your honor. So I'm not sure that that would

make a difference. And the problem really is that we look at these cases and they're

far more common cases of sexual abuse and child abuse are far more common than we would

even like to acknowledge ourselves. So I think that if you're going to try to get

this jury that seems to have been dropped from outer space that has no

connection with the realities of family life in the United States of America and how wrong

some of the situations can be, you look at one of the reasons that I went through the entire

jury selection in my brief is that when you begin to read all of the different things that

these people have experienced and all of their different contacts, you're realizing

that it's not that you're trying to pick the perfect jury because it's not going to be possible,

particularly not in small town New Hampshire where everyone knows everyone else. I think you made

your point very clearly, quite frankly. Well, can't you find a jury that doesn't have

14 jurors that don't have relationships with witnesses in the case? I mean,

I know it's a small, there are small towns in New Hampshire, but we're talking about a county here.

I can't recall ever having a jury trial where there was a jury that had a relationship with

one of the witnesses. Well, I think that the concept of relationship is a little difficult

to apply here. The police officer was a select man and the person knew him, but didn't know

there wasn't any particular personal relationship. It was that the juror knew him.

And I disagree with Mr. Barnard. I don't think that the police officer's testimony,

the detective's testimony was particularly compelling one way or the other. He was

there when they made the recorded one party call. We don't really know how the jury evaluated

that officer's testimony and certainly a working relationship is enough to recuse one of us from

a case. So I'm not sure it has to be a personal relationship. I'm curious about JC, the gentleman

whose sister won't allow him to be in the same room alone with her daughters due to a prior sexual

assault from the sister, and also RP, who the judge sort of dismissed his concerns about

seeing suicides as a result of personal tragedy, including sexual assault, as saying

he didn't think this case would rekindle his work experience. And I found that to be a bit

of an odd response. So can you speak to those two at all? Well, again, I think that the

firefighter, who you were talking about, the man who had seen things and had also been a funeral

director, I couldn't tell from the transcript if he was just trying to get out of it.

And that's part of the problem here. I mean, I've heard judges say that when they go back

and they talk to jurors after they've been served on the jury, they say it was a rewarding

experience and wonderful, and they were so glad they'd done it. But all the way through

Vladimir, those same jurors are trying to get out of serving in this rewarding,

remarkable experience. And I don't know if it's because we don't do a particularly good job

teaching people what their civic duties are when they're in third grade or what the problem is,

but people seem to approach jury duty as the opportunity to get away from it. And then I'm

told by judges that the jurors afterwards think that it's the most wonderful thing they've ever

done. So I had a feeling with that particular person that he was just trying to get out of it,

and that Judge Ruoff was trying to edge him back towards saying, well, you know,

we're not going to have graphic photographs. We're not going to have any of those things.

Is that going to be a problem for you? The problem with JC, I think, is a similar kind of

thing. You didn't get the feeling that he necessarily wanted to serve on the jury.

So when the court is questioning people, you're taking into consideration their tone of voice,

their body language, all of those things. And I just don't see, based on this transcript,

that these jurors should have been stricken. As I say, I mean, I think it's a fine art. And I've

seen judges handle the jury selection very differently. Their tone with the jurors is

very different. They can change from juror to juror and how they're interacting and how the

questions are being posed. But I think that if you're going to start to say that, well, a woman

who says that she believes children, a lot of adults believe children. Why would a child make

something up? Well, until they get your hand caught in the cookie jar. I think that I'm not sure if

my parents had been selected for jury selection with seven children. They would have come back and

said that they believed children. They might have been a little bit more skeptical.

Those were somewhat leading questions. Were they not?

There were a lot of leading questions that were being asked. And the trial court was trying

to get the defense attorney to stop doing it because that is going to give you a skewed picture.

As one of the cases I cited states, leading questions are really a form of advocacy. They're

not a way of finding out exactly what the person feels. And the open ended questions that the

trial court was trying to ask, I think we're getting at what the concerns of the individuals

were. But can't the trial court do, as Mr. Barnard suggests, ask a direct question of the

juror and ask them to commit to being impartial? That's how you fix that record. That didn't

happen here, did it? Well, I'm not so sure it didn't. I think that the court asks those

questions in a variety of ways. But sometimes you don't realize all the time what the person

standing in front of you is feeling. This is a judge. The judge is sitting there wearing a

black robe and saying, can you commit to this? The person might find that extremely intimidating.

Or, on the other hand, might not. And that's reading the individual justice

document. It's not, it's not, there's no formula for it. If this were sort of like a guilty plea,

for example, where you're supposed to go through certain things and ask certain questions,

that would be one thing. But jury selection has never been a kind of a rule based approach

towards things. You're supposed to be able to determine whether the juror can be fair.

And the trial court made that decision. And I don't think that the transcript suggests that

the trial court was wrong. As we approach this case, should it matter to us that there were

the judge only questioned about 30 jurors and that there were another 60 maybe available

for the panel? No, I don't think so. I mean, one of the cases I think I cited talked about how the

judge had questioned about 30 people and that that was an indication that the judge was being fair.

If you look at the people that the trial court dismissed and said, no, you can't serve. And

you use that as kind of a comparison. This is where the standard was. He was dismissing lots of people

for, you know, they would only get a couple of sentences into what they were saying. He would

say go. Well, but it wasn't like they were running out of potential jurors. There were a lot more

to go, which would seem to me to, you're not being, you're not really in a bind. It's not

like, boy, we're not going to be able to sit the jury here. We've got a lot of people we can go

through. So we don't have to lower the bar because of some practicality. Well, just pass it. If the

first 30 people that you've questioned are all coming out sort of about the same, I don't

think that we'd have any reason to think that the next 30 would be any different. We still have

a situation in which most people in the United States, if they if they aren't related to someone

who has been sexually abused, know someone who has been sexually abused, it's not going to change.

So the next 30 jurors are going to have the same issues. And I think that the the court is trying

to be not only fair to the defendant in terms of trying to select a jury, but also not disqualifying

people. You know, we in the United States, we have a history of disqualifying people

from jury selection for lots of reasons. And courts, I think, have to be as careful

in not disqualifying someone who is qualified to serve as they have to be in disqualifying

someone who is not qualified. And I think that the record in this case shows that this court hit

the right balance. Thank you. Your red light is on. Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. Barnard.

Thank you. And I would like to respond to one point. So the state argues that if a prospective

juror says something like, I'll try or I would do my best that on appeal, we don't know what tone

of voice they used to say to say that they could have been very confident. The state

also says that some jurors might be intimidated, too intimidated to make a firm commitment to set

aside their personal experience. But here's the problem. Say you have two jurors. Juror A makes

that firm commitment and says I will set aside my personal experience, render verdict based on

the evidence. Juror B just says I'll try or I'll do my best. And then during the course of the

trial, both jurors realized that they can't set aside their personal experience. That because

the case is just too close to their personal experience, it's just impossible. Well, juror A,

who made that commitment is going to say I made a commitment to the judge that I would do this

and I can't do it. So I have to speak up and let the judge know. But juror B is not going to have

that experience. Juror B is going to say, well, I told the judge I would try. I said I'd do

my best and I have done my best. So I don't have to speak up. I don't have to tell the

judge that I'm not able to do that. Thank you. Thank you both. Thanks to see you. Very, very well done.
