This is case 2019-0156, Katherine Frederick versus New Hampshire Department of Health and

Human Services.

Take your time, Mr. King.

May it please the Court, Benjamin King, for the appellate Frederick.

Ms. Frederick qualifies for the protections of the saving statute under the Plains language

of the statute.

Why?

Three reasons.

She timely brought her wrongful discharge case against the state of New Hampshire within

the statute of limitations prescribed by RSA 541B14.

She did so in the New Hampshire federal court in September of 2014.

Two, the New Hampshire federal court dismissed the case for reasons that do not bar the

action, the left amendment immunity.

Three, Ms. Frederick timely recommenced her wrongful discharge case against the state of

New Hampshire in superior court within the one year time limit prescribed by the saving

statute RSA 50810.

The trial court got it right the first time when the trial court held that Ms. Frederick's

case could proceed based on the saving statute.

On reconsideration, the trial court misapprehended that RSA 50810 has some applicability here

and based on that held that the saving statute does not apply.

RSA 50810, however, does not apply to this case.

Why?

Doget the Northampton makes clear.

In doget, this court said, quote, RSA 50810 should come into play only when the statutes

being compared contain similar potentially conflicting types of time limits.

So don't these periods conflict given the fact that 508 provides for tolling, whereas

the statute under which you sued the state doesn't provide for any tolling mechanism.

Discovery rule, for example.

Well, actually, Your Honor, this court has held that the discovery rule dealt upon to

claims brought under 541B.

In opinion of the justices decided in 1985, this court held that even though the

discovery rule isn't articulated in 541B, 541B can only be constitutional if the discovery

rule applies to claims brought under the provision.

50810 has only been construed to, has only been looked at by this court when the court's

been called upon to compare conflicting statutes, one from Chapter 508 and one from

elsewhere, governing the time limit within which a person must bring an action in the

first instance.

Isn't that what we have here?

No, it isn't.

The state seems to say otherwise.

The state seems to rely upon the language in 508 that says it does not apply to cases

in which a different time is limited by statute.

And this court has said that 50810 only applies when you're comparing similar, potentially

conflicting types of time limits.

Dawgott has said that the second suit statute is not a similar time limit to a time limit

for commencing action in the first instance.

The STIRE case is distinguishable on those grounds.

In STIRE, this court looked to 50810 to resolve whether the statute of limitations for bringing

a charge of discrimination in the first instance controlled over the statute of limitations

to giving a minor a two-year period to commence an action.

And the court held, based on 50810, 354A was controlling.

And the same is true of the only other analysis of 50810 that I'm aware of, Martin B. Patts

Peek, where the court said the statute of limitations for beginning an action against

a ski area operator controls over the general statute of limitations.

We're not comparing two statutes with different time limits here.

The court compared 508.4 with 541B.

508.4 doesn't have any applicability here.

It's uncontested that 541B is the statute of limitations that governs Ms. Frederick's

claim.

And just, I hesitate to get into this because 508.1 has no applicability, but the trial

court's analysis of legislative history was mistaken.

The trial court said, well, in 1985 the statute of limitations under 541B was six years.

The general of statute of limitations is three years, therefore there were different time

limits.

That's wrong.

In 1985, when this court was considering the constitutionality of 541B, the general

statute of limitations was also six years.

And in opinion of the justices, this court held that the fact that the statute of limitations

under 541B, under the proposed 541B, coincided with the statute of limitations under 508.4,

the general statute of limitations, led support for the fact that 541B passed constitutional

muster.

Let me shift to another issue.

There's three issues in this case.

We're talking about the saving statute.

Let me just ask you about equal protection, and the state takes the position that your

equal protection argument was not made below and is not preserved, and you did not take

issue with that in your subsequent pleadings, so I assume you would agree with that?

I think the court has to consider the constitutional implications of construing the statute.

Construing 541B is the state advocates, and the reason for that is because this court under

Vlad V. Coleman has to construe statutes in a manner so that they're constitutional.

I appreciate that, but is it right that the equal protection argument wasn't made to the

trial court?

That is correct.

Okay.

That is correct.

And let me shift to yet another issue, which is we don't even get to the saving

statute if your client can't bring a wrongful termination action because she's in a part

of a collective bargaining agreement.

Why should she be entitled to bring a wrongful termination claim under these circumstances?

Certainly.

The question in this case is to whether a contract employee can bring a wrongful discharge

claim.

I don't think the court even has to reach that issue, and I'm going to read some language

from an opinion by Judge Nicolosi that I discovered after briefing, says Dovey State

of New Hampshire decided on April 6, 2016.

The state made the same argument that because the plaintiff was subject to the personnel

rules that somehow forecloses her status at will employee, Judge Nicolosi rejected that

argument, saying the court is not persuaded that the plaintiff's statute is a classified

employee under RSA 2949 forecloses her status at will employee.

Although the division of personnel's administrative rules set forth certain procedures for certain

types of termination, nothing in those rules states employees like the plaintiff may only

be discharged for cause, nor do they proscribe termination on any particular basis.

Therefore, the alleged facts support the presumption that the plaintiff is an employee

at will.

Well, there seem to be cases and other jurisdictions that go both ways.

You're asking us to adopt the approach of the Washington Supreme Court in Smith?

Yes.

Yes.

And why is that the better approach?

Well, even that case, that case has to do, then we reach the question of if Ms. Frederick

is a contract employee.

If you agree with Judge Nicolosi's analysis that because the state was not obligated

to only terminate Ms. Frederick for cause, that they could terminate her for other reasons,

and Ms. Frederick is an at will employee, then the ruffle discharge cause of action

is available to at will employees.

The Washington case holds that ruffle discharge cases are also available to contract employees.

And I would note-

Sorry, I didn't hear you are also available to contract employees?

Yes, exactly.

Because it's an action in tort, not contract?

Exactly, Your Honor.

And I'll just, if I could quote from Judge Babadoro in Atard v. Benoit, which he

decided in 2007, the New Hampshire Supreme Court confirmed in 2004 that ruffle termination

is a cause of action in tort, not contract.

While the New Hampshire Supreme Court has not yet explicitly held that contract employees

are entitled to bring ruffle discharge toward actions, the court's reasoning importer leaves

little room for the argument that an employee should be deprived of the ability to seek

relief for the tort of ruffle termination simply because he also has the benefit

of an employment contract.

Rights protect the right to enforce promises.

The ruffle discharge expectation, yes, the ruffle discharge action protects an entirely

different interest.

Right of an employee not to be fired out of bad faith, malice, or retaliation for

acting in a manner encouraged by public policy.

So there is no reason why Ms, there was no personnel rule that Ms. Frederick could have

invoked to appeal her termination or to grieve her termination for being fired because

she insisted on the right, she insisted on being able to breastfeed her child during

the workday because her child depended on breastfeeding for the child's nutrition.

She was a member of the union, is that right?

Is she under covered by a collective bargaining agreement?

She's covered by a collective bargaining agreement.

Does that matter?

Does that?

It does not, Your Honor, because neither the collective bargaining agreement, neither

273A nor RSA 21I, evinces an intent to preempt the common law cause of action

for ruffle discharge.

This court has said that there has to be a clear legislative intent to preempt a common

law cause of action in order for that action to be displaced.

But was there a grievance avenue?

You said no.

But was there no grievance avenue under the collective bargaining agreement?

I can't answer that question definitively, Your Honor, I don't want to miss it.

Your point is that there's no preemption under this agreement.

There's no preemption.

Right.

She could have done both.

She chose to bring the common law cause of action for ruffle discharge.

I want to make just a few more points on the saving statute argument.

Why should this court find that the saving statute applies to the state?

One, the plain language of the statute.

Two, the bedrock principle of New Hampshire jurisprudence, that actions should be resolved

on their merits.

If this court finds that the saving statute somehow does not apply to the state, Ms. Frederick

will never have had her opportunity to litigate on the merits her wrongful discharge claim,

all because she filed in the wrong court.

That is exactly the mistake that the saving statute is designed to cure.

The Vance decision, which is outside of it, just came down from the New Hampshire

federal court in 2019, addresses the same situation.

The plaintiff mistakenly filed in the New Jersey federal court.

The New Jersey federal court disposed for lack of personal jurisdiction.

The plaintiff refiled in New Hampshire federal court, where the case should have been brought,

and the court held that the saving statute applied to preserve the claim.

What was the cause of action in that case?

Do you remember?

Sorry.

Very fraud, negligence, misrepresentation, breach of contract, breach of implied covenant

of good faith and fair dealing.

It was not against a state entity, a government entity.

It's not against a state entity.

Thank you.

And thirdly, the principle of statutory construction that statutes are to be read harmoniously.

You can read 50810 harmoniously with RSA 541B by stating that RSA 50810 allows a plaintiff

to bring a second suit.

If you adopt the reading that Judge McNair did on reconsideration, you're under the saving

statute nougatory as to claims against the state, and you read language into that statute

that is not there.

If the legislature intended the saving statute to exempt the state from the saving statute,

the legislature could have amended 50810 at any time in the past 35 years.

It said accept actions against the state.

Yes.

And the legislature has not done so.

That was the rationale I know I'm out of time.

That was the rationale of the...

Finish your thought, though.

Thank you.

That was the rationale of the Massachusetts Appellate Court in Cowabee City of Worcester, where

the court cited in my brief, where the Massachusetts court held that claims against the state...

The saving statute does apply to claims against the state because the saving statute contains

no language exempting the state.

Thank you, Mr. Gannon.

Thank you.

Mr. Galdieri.

Thank you, Your Honor.

May I please read the court?

My name is Anthony Galdieri.

I represent the Appellee Cross Appellant, the Department of Health and Human Services,

in this matter.

This case concerns essentially two issues that the court will have to decide.

And the first is whether a state employee, classified employee like Ms. Frederick, can

maintain a claim for wrongful termination against the state.

And if she can, whether RSA 541b, 14 Roman IV, or is that claim because Ms. Frederick failed

to file it in Superior Court within three years of her alleged wrongful termination.

The first issue about extending the tort of wrongful termination beyond the at-will

employment context to a state employee like Ms. Frederick is essentially a policy decision.

The trial court read this court's decision in quarters to suggest that this court would

extend the tort in that direction.

But admittedly it didn't do much analysis around that.

I don't see that an issue could just as easily be said that there's nothing in the personnel

rules or the state law intended to restrict an otherwise extant tort cause of action

that virtually everyone holds.

Well the state personnel appeals board and appeal through PAB allows the PAB to issue in all

cases the PAB may reinstate an employee or otherwise change or modify any order of the

appointing authority or make such other order as it may deem just.

In any case in which an employee comes in and claims adverse employment action was

taken against it.

So are you saying that the remedies are co-extensive?

The remedies may not only be co-extensive they may be broader through the PAB.

So all of the remedies available in a wrongful termination action would be available against

the state through the grievance process?

Well it would be for instance if you were terminated and you went to the PAB you could seek

reinstatement and back pay and in certain instances there is automatic reinstatement and

back pay to a like position, a like seniority and like status.

Presumably somebody who didn't want to be reinstated to be back in their employment

might not go to the personnel appeals board, might choose to want consequential damages

of some form.

I think that is foreclosed by RSA 541B because if tort exists and is recognized to extend

to a state employee then it must pass through a waiver of poverty immunity and that waiver

would be 541B and the question arises is it a claim within 541B and a claim is a request

for money damages for personal injury unless another remedy is provided by law?

Was that argument advanced below?

It was not advanced below but it is an argument that goes to sovereign immunity subject matter

jurisdiction and I think it informs the analysis of whether in this context the court would

extend the tort of wrongful termination out of the at will employment context.

It may do so to state employees to find out that it can't be brought against state employees

under 541B.

Is this the first time the argument has ever been made?

This is the first time that I've heard it made.

I do not, it was not made in the trial court.

I don't know if it was made in other cases where this issue has been raised but I

certainly think it is a threshold issue.

Does this tort even if it exists, climb through a waiver of sovereign immunity to affect the

state?

That gets to the second live issue in the case which is in order to have been brought

up within the waiver of sovereign immunity it had to be filed in the superior court

or the board of claims within three years of the injury.

That's what the waiver prescribes.

This wrongful termination claim was not filed in the correct forum within that time frame.

It was filed in federal district court.

The federal district court does not have jurisdiction over 541B claims.

RSA 540B9 indicates which forums have original exclusive jurisdiction and in most cases

it's the board of claims or the superior court.

It is undisputed that this was brought more than three years after the injury in superior court.

It did not originate in superior court which would, which might make it a more interesting

argument about the application of the saving statute if it had originated.

Why should it be different?

Well, the saving statute doesn't apply to toll the statute of limitations unless you

file your claim in a court of confidence jurisdiction otherwise the statute keeps going.

I can't have a right to file a claim with the water board but file that claim with

the PUC and then when it's dismissed for lack of jurisdiction say oh wait I meant

to go to the water board.

There's no jurisdiction in the PUC.

There's no jurisdiction in the federal court.

The saving statute doesn't exactly spell that out.

It just says if a judgment is rendered against the plaintiff in an action.

Well the saving statute is the saving statute is tolling provision and in this court held

and we cited it in our brief, try to recall the name of the case, in one particular case

that the statute of limitations does not toll unless a claim is filed in a court of

confidence jurisdiction and the saving statute contemplates a right of action within

the forum and there is no right of action under 541B in the federal forum for a

wrongful termination claim against a.

Well, but there may be jurisdiction in the federal court for a wrongful termination tort claim.

I don't believe there is.

I don't believe there would be that claim in the first.

Assuming diversity.

I don't believe there would be.

That claim would be barred in the first instance it's barred in the first instance

by the 11th amendment, but the state's general sovereign immunity, the state has

waived it to permit those actions to be brought only in the superior quarter of the

court of flames.

So this is sort of splitting hairs does the 11th immunity, does the state's

immunity sort of trouble the initial jurisdiction of the federal court?

They can't proceed, but the federal court can certainly decide the immunity issue.

The federal court, whenever a claim is brought through the court, the federal court has to

decide whether it can stay there and be decided or not.

And it has jurisdiction to decide that.

It has jurisdiction to decide whether the claim is properly there, yes.

But the point of the second suit filing, the court said this court said this in

dog when it reviewed the saving statute it said that the claim was filed timely

the ZBA appeal was timely filed in superior court and superior court

jurisdiction attached to it.

And so when it was kicked out, they got the benefit of the saving statute and

the saving statute allowed them to refile it.

Not the case in federal court with this claim.

You can't refile it in federal court.

The court didn't have jurisdiction over it in the first instance.

What the plaintiffs are inviting you to do in this case with the saving

statute, however, is to effectively overrule your decision in Steer versus

the Girl Scout of the United States.

In Steer, the issue before the court was whether the minority tolling provision,

which is not a statute of limitations, it's a tolling provision.

Whether it augments the 180 day time period,

an RSA 354A21 in which to file a complaint with the Human Rights Commission.

And the court held that it did not because 354A21 contained its own

specific time limitation.

And that's where you look to determine and

calculate what the time is to file a complaint.

You don't start importing all of the various tolling provisions that exist

in RSA 508 into there because RSA 508.1 spells out that rule that we don't do that.

What about Mr. King's argument that it would have been easy for

the legislature to say that the saving statute doesn't apply to the state?

Well, it wouldn't need to do that because of RSA 508.1.

You have a different limitation that applies and

then 508.1 creates a broader rule, creates a broader rule that goes to all states.

I think Mr. King's point was that it was the same limitation, i.e. three years, both state and under 541.

Well, it's not the same limitation.

The limitation under 541B is it shall be brought within three years of the injury.

No tolling, no discovery rule, that's it.

There's the limitation period within.

So the saving statute tolls the general limitation period.

The general limitation period is 508.4.

Not automatically, it's just under suit and search condition.

Correct, correct.

Is Mr. King correct that we have imposed the discovery rule under 541?

No, he's not correct.

You have not imposed the discovery rule under 541.

Are there any aspects?

The opinion of the 1985 opinion of the justices is an advisory opinion.

It's not accidental and the court has never decided the issue of whether there's a discovery rule in RSA 541.

But in fact, that opinion of the justices opined that it didn't go through all the tolling provisions and say,

RSA 541B is unconstitutional because it doesn't have all these various tolling provisions in it.

It pointed to the 180-day notice rule in RSA 541B as well as the discovery rule.

And pointed out that those may be issues.

And it stopped there and indicated that in all other respects, they found it to be constitutional.

In this context, in this case, I think the 1985 opinion of the justices works against the plaintiff's argument.

But in deciding whether to extend a cause of action for wrongful termination to a state employee,

the court should look to the analysis that has employed in the past.

And it's the analysis employed in the Clark case to decide, are we going to recognize a wrongful demotion claim?

And that goes back to the Monge case where we're going to balance the employer and the employee in the public interests.

And in 1976, in foot versus the State Personnel Commission,

this court said that the state personnel system balances those interests in the public sector.

But we've never held that a state employee cannot bring a wrongful termination claim.

No, but I think it's helpful to use the framework of the Monge analysis to decide whether you would extend it to this context.

Because context matters.

In the at will and context, there are no other protections.

Is there a split in the Superior Court on this issue?

It does not.

I can't say that I have seen perhaps every Superior Court decision on this issue.

But it sounds like the Superior Court leans towards saying there is such a cause of action that extends primarily on the strength of Porter says it's a tort and a tort that should be available to everyone.

I'm not sure that analysis takes into account that we have many causes of action that only exist in certain instances where there are certain relationships.

And this is one that exists in the at will employment relationship.

Should this court extend it to other relationships?

In this case, the state employee relationship, which is a different relationship, the private contract employee, that's the question before the court.

And the court has to be deliberate about that in deciding, is it wise to extend the tort in this direction?

Is there a wrong in need of a remedy here that can't be obtained through several other mechanisms?

The collective bargaining agreement, the step one, step two, step three grievance process with arbitration or the personnel appeals board in that system.

Is there a lack of protection here that requires the common law to extend in this direction?

Do you agree that if the remedies are not co-extensive, if you can get additional remedies for the termination through a wrong termination case, that that would provide a reason for having that cause of action recognized?

You may look at that, Your Honor, but I wouldn't say that should be the analysis that just because there's one or two additional remedies you could squeeze out of a tort of wrongful termination,

that that means the common law should extend and be a third avenue to obtain relief.

The question will be, because under 541b, section one, whether it's a claim and it's not a claim, if there's another remedy, it doesn't have to be the same remedy provided by law, it's just another remedy provided by law.

And so if the tort extends in that direction, it still needs to make it through the waiver.

And again, just to clear that argument that you just were talking about in terms of not a claim, that was never raised or addressed with the trial court.

That's correct, Your Honor.

I'd like to make one final point is that when the court looks at a dogged, what it's being asked to do is overrule steer,

steer is about when does a tolling provision augment a filing period, a limitation filing period.

Your light is on, but finish your point.

And the saving statute operates at the other end of minority tolling. Minority tolling operates at the front end.

The saving statute operates at the back end to toll the statute of limitations.

The dogged case concerns an appeal period, which is different, the court says, than a period of time to initiate or file a lawsuit.

And that is a distinguishing factor in dogged that the court should consider and the court should affirm the trial court's decision in this case.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Very well argued, by the way.
