This is case 2019-0031, state of New Hampshire versus Joseph M. Allen.

Good morning, may it please the court. I'm Susan McGinnis for the state of New Hampshire.

I have reserved two minutes for rebuttal in this case.

Before I get to the facts in the case, this is a trial court's, this is a state's appeal

of a trial court's decision, suppressing a large amount of fentanyl that was found

in a car the defendant was a passenger in. The court found that the officer lacked probable

cause to seize the car. Before I get into the facts of the case, in the defense brief,

defense counsel has stated that the court will affirm a trial court's determination

of probable cause, unless when the evidence is viewed in the life most favorable to

the appellee, the decision is contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. However,

in state versus gros Santos, the case they've cited, and every other case where this court

has applied the manifest, contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence standard,

this court has stated that it will view the evidence in the life most favorable to

the state, not the appellee. If the defense believes that the standard

should be different when it's a state's appeal, then the defense should brief

that issue rather than simply changing the word state to appellee. I did a search while

preparing for oral argument, and I found 41 cases applying that standard in the context

of motions to suppress, and the court has always said in the life most favorable to

the state. It makes sense to me since a trained officer's perceptions are entitled

to deference when you're doing a probable cause analysis.

Not as much deference as the trial judge's observations of fact are.

No, the findings of fact are entitled to credibility determinations are entitled

to deference, and so are the factual findings.

So in this case, I don't think it really matters either way how you view the

evidence, because the trial court aired in finding there was no probable cause.

First of all, the trial court only considered some of the factors the

state relied on, and those factors standing alone the court found were

insufficient for probable cause. The state actually relied on numerous factors,

any one of which standing alone would be insufficient, but you have to look at

these facts. First of all, in light of the officer's experience, he's been an

officer for over 12 years. He specializes in detection of drug trafficking.

He routinely patrols I-95 where this stop occurred, which is a known drug

trafficking corridor. He didn't give a lot of...

Are you asking us to take judicial notice of that?

A known drug trafficking corridor? It's beyond dispute. It's been in numerous

cases that it's a known... And the officer testified that it was a known

drug trafficking corridor, and the court also found that it was, but that's

not entitled to that much weight. The officer didn't give it that much

weight because, quite frankly, to get from Massachusetts to Lewiston, Maine,

where they were going, you pretty much have to travel on 95 unless you take

back roads. But you have to combine that with other factors. They are going

to the Lewiston, Auburn, Maine area, which the officer testified as an

area known as a hub of drug trafficking and drug use. After he turned

on his blue lights, the driver pulled over into the breakdown lane almost

immediately, but then continued driving down the breakdown lane for three

tenths of a mile. And how long would it take for somebody to drive three

tenths of a mile if the person is traveling at 50 miles an hour?

Yeah, you're going to make me do math, but they weren't traveling at 50

miles an hour in the breakdown lane. It actually took them quite a bit of

time because they had slowed down to 15 or 20 miles an hour, a slow

speed down the breakdown lane for three tenths of a mile.

Maybe given the not so great excessive speed, they weren't sure it was

they that the officer intended to pull over. No, the officer's within a

car length behind them while they're traveling down the breakdown lane

with his blue lights on. Did the trooper question them why it took them so

long to stop? No, it's just a factor he noted. Did he question them

about their furtive movements? No, he did not question them about the

furtive movements because I'm assuming because as soon as he walked

up to the car and they rolled down the window and he started talking

to him, he could smell an overwhelming odor of air freshener.

Right. But did he smell any drugs? He couldn't smell drugs. No,

because they'd sprayed industrial strength air freshener in the

car. But didn't the trooper also testify that typically that

doesn't work that he can smell drugs through air freshener? No,

he testified that people typically use it to try to mask the

odor of marijuana and when they do with marijuana it generally

doesn't work because marijuana smells so strongly that it just

makes it smell even worse. It smells like air freshener and

marijuana. But he also testified he'd never seen a can of

industrial strength air freshener that's normally used in

commercial buildings in a car. But he didn't ask them about

that, did he? He didn't and he doesn't need to ask them

about that. He's making observations. He also noticed

that the car was extremely clean. Even though it's an older

model car, the interior appeared as though it had been

detailed that there was nothing in the back seat. So a detailed

car is evidence that somebody's a drug trafficker? It can be a

factor. He testified that that's one of the things. It could

also be a factor that they're an Uber driver. It could be but

there's no evidence it's an Uber driver. It could be. My

concern is the trial court went through each of these

factors and indicated at the outset it was a close case.

And rejected various factors but then at the end sort of pulled

them all together. So how do we get behind the trial court's

analysis? Well, there were factors the trial court didn't

consider and it didn't give any deference to the officer's

perceptions. Instead it gave deference to possible innocent

explanations for each of those factors. And those

explanations quite frankly didn't make sense. According to

the defendants, they're from the Lewiston Auburn area and

they're still an hour from home. And the air freshener got

sprayed while they were driving down the breakdown lane. The

officer can see them moving around can tell it's just been

sprayed. And the driver's still smoking cigarettes. So why

would he be spraying air freshener to cover up to

smell a cigarette from his girlfriend smelling it when

he's still an hour from home and still smoking cigarettes?

Does fentanyl give off an odor? I'm not sure. I'm not aware

of that though. Does it? Cigarettes? No, fentanyl. That's what

was found in the trial. The officer didn't said that he

couldn't ever smell heroin. They didn't talk about fentanyl. He

said that they could sometimes smell crack cocaine. I don't

know what about the smell of fentanyl. There really was no

testimony, but it makes no sense to be spraying

industrials. Help me. The drugs were found in a container

that also contained jumper cables. Was that a plastic

container? The drugs were the fentanyl was wrapped in

plastic and tape and inside a bag that held jumper cables

that was in the trunk of the car. A bag that was for that

purpose, i.e. holding jumper cables, not fentanyl. Yes, the

bag was for the purpose of holding jumper cables and the

fentanyl was in the bag. Now quite frankly, the officer

saw the passenger, the defendant here go all the way into

the back seat while the car was slowly driving down the

breakdown lane. I don't know. Maybe there were things in the

back seat he was stashing. Maybe he reached through. I don't

know about his car, but mine has a pull down in the back that

you could open it up, get to the trunk. You have one of those

foreign cars. A foreign car. Yes, I have one of those

foreign cars, but there's a thing you can pull down and

reach into the trunk from the back seat. Clearly they're

spraying air freshener, but you have a lot more. But the

main factor is both of them trying to distance themselves

from the car after the officer asked about drugs and before he

said he was going to impound the car. So that was sort of a

behavioral analysis. They both moved away from the car and

the officer could interpret that as some sort of

indicative behavior. He said in his experience and based on

his training, when you ask people about something

they don't want to acknowledge, they have a tendency to

move away from whatever it is and they both moved away from the

car when he asked about drugs. You have two minutes. Ms.

Hausman? May it please the court, Stephanie Hausman on behalf of

Joseph Allen. The trial court correctly found that the state

did not carry its burden to show a substantial likelihood that

drugs were in the car. The state's argument on appeal

rests solely on disputes with the trial court's factual

findings, which this court reviews for an unsustainable

exercise of discretion. Those findings were neither against

manifest weight of the evidence nor clearly erroneous. So how do

we view that evidence in the light most favorable to the

state or to the in the light most favorable to the trial

court's ruling? And so that means that it's in the

light most favorable to the appellee. The trial court

correctly found that many of the support for that. I note

that the state didn't file a reply brief to dispute our

contention about what the standard of review is. But it is

because it's an unsustainable exercise of discretion that the

court views the trial court's factual findings, the court

gives deference to those factual findings. The trial court

correctly found that many of the factors present here. So I

know this is esoteric. So it doesn't matter like attorney

McGinnis said. It doesn't matter whether it's viewed

most in the light most favorable to the state or to

the defendant, it's viewed in the light most favorable to

the trial court. It is viewed. This court has phrased it as

identifying which party, but because it is a deference that

the court shows to the trial court factual findings, it is

therefore the light most favorable to the party that

prevailed below. So presumably Mr. McGinnis's cases

involve cases where suppression was was denied. I suspect

that is the case. Yes. Many of the facts in this case

were identical to those present in moral where this court

found no reasonable suspicion. The trial court then

correctly found that the few additional factors present

here didn't bring this case from a level of less than

reasonable suspicion to probable cause. The most

significant of those additional factors is the

presence of an air freshener. On appeal, the state

relies on two cases from other jurisdictions for the

argument that air freshener establishes probable

cause that drugs are in a car. What the state fails to

note about those two cases is that in both cases, the most

significant factor in the probable cause analysis was

that a specially trained drug sniffing dog alerted to

those cars. That is not a factor that is present

here at least at the time that the trooper made the

decision to seize the car. The dog alerted before the

notice of the air freshener. No, it's both there was an

air freshener and there was a dog alert and then the

critical moment of probable cause was established. And

both of the cases that the state cites, there was a

probable cause finding, but the courts really relied on

that drug sniffing dog. So in this case, if the

trooper had just temporarily seized the vehicle,

brought a dog to the scene and the dog alerted,

that would create probable cause. I think so. I think

so. There was a dispute about reasonable suspicion. The

trial court found there was reasonable suspicion to

investigate drugs. So that would have allowed a

moderate delay in order to get a drug dog to the

scene. But that did not occur in this case. Instead,

cases from other jurisdictions that address

air fresheners indicate that they do little to

establish the lower burden of reasonable

suspicion. And the cases cited in our brief are

cases of exceptional air freshener use. So that's

it's heavily scented cars or cars that have three or

four of those hanging air fresheners. So unusually

freshened cars. The courts have have considered that

and found in those cases that probably that

reasonable suspicion wasn't established. Given this

court's holding in moral and the treatment in

other jurisdictions of the presence of air fresheners,

the trial court correctly held that the state had

not established probable cause. This court should

affirm. Unless there are further questions. Thank

you. Thank you, Council. Ms. McGinnis. I just

wanted to state this was an unusual air freshener.

It's an industrial strength air freshener, but kind

the officer has never seen in a car before. It

was sprayed after he it obviously had been

sprayed immediately before he started talking to

them. And you have a lot of other factors. This

isn't moral. This is a lot more. The story the

defendant told and the two defendants tell is not

only inconsistent with each other. It's the

defendants timeline is inconsistent with his own

story about where they're going. Isn't the

question whether that inquiry was an improper

expansion of the stop for ostensibly for

speeding. The court found that it was not that

they had reasonable suspicion to expand the

scope of the stop and the defendant has not argued

in their brief that the reasonable suspicion

finding was improper. How did the trooper make

this observation about the air freshener? It was

in the center console, right? Well, first he could

smell it. He could smell it when he went up to

the car and then when the driver opened the

center console to get the registration or to

look for the registration. He saw the can which

he had previously worked in commercial buildings

and they're made for time dispensers. They're

not designed for cars or even for homes. They're

designed for large commercial buildings that

where there's an automatic spray at a timed

interval. But you've got a lot more. You've got

the drivers not saying anything looking straight

at the ground. The defendants, the defendants

answering all the questions, even though he's

the passenger, including the question about the

speed limit, which the defendant's the one,

the treasurer is the one driving. But the

trooper is right next to the passenger, right?

He's on the passenger side of the view. Yes, he

said, but he was directing his questions really

at the driver, particularly about speed limit. I

mean, it makes sense that the driver would

answer that question. And then you've got the

driver as soon as he's asked about, he's asked

if there's any in the car that thing in the

car that shouldn't be. And he says no, then

the officer specifically asks about drugs. If

there are drugs in the car and the treasurer

says, uh, no, breaks out on a visible

sweat in his forehead, even though it's 20

degrees out, and then moves away from the car. And

then the defendant's whole behavior jumping out

of the car, exaggerated motions, loud talking. If

you add it all together and give difference to

the officer's perceptions, there's probable cause

to impound the car and the trial court aired

and denying the most and granting the motion

to suppress. So this court should reverse

that ruling. Thank you, counsel. Case

submitted. Court stands in recess.
