This case 2019-0012 Red Oak Apartment Homes LLC versus Homes Carpet Centre LLC at all.

Council.

May it please the court.

My name is John Strasburger and I have the privilege of representing Red Oak Apartment

Homes in this matter.

I'll waive my three minutes of uninterrupted oral argument and field questions from the

court at any time.

This appeal involves a decision from the trial court granting a Canadian defendant

strategist's floor and decor inks motion to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction.

The trial court aired and granting strategist's motion to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction

because in this case strategist undertook specific efforts to market its products to the New

Hampshire market which constitute purposeful availment making strategist's presence

in New Hampshire before New Hampshire courts foreseeable.

How does this case differ from Vermont wholesale?

It's significantly different because there's no evidence in Vermont wholesale that JW Lumber

which was a North Carolina lumber yard for all intents and purposes undertook any efforts

at all to market its products to New Hampshire consumers.

In this case you have strategists taking active efforts to establish a distributorship

with NRF distributors which is the courts where there's also another defendant in this

action.

Right, but they don't have an exclusive relationship with them.

Do they?

They don't.

They don't.

But if you look at the analysis in Vermont wholesale which incorporates the Commerce

Plus test as adopted in the Asahi Metals case, an exclusive distributorship is not

necessary.

Because there's a distributorship that is established to market the defendant's products in a particular

area.

But you seem to argue that undertaking efforts to establish that kind of relationship is

sufficient.

Well, it's one prong I think in the test.

And so when you have a defendant such as this that has undertaken efforts on its own

to establish a distributorship in an area such as New England, it's universally known in

the flooring industry that NRF-

Arrailing down to the fact that the ask was made by strategists representative.

The ask was made to the distributor to take on their products.

Right, to market their products.

As opposed to a passive or a response to a request from the distributor.

Correct.

So as I-

Where that facts absent from the trial court's order though, how do we resolve that issue?

Well that's the problem.

If the trial court, despite my request that I revisit that issue in my motion to reconsider,

the court didn't specifically comment on that in its original order granting the

motion to dismiss what I think is significant.

Because when you look at the commerce plus theory is about voluntary conduct on the part

of the defendant that would make it foreseeable that they could be hailed into court in the

forum state.

And if you are establishing a distributorship in a market area, you are the one as the

defendant undertaking those efforts, I think that is significant.

This isn't like the J.W. Jones lumber case where you have a milliard in North Carolina

that somehow has lumber that shows up in New Hampshire via multiple distributors and a retailer.

When there was no evidence in that case that J.W. Jones did anything other than place

their lumber in the stream of commerce.

Is this an exclusive distributorship or do they have exclusive territory?

There's no evidence that there's an exclusive distributorship.

In fact, the record shows that there was no written agreement.

This was all a handshake for lack of a better word.

So it doesn't that undermine your position?

I don't think so because the case law doesn't require an exclusive distributorship.

And when you look at the advertiser that...

Or does it require the sales agent test we're talking about?

Does it require intent to invade a certain market?

I think it does.

Is there authority to support that you need to establish intent for, in this case, invasion

of the New England market?

I think it does.

I think that at least has to be an understanding that your product is likely to end up in that

market as a result of your efforts.

And I think that's what's happened here.

The efforts we're talking about again is a phone call, right?

So if the Lumberyard in North Carolina in Vermont Wholesale had called a distributor in

New England, that would have been enough to establish jurisdiction?

I don't think so, Your Honor.

I don't think so.

And I think that's a good question.

But again, the initial act of setting up the distributorship is one voluntary act.

But you can't look at it in a vacuum.

Here we have advertising authored by this defendant strategist, Florin Decor, which directs its content

to the Northeast region.

So that ad, page 67 of your appendix.

Correct.

So it doesn't indicate where was it published?

It's actually available on the defendant's site for its retailers or distributors to

use and presumably take to market events, et cetera.

So that's on their site.

And presumably they take it to trade shows, et cetera.

Now, what's interesting about the content of that advertising is that it directs any

consumer inquiries to your NRF agent.

So it says for Northeast region, contact NRF, which again suggests that there is a specific

relationship that has been established as a result of a vice president in strategist William

Friend reaching out to NRF, asking them to carry their product line and sell it within

their distributorship.

Then there's advertising that is done directing contact NRF.

And I think that's very significant.

There is none of that present in the Vermont wholesale case that Justice Donovan just

cited to.

I think that's significant.

The fact that there's not a discussion about that in the trial court's order, I think

is concerning, which is one of the issues that I had pointed out in my motion to reconsider.

Additionally, I think if you look at the North Atlantic refinery case that I said-

Mr. Shrestler, could you stay closer to the microphone for those who are watching online?

Thank you, Ron.

Thank you.

If you look at the facts in the North Atlantic refinery case, which I cite in detail

in my brief, the facts there were far less as far as voluntary acts are concerned.

And this court in 2010 decided that there was sufficient voluntary conduct on behalf of North

Atlantic refinery, which coincidentally is also a Canadian.

Wasn't that a product that was specifically tailored to New Hampshire and New England?

Do I understand correctly that this product was not tailored for the New Hampshire market?

Is that right?

Well, I can't say that this product was tailored to New England.

The product, in our case, I think it's a fundable flooring product.

It was a specific laminate vinyl tile that was marketed wherever strategist was established.

So doesn't that distinguish it from North Atlantic refinery?

I don't think so because it's my understanding that the NBTE reformulation that was done

by North Atlantic was done with the understanding that it would serve the New England market.

But that's what the New England market was requiring at the time.

There was an understanding.

The first part of the analysis, the court's decision in that case, said that the fact

that they knew that the likely market was the New England market and not necessarily

New Hampshire.

The court says the New England area, which necessarily includes New Hampshire.

And I think that's the same thing here.

If you are establishing a relationship with the largest flooring distributor in New England,

you understand that New Hampshire is a part of that market and that New Hampshire consumers

are going to be purchasing your product.

But isn't that what Vermont Wholesale says is not enough?

Well, that's right.

If you understand it's going to wind up in New Hampshire.

That's right.

But what we don't have in Vermont Wholesale is any effort by J.W. Jones Lumber, which

was the North Carolina defendant in that case, to do anything at all to establish

a market here in New Hampshire.

And what we have here are affirmative efforts to establish that distributorship.

We have an agreement, and this is another reason that's specifically cited in the

ASAPI decision incorporated in the Vermont Wholesale decision from this court, that

if you have a party that agrees to act as a sales agent in your forum state, that

that is voluntary conduct.

So the agreement is oral here?

I thought there was no agreement.

That's right.

There was no written agreement.

They entered into this agreement to carry the strategist product line, market it within

their market, which is the New England market in New York.

And that was it.

And they did that.

And they sold 31,000 cartons of their flooring product to New Hampshire consumers during

the course of that relationship.

But the trial court had a hard time evaluating whether that was significant or not, given

the evidence.

Well, I read that as well, although this motion was filed at the outset of the case, right?

There wasn't an opportunity to do a lot of discovery about that, whether or not that

was a significant portion of business for strategists or not is not in the record

anywhere.

Can the plaintiff get complete relief in the absence of strategists, given DiBenedetto?

I don't think so, Your Honor.

Is that a consideration for us?

I believe it is.

I believe that Red Oak, similarly situated to other New Hampshire entities or individuals,

has an interest in resolving their disputes in New Hampshire.

The court has an interest in having its litigants be able to resolve these types of disputes

here.

This is a situation where you have flooring manufacturer, the distributor, in Star Wars.

That's another question.

Is strategist a manufacturer or an importer?

There appears to be some confusion.

It's my understanding and the briefing.

It is my understanding, and counsel can correct me if I'm wrong, that this particular product

was imported from China.

I am not aware if they manufacture any of their other products, because strategists

sell multiple flooring lines.

They sell this LVT product that's at issue in this case.

They sell various hardwood flooring, bamboo flooring.

It doesn't matter to our analysis on this stream of commerce issue.

I don't think it matters under the test, Your Honor.

I think what matters is the court needs to find some level of voluntary conduct on the

part of this Canadian defendant to make it foreseeable that they would be hailed into

court here.

I think that the steps that we've been talking about in reaching out and affirmatively

establishing a distributorship where they know New Hampshire as part of that market,

designating NRF as their sales agent in their own materials that are being marketed

to the public in the Northeast region, which includes New Hampshire, and including

warranties in all of their products that are sent to New Hampshire.

I will agree that there's nothing that makes that warranty New Hampshire specific,

but there's nothing that makes it specific to any forum state, which leads

me to believe that if there's not a choice to forum in the warranty and you're

sending out this warranty with your products nationally, you have to have an

expectation that you may be sued in that state.

The warranty is a contract between strategists and the consumer.

If we were to reverse the trial court, could we then go on to address the other

factors in a personal jurisdiction analysis, or what's the next step in this case?

Right, so the next step would be the gestalt factors.

Once you get by, whether or not Stream of Commerce Plus Theory has been

established, then yes, you have to go through the gestalt factors and make a

determination as to whether or not hailing this particular Canadian

defendant is fair and reasonable.

Do we have the record to do that?

The trial court never got there, right?

They didn't.

They didn't.

I can't say that the record is there for that.

I mean, obviously there are certain things that are in the record as far

as the location of this defendant, how far they are, the number of witnesses

that are here in New Hampshire, the individuals and entities that are

also defendants here in New Hampshire.

And so those factors are there.

I'm not sure the court really spent a lot of time on that particular issue,

given its decision on the Stream of Commerce Plus Theory.

So I can't say that the record is fully developed on that issue.

But I think that could adequately be dealt with if the court remands this for

further proceedings to the trial court.

And for all of those reasons, I would respectfully request that the

honorable court remand this matter for further proceedings in the trial court

and to an order indicating that the plaintiff in this case did establish

a prima facie case after DeNovo review before this court.

And that the Stream of Commerce Plus Theory was satisfied.

Thank you.

Thank you, counsel.

Dr. Allard.

Good morning.

I'm Dr. Allard with Bernstein-Sher for the Appellee Stratus Floor and Decor Inc.

I'll also wave the initial three-minute period.

I'm happy to take questions at any time.

The only issue in this case is whether the appellant satisfied the Stream of

Commerce Plus Test.

And the trial court authored a very well-reasoned decision that's on all

fours with this court's decision in Vermont Wholesale.

And in that case, this court made a determination that a nonresident

defendant should not be subjected to suit in all 50 states merely because it

places its goods into the Stream of Commerce.

And as this court knows, all three prongs of the minimum

context test must be satisfied in order for a New Hampshire court to

exercise personal jurisdiction over a nonresident defendant.

Can you dispute the fact that that's the client advertised in New

Hampshire?

We do dispute the fact that my client advertised in New Hampshire.

If you look at those advertisements, there's nothing New Hampshire about them.

They are, for all intents and purposes, national advertisements.

There's no evidence in the record that they were ever received or

viewed by anyone in New Hampshire.

They certainly don't ever mention New Hampshire.

They mention a Northeast region.

And that is insufficient to establish that my client purposely availed

itself New Hampshire law by targeting New Hampshire.

I would say maybe this would be different if we were in Michigan or

Kansas.

And because if you look at the list of states that are included in the list

at the bottom of those ads, it does say Michigan and Kansas rather than

Northeast or Southwest region.

Maybe if we were in Michigan or Kansas, in addition, there was some

evidence that people in Michigan or Kansas actually received this ad.

Maybe that would be enough, but that's not what we have here.

There's nothing about New Hampshire.

There's nothing in the record that says anyone in New Hampshire

would be able to direct consumers to NRF as the distributor.

But I think what that comes back to is that there is no exclusive

distribution relationship between NRF and between strategists.

There's no exclusive territory where only NRF can sell strategists.

Is it a requirement that there be exclusive distributorship?

I think the case suggests that that certainly helps you get to a

finding of personal jurisdiction.

I don't think it's dispositive in any single case, but certainly

even if it was, it's not what we have here.

This case is just like Vermont Wholesale, where you have a

relationship of some sort between, I would say, an importer for

strategists, not a manufacturer, and a distributor for a particular

region, just like Vermont Wholesale, where the manufacturer

knew at the time that it sent its product to the Vermont

Wholesaler that it distributed in a four-state territory, that

includes New Hampshire.

What we don't have in Vermont Wholesale is this evidence of

this phone call from Mr. Friend, specifically soliciting, if

you will, the distributorship.

So how do we factor that in when we're comparing the facts

before us in these two cases?

I don't think, if you look at Vermont Wholesale, and I

understand that that fact is absent from that case, and

perhaps it is present here.

But how the relationship was formed doesn't seem to be a

distinguished factor.

Maybe if NRF was a New Hampshire-based company, you

could look at that and say, OK, they made a phone call to

New Hampshire, they're trying to target New Hampshire.

But NRF is a main-based company.

So to the extent that strategists even calling in the

first instance is a factor that can be considered, it was

an act that was aimed towards the state of Maine.

Well, presumably, Jones Lumber telephoned somebody in

Vermont to sell their products.

There had to be a conversation, right?

Right, and how the relationship formed in the first

instance isn't the distinguishing or dispositive

factor when looking at that.

But doesn't it matter who reached out to whom?

It could matter who reached out to whom if NRF was

located in New Hampshire.

Because then maybe there's an argument that, OK, they

sent, made a phone call to a New Hampshire company.

They knew they were in New Hampshire.

Maybe you're closer on your analysis to saying that

strategist purposely availed itself of New Hampshire law by

taking deliberate acts targeted towards the state of

New Hampshire.

But just like Vermont Wholesale, where the manufacturer in

that case has a relationship with a Vermont Wholesaler

where it notes at the time that that Wholesaler

established will distribute its flooring in a four state

region which includes New Hampshire.

That's the same case we have here.

We have a Canadian importer who somehow formed a

relationship with a main distributor and at the time

it knew that the main distributor distributed the

flooring in all of New England and New York.

That in and of itself under Vermont Wholesale is

insufficient to establish additional conduct on the part

of the non-resident defendant to meet the

Stream of Commerce Plus test and the trial court

properly established and it's well-reasoned order.

If we were to reverse the trial court on this issue,

do we send it back or do we have the record before us to go

ahead and do the other steps of the jurisdiction analysis?

If the court was to do that, I don't think the

record is sufficiently factually developed with respect

to third prong of the minimum context test and that's

where the gestalt factors come in.

In fact, much of the appellant's brief concerns

the gestalt factors in this court never actually,

you don't ever reach that unless the Stream of Commerce

Plus test is satisfied in the first instance because

all prongs have to be satisfied.

So I don't think this court could find personal

jurisdiction based on the record before us because

there aren't sufficient facts to make a finding under

the five gestalt factors.

The trial court never reached it because it didn't have to.

This case is dispositive as the trial court held

on the failure of the appellant to satisfy

the Stream of Commerce Plus test.

Do you agree that our review here is de novo?

Yes.

Had to respond to the warranty argument.

The warranty argument, the first there's nothing,

well first it's not, I don't think it's even

in the record before this court,

but even to the extent it was,

there's nothing New Hampshire specific about the warranty.

It doesn't make the New Hampshire consumer

if that's where this warranty ended up.

It doesn't make them fill anything out.

It's a complete generic warranty that's received

by consumers all over the nation,

all over the world in fact.

And I think if the plaintiff wants to,

well the cases that we cited in our brief

indicate that the providing a non-resident

defendant who provides a generic warranty

that makes its way through the Stream of Commerce

along with its product.

Just because there's a contractual obligation there

maybe doesn't necessarily mean that that

automatically triggers a sufficient finding

of additional conduct under the Stream of Commerce test

to establish personal jurisdiction.

But in this case it's easy.

I think that if the plaintiff wanted

to enforce its warranty it could go to Maine

where strategists arguably had deliberate conduct

when it established and sold its flooring

to a main distributor.

Can you just clarify the state of the record

in regard to the print advertising?

It's, you said there's no evidence

that it was ever targeted to New Hampshire

or read by anybody in New Hampshire, is that right?

Yes.

Was it just posted online or was it mailed?

Was it in newspapers?

I don't think anyone knows.

I think it was submitted if I recall procedurally

as part of the plaintiff's motion for reconsideration

and the opponent could correct me if I'm wrong about that

but I think that's how it made its way

into the record originally.

Strasburger indicated that it was on your client's website.

Was that enough?

Even if it's on the website I don't think

the mere fact of posting a advertisement,

a nationwide advertisement that covers the entire country

in all 50 states, I don't think the fact

that a Canadian importer posts that advertisement

on their website is sufficient for this court to find

that strategists took deliberate intentional acts

to target New Hampshire specifically and its residents.

I think it's true.

In this day and age, if we were to just look

at what people post on websites,

if a product winds up in New Hampshire,

it's awfully likely that some website somewhere

from the manufacturer will have an advertisement on it.

So it's gotta be more of an analysis than that

in order to give rise to personal jurisdiction.

I would agree and what it comes down to

is the fundamental principles

under the Purposeville Availment Prong of deliberate conduct.

And your deliberate conduct has to be voluntary

and it has to make it foreseeable

that your product will enter that state

that you are specifically targeting

and that is simply not the record

before this court in this case.

Well, it would be if the distributor NRF

was a New Hampshire entity, I suppose.

Because the ad does identify the distributor.

It would be a closer call, certainly.

I don't necessarily know that that would be dispositive

but we'd be a lot closer to where we are now.

So why is that any different than NRF

being a Northeast target distributor,

including the state of New Hampshire

under North Atlantic?

Because this court has found in Vermont wholesale

that even when the non-resident defendant has knowledge

that a out of state distributor distributes its flooring

in a four region state, which includes New Hampshire,

that was Vermont wholesale,

that conduct is in and of itself.

We're talking awareness versus intentional,

intent to invade a certain market.

So again, based on the phone call,

can't you then extrapolate intent

to invade the greater market, which includes New Hampshire?

I don't think you can.

Again, to repeat myself, I don't think the manner

in which the relationship formed is dispositive

when you're talking about out of state companies.

And that sort of was the situation,

although the record isn't clear in Vermont wholesale.

How the relationship formed isn't necessarily dispositive

when you're talking about two out of state companies.

And the fact that the non-resident manufacturer,

or in this case the importer,

has the awareness that the company it is approaching

will distribute in New England, including New Hampshire,

that is not sufficient intention to avail itself,

to be an additional contractor on the stream of commerce test

to avail itself in New Hampshire.

That doesn't meet the voluntary or foreseeability threshold

that was established in worldwide Volkswagen and ASAI

and then adopted by this court in Vermont wholesale.

I would just like to touch on very briefly

as I wrap up the amount of flooring

that was brought in as alleged by the plaintiff.

The trial court was correct that in isolation

there was no way for the trial court to determine

whether the amount of flooring that NRF brought

into New Hampshire was a significant amount

of flooring in the marketplace.

And probably more importantly,

there was no evidence that the amount of flooring

brought into New Hampshire by NRF

was a significant percentage of strategists' nationwide

or worldwide sales.

It's simply in a vacuum.

There is no way for the trial court to resolve that.

They made the trial court a proper decision on the record.

This case is very distinguishable from North Atlantic

where that was a designed MDTE gasoline product

that was specifically designed and targeted

for the Northeast.

That's not what we have here.

There's nothing about strategists flooring

that specifically designed, targeted,

or tailored to the Northeast or New Hampshire.

This case is distinguishable from North Atlantic.

It is on all fours with Vermont

and we would request that this court uphold the decision

of the trial court dismissing strategists.

Thank you, council.

Case submitted.
