Brown.

Mr. Fleming?

OK.

May it please the court.

I am attorney Patrick Fleming.

I appear here today on behalf of the appellant, Cleve Brown.

We are here today to ask you to order a new trial for Mr. Brown.

We're here to ask you to order the fair trial that he was

promised as opposed to the flawed trial that he received.

And to do that, your honors, I think there's really only one

premise that I need to ask you to accept.

And that premise is that the word assault

is vastly and materially different from the word stuff.

That is the center of the dispute in this case,

and that is why we are here.

To explain our position, I think it's

best to go back to the beginning,

because I think it is very important that this court

realize that this case and this issue began not

as an evidentiary objection, but as a remedy

for a discovery violation.

The issue of this witness's testimony

and the concerns about it began in that particular context,

the discovery violation.

It's laid out in the brief.

I won't belabor the point.

We were notified of the substance of this witness's

expanded testimony after the final pretrial.

And so, as Mr. Brown's attorneys,

we moved to exclude that witness's testimony.

Or, in the alternative, continue

the case, which, in retrospect, maybe

should have been the thing that we did,

because it leads us this year.

Tony Fleming, if I might interrupt you for a second.

Is your argument that the trial court improperly

found that the conversation between this witness

and the victim involved the allegations in this case,

or is it that the trial court improperly

allowed the state to exceed its own pretrial order?

It's that the trial court improperly

allowed the state to exceed the pretrial order.

We ultimately accepted and relied upon the pretrial order

in this case, which is where I was getting.

Based on that discovery violation,

the court ruled that this witness, Ms. Dignard,

was to testify only to what was contained in the discover

we had prior to the final pretrial.

And my appendix to my brief are

both documents that contain the full extent of what

we were informed of with respect to the witness Dignard.

Didn't the trial court appear to disagree

with that interpretation of its own order?

It did, and that's the flaw that we're asking here.

And that's why I emphasize that this began as a discovery

violation order.

The order was that the witness should not

exceed what was in the initial discovery.

Where the confusion came in, and with the benefit

of hindsight, I wish I'd never raised this issue,

was based on the court's order with respect

to the discovery violation.

I said, well, the only thing she can testify to

is that they talked about stuff is that relevant.

It is in that, and in overruling that objection,

that the court brought in the word context.

The word significantly relied on by my esteemed colleague

in her brief, and ultimately, what I believe,

led the trial court to misremember

the basics of its ruling, the ruling we relied on.

Because the context was what made it relevant.

But the context was not other things.

The context was that she said, quote, or close to a quote,

I remember we talked about stuff involving the defendant,

after-

It wasn't stuff he did to me or did to you?

Stuff he did, yes.

Right.

That's correct, that paraphrasing

without taking the time to look at the transcript.

But you, of course, have the transcripts.

The, but the point is that the context was the context

of what the alleged victim in this case had said,

which was we were talking about the fact

that I had bought an allegation against Mr. Brown.

The response then from the witness center of this case

was, oh, I remember when we were young,

you told me about stuff Mr. Brown had done.

That is where it should have ended.

That is where we should have been left.

And had we been left there,

we would not be before this court today.

What we anticipated at trial was a very simple interchange.

The context could be laid.

It's what made it relevant.

What were you talking about?

Well, the alleged victim was telling me about

that she was bringing a case against Mr. Brown

involving allegations against him.

And what did you respond?

I respond that I remembered when we were younger,

we talked about stuff that the defendant had did.

Had it ended there, we would not be here.

But no, it didn't happen that way.

As the transcript demonstrates,

instead, first the state, for whatever reason,

I certainly am not gonna question

the motivations of my colleagues,

but for whatever reason, couldn't proceed in that manner

or didn't proceed in that manner.

Instead, they asked the leading question directly.

Did the alleged victim tell you

that Mr. Brown had assaulted her?

And that was the first time the word had assaulted,

had been used in any of the discovery materials

had ever been mentioned in the context

of the conversation between these two people.

And what happened next at trial?

And what happened, then we objected, obviously.

And moved for a mistrun.

And then the court made the mistake

that is the center of this case,

which is that it said, well, we had talked about context.

Wasn't this context?

And that's where it then allowed the expansion

to the word assault.

But again, the context was not in terms

of the discovery violation ruling,

the context was in terms of whether

this was relevant or not.

The fact that they were discussing Mr. Brown

is what made it relevant.

But it did not mean that Ms. Dignard, the witness,

was then allowed to expand the subject of her testimony

as it was contained in the prior discovery ruling.

And to compound the horror of that,

even though the judge didn't overrule our objection,

denied our request for a mistrial,

the state then followed up with the question,

did she tell you about sexual assault?

Now, thankfully, the trial judge immediately recognized

that that went way too far.

And immediately struck that answer

and instructed the jury not to consider it.

But it clearly had an impact in this particular case.

And it clearly emphasized what the state

was trying to imply.

And it clearly demonstrated the prejudice

of this particular issue.

The prejudice of this particular test.

Was there a request for a limiting instruction?

There was not a request made for a limiting instruction

at that point in time.

The judge had essentially already said

the jury is required to disregard that

and not consider that question.

We were, the judge actually acted in my memory.

I think the witness may have tried to answer,

but immediately in response to the question,

the trial judge said,

we didn't, Mr. Loring was conducting the cross examination.

He didn't even have a chance to fully stand up

before the trial judge said that question

is not allowed, jury is instructed to disregard it.

But since the charges in this case

involve sexual assault,

isn't it just a reasonable assumption

that the stuff he did to me?

If relevant, if it was relevant at all,

that's what it was relevant to.

That I tend to accept in general,

but not in the context of the testimony.

That was the argument for the state to make.

That was the argument for the state to make

in its closing argument.

And that was an issue that we would have addressed.

In fact, I did address in my closing argument

referring to stuff.

Stuff could mean anything.

Maybe it meant sexual assault,

but maybe it meant physical assault.

Maybe it meant not letting me go out in the evening.

Maybe it meant not letting me call my boyfriend.

Maybe it meant a number of things.

The state certainly would have been free to argue

in closing argument that that maybe should be,

presumed to be, the bad stuff

that the defendant's accused of.

But aren't all those potential alternative interpretations

answered by the complaining witness's testimony

that she recalled telling this particular witness

about abuse?

Not assault, but abuse.

Wasn't there testimony to that effect?

My recollection is that the complaining witness

did testify to that.

But that again is the distinction

and the distinction that deprived Mr. Brown

of a fair trial.

That was confirmed by this witness,

but it should not have been confirmed.

No more than, yes, I remember back then

she talked about stuff the defendant had to.

We were prepared to live with the word stuff.

We were offered the opportunity to continue the trial,

but we made the tactical decision

that if this trial and if this testimony

is limited to the word stuff,

we can deal with it, we can handle it.

If it goes beyond stuff,

we would have wanted the continuance,

we would have wanted the further investigation,

we would have wanted full preparation

to deal with this last-minute witness.

And that's what we were denied.

Well, you had known about the witness for a long time.

We had known about the existence of the witness.

And you have the discovery materials that,

well, we knew that the witness was mentioned.

We were never given the witness's address.

It means to contact the witness,

whether she still lived in New Hampshire

or even the United States.

None of that material was available to us.

If you look back at the discovery materials

that were given to us, they were secondhand.

They were the alleged victim saying this about the witness,

that this is what I told the witness,

that this is what the witness said to me.

That was never a statement from this witness

prior to after the final pretrial.

So that's a very key distinction too.

We knew that this person was somewhere

out there in the ether,

and we knew what the alleged victim had said

about their conversation.

That we were prepared for.

As I said, that we were prepared to accept

and deal with in the context of trial.

That is what I thought and reasonably thought

the judge had ordered in response to our concerns

about the discovery violation.

That we would not have to deal with more

than what was in that original discovery provided to us.

But that's not how it turned out.

Instead, there was the direct confirmation

that we talked about assault.

And magnified by the disallowed question

from the prosecutor, sexual assault.

That is why the state's argument

with respect to harmless error must fall.

The state talks significantly about the various things

that the witness corroborated.

Virtually all of the things that the state talks

about in its brief, as corroborated,

were simple facts that in no way demonstrated

one way or another whether any actual assault occurred.

They were simple facts that were never in dispute.

Yes, he married her mother.

Yes, they moved in together at age six.

Yes, they went to live here.

Yes, they went to live there.

Yes, they moved back.

None of that was even remotely disputed in this trial.

It was not the issue in this trial.

The defense in this trial, as you can see from this transcript,

was that this alleged victim made up this story

and made up this story 15 plus years after the fact

to explain why those 15 years

were such terrible years for her.

To justify her actions during those 15 years.

And we emphasize that that was a position

that was reasonable and should create a reasonable doubt.

We worked on the principle that nothing,

she had said, was corroborated.

She never talked to teachers, never talked to counselors,

never talked to police, never talked to doctors, nurses,

all of which were involved throughout her younger years.

No statements were ever made to them.

And the state's counter was, well, we have Ms. Dignite.

And as is clear in the transcript

of the state's closing argument,

that's how they justify not accepting

that our defense was treated.

And Ms. Dignite, the only corroborating witness.

Yes, to any allegage, to the position

that the assault had ever been,

or assaults had ever been discussed

before about a year and a half

prior to bringing this case to trial.

Your light is on.

Your light is on.

Yes.

Thank you, counsel.

Ms. Woodcock.

May it please the court.

Elizabeth Woodcock for the state of New Hampshire.

I think that the final remark that Mr. Fleming just made

is really shows that the trial court

made the right decision.

He says that their defense was that the alleged victim

had made up this story.

And because she made a contemporaneous disclosure

to Ms. Dignite, that became extremely relevant.

It was relevant before trial

because it was likely that that was going to be the defense.

And when Judge Delker ruled, he told the defense,

this is not going to be just limited to stuff.

It's going to involve something more than simply stuff.

Which ruling did he make that with?

He made that in the pre-trial ruling, Your Honor.

He said on page 49 of that March 18th transcript,

it is in fairness not limited to just stuff

because the victim says she told Dusty

something about the abuse by the defendant.

So it's more than just stuff.

So why not use stuff or abuse?

Why move to the word assault in the question

which was leading?

Well, the question is leading.

And I think that in fairness to the state,

you would want to ask a leading question

under those circumstances because you'd rather get

a yes or no answer than a description.

Witnesses can be difficult to control.

And Dusty Dignard was a relatively young woman

and not a skilled attorney

or a professional investigator or anything of that sort.

So you would want to try to control the answer.

But when the defense attorney gets up

in his opening statement and drives this home

over and over again as he just did now,

no corroboration, no corroboration, no corroboration.

Well, then the fact that there was a disclosure

about sexual assault becomes highly relevant.

Well, there's no issue here that it's relevant.

I mean, that's why we've got the case

because everybody agrees it's highly relevant.

It's just whether the discussion

between the court and counsel gave defense counsel

adequate information that this was coming.

So it's not whether it's relevant.

In fact, everybody, you're arguing it's relevant.

He's arguing it's relevant.

So it's just was this unfair surprise

that made the trial unfair?

And I think that the answer to that, Your Honor, is no.

Judge Delker made it very clear

during the course of that pretrial hearing

that it was not going to be limited to just stuff.

You know, even when Mr. Fleming

referred to it in his opening statement,

he said that Dusty Dignard would testify

that the defendant had done bad stuff to the victim.

And there's no other context for that.

When Dusty Dignard is on the stand,

she starts talking about the disclosure

and she says, we were talking

and I was subject to some abuse.

That answer drew the objection.

And then you have the sidebar in which

Judge Delker is saying at the pretrial hearing,

I told you that this was not going to be limited

to just stuff.

He used almost the exact same words.

But again, I come back to abuse, covers,

could cover a variety of activity.

Assault is a more pointed word.

So why jump from abuse,

which sounds like it was in the lexicon of this trial,

to a question that pointedly looks

for confirmation of an assault?

Well, because I think that the pretrial ruling

by the court had given the state the impression

that that was the kind of question that would be allowed.

There was a great deal of discussion

because apparently after the state talked to Ms. Dignard

and I don't know why there was a delay

in getting her statement, but there apparently was.

And so as the state would do,

if you find out new information

as you're preparing for trial,

you send the information as quickly as possible.

And in this case, they did it by email

to defense counsel and says,

this is the new information I have found out.

That doesn't mean that it's going to be admissible,

but I've had situations when I've tried cases

where people come in and all of a sudden

they remember something new

and it comes as a surprise

to everybody who's listening to them.

The responsible thing to do under those circumstances

and the ethical thing to do

is to make sure you let defense counsel know

as quickly as possible.

And if the defense wants to move to exclude it, that's fine.

Wasn't there some issue here about communication

or encryption or something?

That's what Mr. Fleming told the court

was that the county attorney's office

had some sort of encryption issue

and that he was not aware of the email

when it was sent on the 28th.

He got it two days later on March.

Second in a letter delivered by the United States Post Office.

Can I ask a couple of quick questions?

Just put this in context for me.

It's my understanding that the defendant

was tried in March of 2019, is that right?

Yes.

And the memo from the county attorney's investigator

is dated May of 2018.

No, no, there are two.

The memo that documents the conversation

between the victim and this witness.

Right.

There are two different groups of statements,

I think, Your Honor.

The first are the two that Mr. Fleming attached

to his brief, which is what they had

before the state was able to find Ms. Dignard

and interview her.

And apparently after they interviewed Ms. Dignard

in preparation for trial, they drew up another statement

that was emailed and then put in the mail to Mr. Fleming.

But as of May of 2018, the defense was aware

that the victim had spoken to a childhood friend

who remembered the victim at that time,

disclosing stuff that happened with the defendant.

And the context of that conversation,

according to the memo, appears to be

in the context of the allegations in this case.

Correct.

Is that accurate?

I think that is accurate.

In any event.

When was that memo given to defense counsel?

I assume that it was done sometime

after the defendant was charged.

He was charged initially in June of 2018

and then there were superseding indictments

in March of 2019.

I think that it must have been to correct a minor error

because nobody asked for a continuance on that basis,

Your Honor.

Is it correct that the state did not provide

defense counsel with any contact information

or address or anything like that?

I don't recall reading anything like that on the record.

I don't know that the state actually knew

where Ms. Dignard was, so that is sort of,

the record is kind of empty on that point

as I recall it, Your Honor.

I can't.

But it is not uncommon in my experience

as you're preparing for trial to get a witness

who comes in and begins to tell you more information

and you provide that and sometimes it's late

and you pay the penalty for it and sometimes.

Let me follow up on something Justice Donovan

may be driving at.

In the context of a sexual assault case of a minor,

what else could stuff be?

Well, I can't think.

And if you read Mr. Fleming's opening statement,

he says, Dusty Dignard said,

it will say that the defendant did bad stuff.

To the victim, well, he's just been saying

there's no corroboration, there's no corroboration,

there's no corroboration.

And all we'll have is this one witness

who will say bad stuff.

Well, what else could the bad stuff be?

We're not talking about being grounded.

Well, but isn't that the inference

that it could be other than the allegations

that the state has the burden to prove?

I mean, I think that's what counsel was saying

that bad stuff could have been withholding an allowance

or yelling at her.

I mean, that's a far cry from sexual assault.

But not in the context in which this conversation

is taking place.

I mean, I think that that's the problem

is that you have two little girls who are talking.

And at that point when she's disclosing she is little.

She's not 15, she's not 19, she's a little girl

and she's telling her friend

that her stepfather is doing bad stuff to her.

I think that the context of that conversation

and the ages of the children involved.

And abuse began when she was, I think,

six or seven years old and continued for a few years.

So she wasn't, this wasn't an adolescent

who was rebelling against her parent.

She was just a little girl.

If the court has no further questions for me,

I will yield to Mr. Fleming

who has reserved time for rebuttal.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Mr. Fleming, how much time did you reserve?

Two minutes, Your Honor.

Thank you.

Please proceed.

And I hope two minutes should be enough.

There are really only two things

that I want to address here.

The first is the discuss of context and bad stuff.

I want it to be clear

because there has been sort of an intimation.

What else could bad stuff mean?

This case involved in the questioning

of the alleged victim clearly shows

there was all sorts of other bad stuff.

There was the fact that she didn't want to go see a therapist.

The defendant took her to see the therapist.

That she wanted to spend all night talking on the phone

with a boyfriend at the time.

The defendant stopped her from doing that.

The defendant took her when she was cutting herself

and brought her to the school nurse.

She didn't want to go.

Relying on my memory,

I can't even think of all of the things,

but in the discovery in this case,

which of course you're not, you don't have a copy of,

there was a huge amount of stuff,

a bad stuff that had nothing to do with sexual assault.

Reasons for this alleged victim

to dislike this defendant

and to want to testify falsely about him

or to make up a story about him

or to blame her troubles on his bad stuff.

So when I used bad stuff in opening statement,

it was precisely to make that point

that there was huge amounts of things

that gave this victim a motive

to fabricate the allegations against his charges.

That is the bad stuff.

To say that there's no other context,

but sexual assault that could be explained by bad stuff

is totally incorrect.

There was a lot of other stuff

that would be considered bad,

that would be considered things he did to me.

The other point that I want to clarify

is the whole thing about discovery,

Judge Dunovan has talked about it.

You have what is the total discovery

that was provided to us prior to the final pretrial.

Some discussion about whether they sent it to us

before the final pretrial

and we received it afterwards,

but that's a matter of a few days.

The case began trial in March.

We had that evidentiary objecting

about the late disclosure,

the Friday before the Monday trial,

the Monday jury selection.

The disclosure, if it was made a little earlier,

was made a couple of days earlier,

had it been properly delivered to us,

a couple of days prior to the final pretrial.

So what you have in my appendix

is everything that had been provided to us

prior to the trial.

And what Judge Delta ruled as a response,

which was a reasonable response,

I'm not criticizing them for what they did,

but a reasonable response to this late disclosure was,

you can't bring into the trial

what you just disclosed a week or seven days

or five days or nine days before.

You have limited to what's in that discovery from before.

That is the key ruling.

That's the ruling we relied on.

And that's why we expected this trial to be

stuff in general, which we could then explain.

And that is the ruling that they exceeded

by saying assault.

Thank you, counsel.

Case admitted, courts in recess.
