This is case 2019-0217, Mary Ann Salchetti et al. versus city of Keene.

Mr. Sullivan, give your opposing counsel time to set up, please.

Absolutely, thank you.

I can drink some water.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Good idea.

Thank you.

Mr. Sullivan, when you're ready.

Oh, did you call the case yet?

Yes.

Okay, good.

It's been a long morning.

Morning again, members of the court.

Gregory Sullivan represent Mary Ann Salchetti.

A journalism professor at Keene State.

And this case began as a journalism lesson and project for five of her journalism students

who were given the assignment of making right to no requests to the city of Keene.

The city's response, I believe the pleadings bear out,

was an egregious, continual violation of law right down the line.

And for the sake of clarity, I want to highlight some requests and responses

by each individual student.

First, Fleming.

Fleming on September 25, 2017, asked for all documents,

and I emphasize the words, all documents,

including but not limited to printed documents and electronic documents,

police citations involving infractions pertaining to RSA 17910,

which is a minor in possession of alcohol,

and RSA 644 regarding party host liability.

The city's response was,

there is no existing government record listing all citations.

Right down the line, the city took each request,

many of which did not reference the word list, did not ask for a list,

and yet the city said, we don't have a list,

and we're not going to create one when nobody was asking for a list.

In the city's answer with respect to the Fleming requests,

and he, by the way, repeated that request a number of times,

and in the answer to the complaint, they say there are 600 separate case files, responsive.

And what did Mr. Fleming get?

Nothing, zero.

Now, redact.

I am all about redaction in this field.

I call it redaction when teaching my students.

Nothing, he got zero.

We go on to Grace Pesci.

Her request, 924.17.

Any and all documents from August 1, 2012 to September 25, 2017,

regarding any and all citizen complaints, logs, calls, and emails

regarding charges of excessive police force and or police brutality.

77 days later, she got what's in the appendix as the Miola report,

which was a summary, arguably a personnel practice document,

but it was disclosed with the names of the police officers redacted.

That summary had already been prepared, or was it prepared in response to the request?

I believe it had already been prepared.

It was a report commissioned by the city.

Assuming there was no list on the first request, but in order to respond,

a list had to be created, a review of all the files, and then pulling all those files.

No need for a list.

We're asking for logs, calls, emails, any and all documents.

How practically speaking is that group of documents pulled together to provide access?

Well, obviously, they were already pulled together in order for this Miola to create a report.

I guess I'm going back to the first one.

There was no report, right?

Your first request, Fleming.

The 600.

The 600.

Oh.

So how do they get what, put in a box, put in a room, person comes in to look?

I mean, someone has to...

There's all kinds of ways.

There's all kinds of ways.

And the governmental duty is indeed to search for those documents, but you know,

we're going to get to it, but I'm going to call it a thumb drive, a flash drive.

Right.

Real simple.

Someone has to download it though.

Find them and download.

Correct.

Okay.

But for the police department to find charges of, for example,

minor in possession of alcohol shouldn't be hard to do.

Isn't the downloading onto a flash drive akin to creating a list?

No.

Okay.

It is merely reproducing the documents that already exist.

Two different things, if I may respectfully.

As a matter of fact...

You're going to have to educate me.

Does it assume that those citations are already in electronic form?

Well, if they're not, let us come in and copy them.

Just give us the piece of paper.

Let's look at them.

You have to understand these students got nothing, zero.

Redact what you need to redact, but let us look...

And you know, I think...

They weren't made available for inspection.

Correct.

I think there's a duty, by the way, for the government to reasonably cooperate with requestors

if they feel that the request is too broad or too narrow

or asking for something that doesn't exist.

Let's talk about it.

So was there any sit down here between your clients and the city?

Not that led.

There were some invitations.

And each time there was seeming meaningful conversation,

it was ultimately overruled under 91A.

Overruled by whom?

I'm going to say the...

Somebody in the city.

City manager and city attorney.

Right down the line.

And it's fully briefed, if I may, Your Honor.

Were they aware that this is an academic exercise?

Yes, they were.

Next, we have student Vassus asking for all charges of aggravated felonious sexual assault.

2013 through 2017.

We have no records for all charges listing.

It was the response.

We now know from the answer there are 17 separate case files.

Could have been produced, could have been produced in part, could have been redacted,

but student Vassus got nothing.

Should it matter to our thinking about this case that there were these multiple requests submitted

at the same time that are asking for voluminous information?

I'm not sure the information was voluminous in each case.

Well, 600 and one.

Sure, so that's when the government has the right to say,

you know what, we're working on it, we need more time.

That's built into the statute.

It did happen in this case.

They asked for more time and more time, and then said,

okay, you're not going to get anything.

How about the AFSA files, 17?

What if five of those charges were dismissed?

Is that still discoverable?

Absolutely.

After serious redactions, I'm sure there's all kinds of...

Absolutely.

This field is all about redaction, if I may, your honor.

There's no question about it.

Your clients are asking the city of Keene to incur some significant expenses.

If they're going to try to comply with these requests within five days?

They don't have to respond.

They have to respond within five days saying,

we need another 30 days, we need another 90 days.

There's no need to produce the documents within five days.

Or maybe they need to go out and buy a computer terminal

that can be accessible to the public

so that people can come in and view electronic documents.

Absolutely.

Most cities and towns have them.

Buy a terminal that they load stuff on for people to come look at.

I think that's happening every day.

I just want to finish with the remaining two students,

Dudall and King,

both of whom, and I'll try to summarize,

are asking for records relating to food establishment,

restaurant scores and dates of inspections from 2014 to 2017.

And the answer I found so obstructionist,

the information from our data system isn't a government document.

And there is no report currently created with this specific request criteria.

So the city inspects restaurants,

but they don't have any documents,

evidencing when the inspection was,

what the results of the inspection were,

who did the inspection, where was it done?

They say they have no documents.

I don't believe that, but they're saying it's in a data system now.

Right, and if they have to push a button to create a document,

it would be accurate that there's no document.

The information from our data system isn't a government document.

If they have to push a button to create the document, that's their job.

We, the people, have a right to that data.

To the data.

Yes, these are our agents and servants,

and are at all times to be responsive and accountable to us.

Your time is running, you have at least one more student.

King, very simple.

Any and all e-mail correspondence between the city and restaurants

about health inspections regarding dates, times, appointments,

name of inspector, and name of restaurant.

Nothing.

Mr. Sullivan, one of the points you make in your brief

is that it's a violation of the right to no law

that there's a requirement for a signed written request.

Absurd.

But that wasn't the basis for any denial, was it?

No, it was not.

So why should we be ruling on it?

It was the basis for delay, and I've been representing

requesters for longer than I like to admit,

and I had never heard of that the request had to be signed.

Union leader reporters e-mail requests every day.

Nobody ever asked for a signature until these five journalism students

wanted information from the city of Keene.

Now we want signatures, which they complied with.

Quite unnecessarily so, I believe, Your Honor.

But I want to say that in summing up the conduct of the city,

in this case, turned our right to no statute

from a disclosure statute into a withholding statute.

And that's just not consistent with the purpose of the statute,

with the preamble, and most importantly,

with our state constitution Part 1 Article 8.

And it looks like I have time to answer questions.

You do.

What about the $300 charge?

I don't know where that possibly could have come from.

They said that first page is 50 cents and 25 cents thereafter,

and there was one set of documents, I think, at issue

that was like 130 pages.

I did the math.

I think it came out to $29.70.

So I don't know where that $300 number came from,

but it sure didn't sound reasonable to this journalism student.

And she didn't have the $300, and she shouldn't have to have

the $300 because she has the right to come in and look

at the documents, no charge at all.

So the trial court upheld the $300 charge, didn't it?

The trial court upheld so many of these egregious violations

of the right to no law, accepting the city's arguments

that when someone says, I want any and all documents,

they're asking for a list.

The trial court upheld that.

And it's just egregiously wrong.

And I think the remedy here, anticipating the question,

is remand with the proper standards being applied

to these requests, Your Honor.

That being a balancing test.

Absolutely.

I'm done.

Out of breath.

Thank you.

Our fire's dwindling.

You want to get to that?

You know, the first time I heard the crackle,

I had said something, and I thought opposing counsel

had smacked a binder on the table.

It was an act of God.

No doubt.

If I saw some, what I'd throw it in.

Mr. Mullins?

Good morning, Your Honors.

Good morning.

Thank you very much for having us here.

My name's Tom Mullins.

I'm the city attorney for O'Keehn.

I'm here representing the city in this matter this morning.

You have to say I feel a little bit of a disadvantage

that Attorney Sullivan had an opportunity to be up here

and sort of get his sea legs before I came up to,

have to argue before you, but I'll get over that.

Well, we don't have to talk about feniments, right?

Right.

I was going to say I can't get my head out of feniments,

so coming back down into everything else will be a change.

With respect to the question about the list,

because that seems to be where Attorney Sullivan

and the court seems to be interested.

I mean, I think that there's just no way that you can look

at these requests that came in,

even on their face, without,

without coming to that conclusion,

Mr. Doodle's request for was,

for was a list of food establishments

that he wanted with certain criteria in them.

Do you concede, do you concede that a written request

is not necessary under 918?

We did not, not proceed with any of the document requests

based upon the written request that we asked for.

So you agree, you concede?

I concede that a written request is not required,

and we did not do that.

I would like to point out though that even in Taylor,

the decision in Taylor, this court pointed out

that municipalities, because of the potential penalties

that are associated with violating the right to no law,

municipalities can have more formalized procedures

than they would have in other contexts,

and that would include preparing a form

that we require now request,

and even then we didn't require it

because we would sign off on it if they didn't do that.

But you know, the Taylor case indicated

that we can put together some formalized procedures

with respect to that.

And what was the basis for the $300 charge?

$300 charge is an estimate based upon

the number of emails that may have been generated

as a result of the restaurant inspections.

There were approximately 800 to 1000 inspections

that occurred during the time period

that was being requested.

So it was just basically an estimate.

Of the cost of what, of printing them?

It would be an estimate if you were to print them out.

Correct.

Now what didn't happen in this case

back to one of the questions which was

was there any further discussion about this?

That was an email from the city manager

back to Ms. King.

But there was no follow up with respect to

is there another way we could potentially produce

those records for you?

I think that's what the trial court

was really grappling with was

that in order to be able to

to view the records without any kind of copying

at all onto any kind of device

related form we would have to

had to provide her access through

our various employee terminals

to be able to review those files.

And why isn't that okay?

I'm sorry?

And why isn't that the proper response

to put aside a terminal and have

the requesters come in and look at them?

That is now the proper response.

We have a terminal now back to the

Justice's questions.

You still have to redact those documents, right?

You still have to redact those documents?

We would still have to go through

that's correct.

I mean, it's one thing to show them

but in order to be able to do that

we would still need to be able to go through

and remove any of the information

that was authorized.

But isn't that just contemplated by

the right to no law that there will

that that's an obligation that communities

have to have to go through and

Yes.

do redactions so that's really not something

No, no, no.

to complain about.

No, we're not complaining about it.

We do the redactions all the time.

I mean to point out to the court

back to one of the questions

this was just five of these requests

we did receive 11 at the same time

from different students on all of them

fairly broad so we were trying to

juggle all of that at the same time

but back to your point we could

pull the information together

and put it on to a thumb drive of some type.

My point is that once that email

went out from the city manager

unfortunately that stopped any further conversation.

One of the things broadly speaking

that concerns me about the trial

court's order is its construction

of these requests as lists

or the city's construction of them as lists

and the court's acceptance of that

interpretation and that seems

perhaps a stretch.

Well, I'd have to submit to you though

that if you look at the actual request

again Colby Doodle's list

he would like a list of the food

establishments that are part of a certain

class with certain criteria

and then a second request for a list

of violations of those food establishments.

That's a word that's included in this.

As the trial court pointed out,

the word list is not ambiguous.

If I ask you to go to the store

and you say well where's my shopping list

here's the list.

But don't some of them ask for all documents

related to complaints or things like that?

Why is that a list?

No, we didn't treat that as a list.

That was the request with respect

to the documents for police

officers that may have been

involved in a complaint for some sort of

use of force or excessive force or something like that.

We collected those documents.

This is the fenomen question.

We collected those documents.

There were 119 pages of those documents.

We argued that they were not disclosable under

fenomen and the court

required us to submit them,

submit it to the court in camera

for review. One of the oddities

unfortunately in the court's decision

and I agree with counsel on this

was the court made this statement that

we requested in the first place.

And I have to say that

we certainly read that request as being a request

for all of those documents.

We took the position that they were not

disclosable at that point under fenomen.

So those were provided.

So we are talking about fenomen again

if we were to overrule fenomen.

How does that impact

this case?

I'm fundamentally sorry that I brought up fenomen.

Yeah.

It doesn't feature as large

as the first two sets of briefs.

You know, not to rehash all of the

arguments that have been before,

but from our perspective, fenomen

was the law that governed at this point.

At this point, if the court

were to decide over our objection

quite frankly to overrule fenomen

and send it back, you know, I think

at that point there would have to be a remand

with respect to this because the court never went

through any of the balancing tests

with respect to the documents

that we had provided that we wanted to

initially see for in-camera review.

So that would have to occur

in that kind of context.

But again,

So you're saying that even the 17

AFSA files were not

disclosed? We didn't, when we, again

Your Honor, when we looked at this,

it was for a list of, under

the statute with respect, all charges

associated with that

kind of complaint.

Mr. Dow, who is the records clerk

for the city who's been there for 20 years

who does a lot of work with all of our

record keeping systems and especially

with the police department, understands

that governmental records of the police department

aren't kept in that kind of format.

You know, there isn't a list of

all charges. There's nothing

all charges associated with it.

They're all case files and the case files

have to be searched essentially by

date of birth with respect to the individual

of the police department. So it wasn't until

after all of this started

that we did that. Are they electronic?

No most

I have to say I don't know

precisely the answer to that question

but I suspect a lot of them are

available through the database. Okay.

But the question at that point is back

to the list. You know, my analogy

with respect to that is when I give you

a shopping list for a list to make a

cake, you get the ingredients

to make the cake. They're all on that

list. But the cake itself, which is

the end point of whatever

it is those, those bits of data

on that list indicate hasn't been created

yet. So this was basically

a request for all of the ingredients

that may be in a cake somewhere

without the request for the cake. Someone couldn't have just gone in

and pulled those case files

and redacted them

and then put them in a room for someone

to come look at. Subsequent to that,

that's how we determine how many cases there may be

associated with this. Because

we did do a search based on

the just based upon that statutory reference.

We admitted that in the answer.

But again, at the time the request came

in, it was reasonably

looked at, I think from our perspective, and the

trial court agreed with us that

it was a request for a list of those

cases. Not for the case files

themselves.

And it was when we decided, well

what do we do with this? Let's put it

into the database and see what we get

from that. And that did result

in quite an expansive number

of those types of cases. The court gets

similar questions from time to time for

demographic information about cases

that

isn't reflected in how the cases are

maintained. That's exactly right.

Is that really what you're describing?

You don't have a ready

index, if you will, of cases

by that category. Exactly.

That's the point.

Recall that the statute doesn't

require us to compile

cross reference or

assemble. Information.

That's what the statute

uses as a word. Information. Information

is defined to include

data. So essentially

what is being requested is that

we take bits and pieces of

data requested, put them

into a database, and create

a report or a document from that process.

And that's not something that the statute requires.

But doesn't your restaurant

inspector have, in fact,

a log or even a list

but never strike list, a log

of what he or she did

every day during the course of a year?

But that wasn't what was being requested.

And the answer to that question is

yes. Unfortunately

at the time that these requests came in, as you saw

probably in the briefs, the city was

right in the middle of transferring

the data from one

application to another. And

we couldn't even go into

the old database at that point

which covered the time period that was being requested

to pull out any of that.

All we could do was provide the entire

database which we offered to do

but it would have had to go through

my office first to make sure

and determine whether or not anything needed to be redacted

before we could release it. What happened to that offer

of the old database?

Nothing.

What's the basis for the

redactions of the report?

Which one? The one on

excessive force.

Oh, you mean the

like

report that the Muriel report

for the names? Yes.

Yes. Again

that was a pre-existing document

we had it. We took the position

that the names on that report

were only there because

they were pulled out of the internal

disciplinary, not disciplinary, but

internal investigation files with respect to

each one of those complaints.

The only reason the name existed

was because of that. So, Phenomen.

You realize that? That's right. You know, it's back to

Phenomen with respect to that question.

We're producing some of the information

about redacting the specific names.

We redacted the specific

names. That's correct. One of the mistakes

quite frankly that we made in this case

and I'm not going to suggest to you that the city

didn't make some mistakes in this case

was accidentally we took out the heading

name underneath the name

on top of the names. That was a mistake.

There was no reason to redact that.

And when we provided

in accordance with the court's order

the redacted

document but with the names removed

with an identifier

that wouldn't identify them specifically

we made sure not to make that mistake again.

And what was the basis for not producing

the citizen complaints?

The citizen complaints again back to Phenomen

were generated as part of the internal

and ferris investigation by the police chief.

But these are the complaints from

the citizens. Not something

generated by the city, right?

They're complaints that come

into the police department through its

administrative structure saying

I have a complaint against a particular

officer for this reason. And what is the

basis for not producing

those? Those then

become part of the internal and ferris

investigation to determine whether or not

there's any validity to the complaint.

And then become cloaked

and then become cloaked by the right

to know exceptions? Under

internal personal practices that's

correct and under Phenomen they're not

discloseable at that point. Yes.

Do you know how that existed at the time

we were answering these requests?

You don't have to use all your time. No.

I think your honor just to sort of enclosing

I would like to point out

to the court

that municipalities including the city

we try very hard to answer these

all of these

as we did in this case.

And I really would like to

recognize the people that

do these kinds of things. There are some

people here behind me that do this

and there may be thousands of people in the state to do this.

This is a very difficult statute

to understand. I have a right

to know book that is

a third again the size of that

which includes the attorney general's memorandum

and all of the case law that I could

collect underneath that. And all of the

municipal attorneys in this room will understand

it's a very difficult thing to parse through.

And in situations like this

when these come in Mr. Dow takes a look

at this he has to make a decision as

to whether or not to proceed and how to

proceed with respect to answering these requests.

And those can be very difficult decisions to

make. And some of the information

that's included in these governmental records

are just appalling

and difficult.

Some of the most horrendous things that you can

possibly imagine we have to take a look

at through videos and photographs

and police reports and everything else.

And we're asking now these people

out there to make decisions with

respect to somebody's privacy or somebody's

rights or somebody's confidentiality

and frankly they don't have any training

with respect to this.

Isn't that

what is required by both the statute

and the constitution?

It is your honor and I'm not suggesting otherwise

but what I am suggesting is

that the legislature could

take the statute and improve it.

You know my analogy with the statute

is it's like an old farmhouse in New

England the generations of people started to

live in. Everybody cobbled something onto

it because it worked for them. And at the end

of the day you had something that sort of looked

like a house but it didn't really work

anymore in a modern environment.

This statute is exactly that.

One of the things that this case puts into play

is what is the obligation

with respect to data?

What's the obligation with respect to the

ones and zeros that now live

in these applications rather than

in a filing cabinet with a piece of paper?

This statute does not really deal

with that.

Can we generate reports of the click

on the statute?

I'm not sure but the statute

doesn't say that says we're not,

don't have to do that.

The question then becomes all right then you balance

it out.

Should we do it? And oftentimes we try

and err on the side of yeah let's

just do it.

But it's still very difficult for us to

parse through that. And if you make

a wrong mistake and somebody gives

the information out that they shouldn't

have given out under the statute

then I would like to suggest you

this is not an easy thing to get through.

Attorney Mones, that might be a suggestion

best for the legislature.

I agree with that Your Honor.

And you mentioned again with

Justice Hicks indulgence.

You mentioned that the city made some

mistakes but do you think

the trial court remedied

those mistakes?

Absolutely Your Honor.

One of the first things I was going to say

that I forgot to say when I

got it right for all of those

reasons and we would request that you

affirm it. Thank you very much.

Thank you Mr. Mullen. Mr. Sullivan.

Thank you Your Honor.

So turning quickly

to Grace Pesci's report

of request rather of September

24, 17.

She requests any

and all documents

including any and all

citizen complaints

calls, emails, etc.

regarding excessive police

force and or police brutality.

And then

next she said

provide a list.

And you'll see in the appendix

that when the request

was ultimately given to the chief

of police six weeks

later, he said

I guess I can use the

citizen complaint

log and the

internal affairs

in the box list.

I have for this.

So even though the city wanted to

rely on, well you're asking

for a list and we're not going to

give you anything, they had a

list responsive to that request.

But ultimately the denial wasn't

based on whether it was a list or

not, it was on the internal

personnel investigation.

Absolutely and I was just going to

get to that when Justice Bassett

said we don't have to talk about

that.

And I thought we had gone over

Fenneman at such great length I

wasn't going to repeat myself

too much but this is a classic

Fenneman

case where

in order for

the citizens to know

if management took appropriate

action and by the way

action isn't always negative, it isn't

always demotion.

We learned that in Union leader

that political pressure was

imposed upon a prosecutor

in prosecuting a fellow named

Redmond.

And after prevailing in that

case we got the videotape and

showed that the prosecutor had

done the right thing, that

Mr. Redmond was sober and passed

a field sobriety test.

So you know the disclosure of

these records often can show

that 99% of the time

police officers, firefighters,

are trying to do their best

and the public has a right to know

that just as it has a right to

know if management has taken

appropriate steps when

something wrong has been done

by a police officer or anyone

else. By the way it wasn't

just written request that the

city of Keene was asking for

these were all emails sent in

by the students which is how

college kids communicate these

days in large part, they got

to know these requests have to be

signed. Kids had to go in and

sign the request in addition to

submitting emails. And I'm

going to request on behalf of

my client that attorney's fees

be assessed against the city

in this action because I think

the response of the city

was clearly obstructionist

in violation of the statute

and I'm going to ask for

attorney's fees below.

Did you ask for fees from

the trial court?

Professor Selchetti was

pro se at the superior court,

I took this case on for the purposes

of the bill. So were they requested

whether you were there or not, were they requested?

I imagine not because

there is case law saying that pro se

litigants even

in the reams case

when an attorney

represented himself he was not

entitled to attorney's fees.

Thank you council.

They submitted. Court stands in recess.

Thank you your honor.
