This is case 2019-0598 in the matter of Brett Mullins and Mary Lou Mullins.

Good morning.

Good morning. May it please the Court, Your Honor.

I'm William Quinn of Brennan, Lenahan, Ikebino, and Hickey of Manchester for the appellant

Brett Mullins. I have requested a reservation of one minute at the, of my time for the

end as rebuttal. Your Honor, this case comes to you from the divorce court in

National Family Division. The party's had a long-term marriage. The court entered an

award for an unequal property distribution of approximately 5347. The property award

includes an award of 80 percent of all cash assets and equity in the home to Ms. Mullins

and the remaining balance of 20 percent to Mr. Mullins. The rest of his property is

comprised of primarily retirement assets. The award also includes a long-term alimony

award at an amount that was higher than either party had requested and which represents

36 percent of the difference in the gross wages of the parties.

Well, didn't the wife ask for $71,500 in alimony and the court granted $62,000

in alimony?

No, actually, Your Honor, Ms. Mullins had requested $5,500 a month for 13 years.

So, the issue was that it was, she had requested less money presently, but for a

longer period of time.

So, but currently, this case comes to you with four issues. Three of them are

related to the court's failure to analyze Ms. Mullins monthly expenses.

$458.19, both the pre-2019 and post-2019 statutes, require the court to

make a finding with respect to the reasonable need of the parties.

In Ray-Hampers, it makes clear that alimony is appropriate where one party can

provide for reasonable needs, the other party has reasonable needs, and the

party in need cannot be self-supporting to provide for her own reasonable

needs.

The weight of the evidence, Your Honor...

On that point, is there a number that your client believes should be the

number?

Well, actually, Your Honor, I think my client would request, and the second

part of the judgment is the application of the new statute, which would

be 30% of the difference in the party's gross income, which is roughly

$5,500 a month.

But the appellee testified at the time of trial that her monthly expenses

were actually not her costs.

She testified that her maintenance for car expenses was a Google

expense.

That was nothing that she could actually incurred.

Her meals eaten out were her desire to eat out.

She testified that she wasn't eating out.

Those were not actual expenses.

She made a request for landscaping and a housekeeper to

expenses the parties had never incurred during the course of their

marriage.

Well, that's because she was performing those functions, the

white foot.

Correct.

And now that she's working, she can't do that.

Well, and again, Your Honor, that's a discretionary expense,

and that's what I'm asking the court to take a look at.

Look at the scrutiny given to the discretionary expenses.

The reality is, the landscaper and the housekeeper were not

part of the marital lifestyle.

So is it reasonable to hold my client responsible for those

expenses?

That's actually an increase in the standard of living.

I know, Your Honor, that the travel expenses that were

included of $8.29 a month were based on historic travel

that the parties had done.

But the travel that is referenced in the testimony was

business travel that was actually paid for by Mr.

Mullen's employer during the course of the marriage.

So the $8.29 isn't an actual number that the parties

ever paid, and she testified she doesn't actually spend

$8.29.

You pointed this out to the trial court, I assume.

Pardon me?

You pointed this out to the trial court, I assume.

I did point this out to the trial court, Your Honor.

Now, my client's primary discretionary expense was

to assist the party's third child to get through college.

The court held that expense to a higher level of scrutiny

than it did to any of the expenses incurred by Ms. Mullen's.

Am I correct?

Was there one semester remaining, or was there more?

There's more, Your Honor.

She remains in college today.

So she was, I believe, a sophomore at the time of the trial.

So four semesters.

But for instance, the court found that that was not

a permanent expense.

However, it accepted expenses for a 13-and-a-half-year-old

dog in kidney failure.

Obviously, that's not a permanent expense.

The court found that Mr. Mullen's could choose not to pay that bill,

that she could drop out of school, that she could transfer

to a less expensive school, that she could find scholarships.

Again, none of those considerations or factors were used

when analyzing or failing to analyze Ms. Mullen's expenses.

But the trial court found that your client was going to be

in control of his bonuses going forward, right?

Correct.

Ms. Mullen's is not entitled to any of that income.

That's correct, Your Honor.

But the testimony at the time of trial was the court keeps

relying on stock options and bonus income.

Bonus income, as of 2019, there was no projected bonus.

My client testified at the time of trial that he had

not received any stock options from December 2017 forward.

So the use of a bonus, which is speculative,

it was misplaced.

The use of stock options, which the court divided

between these two parties, anything that was vested

and my client had in his possession

at the time of the divorce, those were divided.

So, you know, to suggest, I mean, an alimony

per master is supposed to be based on actual income,

not speculative income, not speculative, you know,

assets again.

There's a note in, I think it's your brief,

that you believe the trial court also aired

and including past bonus income in the income

on which it based its alimony.

That's correct, Your Honor.

I mean, if you read the final order and the order,

I think Justice Donovan just pointed it out.

There's a lot of reliance on bonus income and stock options.

The testimony at trial was there are no more bonus,

the bonus is not coming in in 2019.

We're in 2020, you know, outside the record,

but there was no bonus coming in.

The stock options ended.

There were no additional stock options

for a year and a half before this case was tried.

So to rely on the historical data for a bonus

and for stock options is an abusive discretion.

So the other issue, Your Honor,

that I think you need to take a look at

is just the treatment of these expenses.

The court adopted virtually wholesale the expenses

that were claimed by Ms. Mullins in the trial.

The court ultimately...

Both parties testified, correct?

Correct, Your Honor.

Ultimately what the court did was it equalized.

It didn't have anything to do with expenses.

It equalized the housing expenses and meals to eat now expenses,

but it did not equalize any of the other expenses,

i.e. recreation and travel.

So there was, again, an abusive discretion

with respect to that issue.

I know, Your Honor, I think it's stark

and it's telling the court ultimately finds

that my client's reasonable need is $15,056.92 a month.

It finds that Ms. Mullins' reasonable need is $10,404.

That's a combined reasonable need of over $25,000

and that reasonable need annualized is $305,000 plus some change.

The combined incomes of the two parties is $292,500.

So there's a $13,000 discrepancy

between what this court found as reasonable need

and what the parties actually earn.

So there's an endless supply of need.

The court failed to take a look at these expenses

and make a determination as to what is reasonable

and what is merely a desire.

So the only person who is going to make up

that annualized shortfall of funds is my client.

My client's under an order of support for the next 10 years

with respect to Ms. Mullins.

Ms. Mullins may make more money, may not make more money,

but she's under no obligation to make up the shortfall.

And in the motion for reconsideration,

you'll note the court trimmed her need,

it fills her need up to $300.

So the only contribution to that shortfall

is going to fall on the shoulders of my client.

Is part of that shortfall made up by the car allowance?

$9,000, which would put it up at $301,000?

The car allowance was included in the motion for reconsideration

so theoretically, but, and the court did,

I believe the court did include the car allowance

recognizing that the first time it put it in

it also didn't recognize that there were expenses

associated with that car.

The other, so I want to point out again,

my client was held to a standard that the

discretion expenses were not permanent.

They were not related to food, shelter, or transportation

and therefore they were unreasonable

and they were rejected.

The issue before the court says that

the specific expense is the college.

The specific expense, but I want to make clear

that specific expense is a discretionary expense

just like cosmetic Botox is.

Are there other discretionary expenses

of your client that were rejected, if you will?

Yes, my client, he removed the expenses

related to the children and at the time of the divorce

the children, two of the three children

were living with him.

And that was the other issue with equalizing food

and other expenditures.

My client had responsibility, granted

they were adult children, Your Honor,

but there were three people in that household

as opposed to one.

Home equity was awarded to Ms. Mullins

in its entirety.

That issue in and of itself is a problem.

She has a significant amount of readily

ascertainable and available resources.

My client is limited to his retirement funds.

So if he is...

What's her source of income?

What's her source of income?

Her source of income currently, Your Honor,

is she's an employee of Southern New Hampshire University.

Including a second mortgage on the house

as a source for revenue?

What I'm saying is, Your Honor,

she can tap into that equity as she chooses.

My client doesn't have that ability.

Nor does he have the ability or pool of resources

available to him to acquire a home

that would allow him some similar standard of living.

Can he borrow from his retirement account?

I suppose he could borrow from his retirement account.

I don't know how specifically, Your Honor,

what that would be subject to,

but there would need to be a payment back.

The final issue that I really want to get to, Your Honor,

is the court abused its discretion

when it elected to use the previous statute.

The statute in 2019 says the court must make a finding

that applying the new statute would be inadequate.

Mr. Quinn, can you tell me where precisely

you raised that issue with the trial court?

I read your motion for reconsideration.

The only reference to it, I think, is on page

of paragraph 32, where you state

in utilizing the former alimony statute,

the court is required to take into consideration

both parties' lifestyle.

And that's the only reference to the new statute

that I see in your motion.

Well, Your Honor, the issue was raised.

I think it is raised, obviously,

these issues morph over time

as we read the transcript.

But I believe that issue was raised.

I know that both parties had submitted documents

that were under the new statute.

$5,500 is what the calculation of child support is.

Ours was $4,500.

Our proposal was $4,500.

So everyone, as far as I am concerned,

was aware that we were moving forward

under the new statute.

Before your red light goes on,

isn't there discretion vested in the trial court

by statute to decide which to use?

There is, Your Honor.

There is discretion, but the discretion requires,

it requires that the court make a finding

that applying the new statute would be

inequitable, apologies,

would be inequitable in its application

for some reason.

He cites the reason of

he wants to front-load alimony,

he wants to step it down over time

and give an unequal division of property.

That is accounted for in the new statute.

There's nothing that prevents

front-loading alimony in the new statute.

There's nothing that prevents it.

In fact, it's addressed directly

in the new statute for step-down

or step-up alimony.

How many years did your client propose

to pay alimony?

My client proposed to pay alimony,

I believe, seven years, Your Honor.

Is it 27-year marriage?

I believe they filed a 26,

but yes, 27 years married by the time

the divorce order came out.

But I also want to make clear,

in Nassar, remember,

a person who can't be self-sufficient.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Mr. Ratio?

May I please quote Your Honor Kevin Ratio

from Handelding, Kerrigan,

on behalf of Mary Will Mullins

to address your question first, Your Honor.

It's in my appendix.

The petitioner

was proposing $3,000 a month

for 60 months.

So it wasn't us 4,500

for seven years.

Are there less alimony than your client

asked for?

Absolutely, at about $159,000

less than what we were asking for.

We were looking for $5,500

for 13 years, Your Honor.

And to get to the issue

of the new statute and old statute,

as I outlined in my motion,

petitioner was asking for the old statute

to apply.

They're ruling a law that requests

Q, which is also in the appendix.

It clearly said that

the old statute should apply unless

because the way the legislative

had written this statute

is that the new, the 2019 amendment

only takes effect on January 1st,

2019 between June 25th

of 18 in December 31st

of 2018.

The legislature mandated Judge Derby

shall use the

pre-2019 amendment

unless in his discretion he finds

that it would be applicable.

So clearly, Judge Derby

put in his right to do that

and it resulted in

a shortfall of $159,000

to my client from what we were proposing.

Now, counsel did admit today

that he'd been looking for

$5,500 a month.

Well, you apply the new statute for 13 years,

that gets me to my number

of over $900,000. We'll take it.

We'll take that, Your Honor.

She deserves it. My client

was a rising star.

When she got married in

1991, she was

on the fast track at Pratt Whitman.

She was a financial analyst. Over eight years

she went from a level 41

this is all trial testimony

to level 46.

She was a rising star. At the time

that she retired reluctantly

because Mr. Mullen's moved to New York

for his job,

she was a senior financial analyst

negotiating contracts with the United States Air Force.

She was knowledge, she had the

brain power, she had the connections

to, she was friends with her vice president.

She testified the relationship that they

had. She was a rising star

and if she did not

do its best

for Mr. Mullen's career,

she would be in a much better

financial position. So today he says

the beauty treatments are

discretionary expense.

She did, the choice

that he made to move

means that she can't afford it out of pocket.

And so she wants to do this now

with the money they earn.

This alimony isn't his payment to her.

It's, she invested in him.

Isn't that a property

settlement argument?

And here we're looking at need

and ability to pay?

I, I, I stress them both

and I think if you look at

if you look at the alimony statute

and you look at, you know

the factors that the court can consider

that the court clearly says they can consider

vocational skills, employability,

opportunity for

future acquisition of incoming

assets and the non-economic

contributions for the family

unit. That's, that's

how it's incorporated into alimony

and that should be incorporated into alimony

or on it. He picks on dog expenses.

It's a $300 expense.

Now he puts a 13 year old dog.

A dog has been part of this family.

There's gonna be dog expenses

and there was no testimony about the age

and how long he was gonna, how long the dog

would, but dog expenses

travel. And that's going forward.

Those expenses are being carried forward for the next

10 years, even though the dog

is presumably gonna expire

at some point. But that doesn't mean

that specific dog, Ava, your

the dog expense.

So Ava, Ava passes away,

there's another dog. That's, you know,

she's now divorced. It's very

likely that it would be another dog

expense. No. I don't think the law says

you have to look at for the specific dog

but just the nature of the dog. It's like power

expenses. You're not gonna have the same

kind of the next 10 years probably.

Oh yes I will.

Not probably myself, so I get kids in college.

But, you know, the

significant part of all of this, Your Honor,

is you look at the nature of the expenses

as you correctly noted, Your Honor.

Housekeeping expense,

if you look at it for that specific

narrow, it's wrong

because she is used to a well-capped

house. A house that was in order.

Which she did when she wasn't working.

Now that she's working, she shouldn't sacrifice

that. So

How do we deal with the

shortfall between the combined

income

and this combined

expense need

as it stands today?

My client has a shortfall too, Your Honor.

She's gonna have to trim expenses if

she needs to.

Or her income rises.

So that shortfall, if the court

establishes her need,

his need, and it is above

what the combined income available

is. What do we do with that?

They both share that equally?

Your Honor, I think when you look at, for example,

the court really didn't cut down his

sharing expenses except for

the college tuition, which the testimony was

that was paid from assets. His own

testimony trial that the sophomore year was paid

from assets that they both contributed.

And she, the last payment

is gonna be made now. She graduates

in September 2021, so it's a moot

issue. He testified

that he put $700 for clothing

expenses on his

financial effort. He wasn't spending

that. He just put that down.

And the judge decreased it in half,

which actually is about $160

more than what the judge gave her for

clothing expenses.

So, you know, so

they spend a little bit less on clothing. They spend

a little less on this. As far as stock arms

is concerned,

the appellate leaves out some important

information.

He testified a trial that he gets stock arms

every three to five years.

So the fact that he hadn't gotten anything in

2017 wasn't a surprise.

So it's, so 2020

or for 2022 he could get another grant.

As far as bonuses, the judge

didn't believe him. I mean, that's what it comes

down to. You know, he

got a $44,000 bonus in

2017 and a $60,000

bonus in 2018. But even

beyond that, the quick and basic alimony

award on bonus and stock options

it based it on his base income

and said, well, he has the potential

to get this, which she doesn't, by the

way. And as she testified, she stayed

up crack with me that they have stock

options at the manager level. She

was a rising star in eight years. She

went to, she went from level 41

to a little 46 senior financial habit.

She is fully committed that she would

have had the ability to have stock options

before the credit. She's not going to get that now.

She's in her mid-fifties

working for Southern New Hampshire

University, which was the only job she could

get. And that's the important thing. This is

where the credibility comes in. She testified

she started looking for a job in 2017

and that

she

he left in June of

2018. It took her a

year. In September 2018, she got

offered a job in Twicken.

That's integrity. There's no doubt

that if she had a higher offer

now or in the future, she would have taken

it. She's not someone that sits

back and wants to be taken care of.

But by the same token, she invested

in him. And she's entitled to return

on that investment. And as far as

the property division is concerned, it's

misleading when they say 80% of the cash.

I don't consider the real estate

cash. As the court pointed out,

yeah, she could take a home equity level.

You can take a loan as far as one can.

As far as the cash is concerned,

they each got their own bank accounts

and a small amount of money.

There was a $254,000

investment account. He got

100. She got $54,000.

He testified

on page 30

out of the transcript that, yeah,

she's entitled to more cash. She

should because she's in a much worse position

than him. As far as bonuses and stock

options. So the court was well within the

tribe. I personally think

a 5347 division

in a marriage like this was

not equitable. But, you know,

we got the alimony word,

the decision to appeal, move forward, move on.

She decided not to cross appeal.

But in this type of marriage

with so much invested

into a career where he now makes $250,000

with the cost, $250,000 a year

with the possibility of substantial bonuses

and stock options

is significant. The testimony

wasn't. He admitted on cross.

Over the next 13 years

he's scheduled to make

$2.7 million

more than her.

$2.7 million.

That needs to be balanced out.

What's the relevant of the support of the adult children?

Is that any relevance to us?

I don't think so, Your Honor. If you look at the alimony

statute, it talks about the expenses of

the parties. Okay. And so

for their needs, for their reasonable

the reasonable needs of the parties.

You put a third person in

and you open the door to a significant

problem in the future. What if

you had a disabled adult child?

So is that disabled adult child's expenses

now

considered for alimony?

I think it's a slippery slope. The legislature

was very clear. But that's not the case here.

There's no dependent child.

There isn't. But when he's saying

considered the case college expenses

similar analysis. And my client

testified, Your Honor, if she got

the property order in the alimony

order, she would contribute.

She was very clear about that. And she's never

contributed to her daughter's college expenses.

She already has.

And it's such a short

term issue

that I think that to consider that

and reduce her alimony would not be

fair to her. It wouldn't be

if you put the daughter's college ahead

of her reasonable needs.

It's important. It's unfair to her

given that the sacrifice

that she made. When you look at

the

expenses that she has

her expenses

commensurate with her lifestyle.

She testified. She traveled

to Lake Homo, Italy during the marriage

to Europe many times

to Florida.

Much of that was business travel though.

For him.

Not for her.

And the family paid for her

way. Well I

understood, Your Honor, that she had to pay for her own way.

The family had to pay for her own way

to go there. But even so

why should she deny

travel? Because that's a benefit from him.

Right? I mean that's not being considered

an alimony order so that we should

increase what is gross income.

Because if that's a benefit he's going to get

a free travel, personal travel

then why including that as additional income?

We should. And so

the fact that she

invested in his career

which he now gets to travel

she shouldn't be business travel isn't

taxed as a benefit.

I'm not sure

I didn't pay anyone

if they did. But

he would extend trips

business trips to stay for personal time.

I'm not seeing any additional

tax paid on that.

But she should not

be denied the ability

to travel personally. Like if he does too

he travels with business.

If you have the tax issue

you claim that that was not raised

100% was not raised.

The testimony was

in June, January of

2019 he submitted a financial affidavit

listing his tax expenses

at $3,458 a month.

We get to try

and it's well over $7,000.

He admitted on the stand that

on page one he puts

his base income.

But on page three when it comes to taxes

he puts the tax obligation

based on the year he made $422,000.

It was greatly inflated.

He then criticizes

the judge for not considering

what his tax obligation

will be post-divorce.

He didn't submit any evidence to it.

So how was the judge supposed to

consider something he didn't present any evidence on?

Was there any testimony about

the taxability or not

of the alimony payment

to whom the tax?

No, there was no testimony.

There was no testimony on that

and there was no testimony as to

what his post-divorce tax

obligation would be.

He can't leave it to the judge to speculate

that it's going to increase.

If he doesn't submit evidence to it

then he can't then say, well, judge

you abused your discretion, you didn't consider it.

The case law was

I remember arguing when I was up here

in Nizhnikov

when it came to business valuations

and I think it was judge six

asked the council, well if you didn't submit

evidence as to a contrary value

how's the trial judge supposed to

determine that?

The court should be left to speculate

what his post-divorce

tax obligation would be.

There was no evidence presented as to that.

So what we did have is

and I actually think the judge's

allotment I think he did around $4,200

is actually high.

We were saying it was around the $3,200

among tax obligation

based on his prior years

and

his tax obligation. The judge

increased it a little bit high but

the judge did the best

he could based on the evidence and he should not

be looked at to the extent of saying

that

well, you didn't consider this when

you did present it. The first time he raised

it was on in a motion

to reconsider and didn't give the judge any evidence

for us to indicate

how do we attack something

when you haven't showed us

what the tax obligation would be

most of all. So it's pure speculation

that it would be higher

and the court should not give that

consideration. As far as

the

property division as I indicated

Mr.

Mullins

is still going to end up

with 47% of the assets

and still have. If he gets

the bonuses and he gets the stock

options

significantly have a better

opportunity to require future assets

which is why I think the property division

as boarded is not

that suitable because it leaves

the wife

really at a

disadvantage. Thank you.

Thank you.

Briefly

the court in Nassar said

that the court is required to consider the party

in needs ability to be self supporting

prior to awarding alimony.

What you just heard is that Ms. Mullins

was a rising star and in fact

the testimony and the record will reveal

she applied for two jobs after being out

of the work force and received one.

So her year

long job

search was actually looking for

small jobs and lunch

ladies she testified to but when

she went looking for a job it was

two applications, two resumes, one

job which to me is a reflection

of the fact that this woman has

value in the work force. She went out

and got herself a job. The dog

is dead. The dog died.

Those expenses

my client remains responsible

for. Thank you, Your Honor.

Sorry to hear that but congratulations

gentlemen on excellent presentations

good to see you both. Thank you, Your Honor.

I understand the journey in case you submit it.
