Association, Inc. versus town of Newport.

Mr. Johnson, you have two minutes for a rebuttal as well.

Thank you, Your Honor.

May it please the court?

My name is Matt Johnson.

And with me, Lynette McComber from my office,

we are counseled to New London Hospital,

the appellant in this case.

The reason we're here in New London Hospital

operates the Newport Health Center in Newport, New Hampshire.

It sought a tax exemption as a charitable institution

for 2016.

Newport selectmen denied that on basis of untimeliness

and on the merits.

New London Hospital appealed that decision.

The trial court granted summary judgments solely

on the issue of timeliness and also

denied a first motion to amend.

So the grounds for the appeal are two different orders

from the trial court.

One, the grant of the summary judgment motion.

And two, the denial of the motion to amend.

I'd like to first talk about the summary judgment motion.

Trial court erred for several reasons

in that summary judgment decision.

First, it failed to find disputed issues of fact

and questions of law over whether the town waived

the untimeliness issue by both their conduct

and by deciding the decision on the merits.

The trial court also refused to apply the de novo standard

review to review all the evidence below

before making a decision.

And the trial court essentially created

a new jurisdictional prerequisite

that New London Hospital had to affirmatively raise

the issue of accident mistake or misfortune

itself independently before the selectmen

or else the trial court could not consider

any of that evidence.

And New London Hospital submits that the trial court

erred in all those respects.

Now to get there, some of the timeline

in chronology matters.

New London first sought an exemption in 2015.

Newport requested a bunch of documents.

New London Hospital's attorney,

longtime attorney Mark McHugh, assisted in that.

In October of 2015, they denied the application.

We later learned that the selectmen

never applied the elder trust factors at all

when they denied it.

February of 2016, the CEO of New London Hospital

writes to the town saying,

hey, we want to negotiate.

We believe we're entitled to an exemption.

We've given you the documents.

We'd like to have a meeting to discuss this.

Then, so this is February of 2016.

And we learned in discovery in the case

that in early March of 2016,

the town sends out reminders

to everyone who had gotten an exemption before.

But even though they knew

that New London Hospital was looking for one,

excluded New London Hospital from that reminder list.

But isn't it true that all the other organizations

that had received those reminders

were actually exempt, had gotten exempt status beforehand?

That is correct, Your Honor,

but we would argue that that goes to the equal protection claim

that we were seeking,

that that's a false categorization

and that has no rational basis

because charitable exemptions are required

to be renewed and sought every year.

So every year is a new class.

So the fact that someone had received an exemption

for the prior tax year,

it's not appropriate classification

to exclude New London Hospital,

particularly when they knew

from the February correspondence

that New London Hospital was seeking a charitable exemption.

We're not asking or suggesting

that Newport would have to have a universal policy

of just alerting every single resident,

but they had facts specifically knowing

that we were interested,

New London Hospital was interested in that

and refused to or omitted them.

And then, so that happened.

And then the end of March,

for the first time,

Newport raises a conflict of interest

requiring New London Hospital's long-time counsel.

Now have to leave and New London Hospital

find new counsel for this exemption case.

That was three weeks before the deadline though, right?

Yes.

And so there's nothing that would have prevented

prior counsel from advising the hospital

as to the date on which the application was due.

Was there?

I'm not aware of anything that would have limited it,

but for the fact that once the conflict has arisen,

it is unclear to me whether ethically

could provide advice to the town on that issue

once the other counterparty

has raised the conflict of interest really at that point,

probably had to remain neutral

and not provide any advice.

So I'm not sure where that timeline is

in the record before the Superior Trial Court

didn't get into that level of detail.

So that happened.

What's the support for the proposition

that the DeNovo Standard Review applies

to accident mistake or misfortune?

The Supreme Court has not developed this analysis much.

I couldn't find a Supreme Court opinion

from this Court directly on the issue.

The 319 Daughtry decision in our papers

from Judge Delcourt, it's a trial court decision,

talks about a DeNovo Standard Review.

These statutes also talk about DeNovo Standard Review

that the BTLA has, which by implication

would suggest that the trial court

has a DeNovo Standard Review as well.

So if there's a DeNovo Standard Review,

it's unclear how you can have a DeNovo Standard Review

on the merits or the underlying decision

without also a DeNovo Standard Review

on the accident mistake and misfortune.

If you look at the step.

If there's not a DeNovo Standard Review

on accident mistake or misfortune,

is that fatal to your case?

No, Your Honor.

Even if it were an abuse of discretion

or lower standard under the facts of this case

particularly the unique facts of this case,

it would not be fatal because of the course

of conduct of the town as we're going on.

And as I was indicating,

so you have this March timeframe, this happens.

And then New London Hospital files the A9 form

on May 19th and files the A12 form on May 23rd.

The other statutory deadline

that the town doesn't like to talk about

is the other statute says the A12 has to be filed

by June 1st.

So realistically, there's nothing the town can do

or should do until after that June 1st deadline.

And by that June 1st deadline, the A9 form was filed

and the A12 form was filed.

And.

That's sort of injecting a prejudice standard

into our analysis.

Prejudice but also just statutory scheme.

Because if you look at the Marist decision from this court

it talks about not engaging

in a hyper-technical analysis regarding the interpretation

and remembering the policy basis behind

of giving charities that qualify tax exemptions

and not setting up overly legalistic hurdles for that.

And so I would submit it's less about prejudice

but also more about timing.

If April 15th were fatal,

why would there need to be a June 1st deadline?

So that's why from our position,

it's really the June 1st deadline

and also the statute itself also gets a final end date.

The absolute deadline is when the state sets

the tax rate for that year.

That in this case did not happen until November of 2016.

That can't possibly be the deadline

for filing an application though, right?

No, no, that's 100% correct.

That just says that after that deadline,

after this tax rate has been set,

the select when are not permitted by statute

granted exemption that sets the bright line

outer limit too far.

But again, even that shows a construct

there's no reason why the April 15th deadline

has to be the sort of Damocles hanging over

someone's head and drop it down on this

and be fatal for this,

particularly in light of a couple other facts

that are important.

Right after these filings,

the town met with Newland and hospital

for multiple hours to talk about the exemption.

They never raised the fact

that the 2016 filing was late.

They never raised or mentioned,

hey, by the way, we need it.

Are you saying, excuse me, Mr. Johnson,

are you saying that arises

to the level of municipal estoppel?

I'm not saying it rises

to the level of municipal estoppel.

I'm well aware of the burden on estoppel

that this court has articulated.

What I'm saying is the statute itself,

7223C Roman I,

doesn't actually say that it is the applicant

or the taxpayer that has to provide this information.

It just says the selectman have to be satisfied.

That's a different language.

And what I'm arguing is that under the particular

circumstance of this case,

where you have somewhat a town

and the applicant actively engaged

in a substantive discussion

about the merits of a charitable exemption.

I'm not saying a estoppel,

but it'd be incumbent upon the town

if they think that they needed this jurisdictional accident

mistake or misfortune prove to at least say it.

Well, you're discussing a different tax year

at that, during those meetings, correct?

We're discussing, absolutely right, Your Honor,

but we're discussing a different tax year,

but they're required to,

each tax year is treated differently,

but the ongoing business operations

of the Newport Health Center,

they're not radically changing year over year over year.

The point of fact, the cases have been consolidated

at the trial court all the multiple years

are consolidated because Judge Tucker found

that there's enough symmetry and repetition of this

that it would be more efficient to do it that way.

So while I agree, statutorily they're treated

as a one-off basis, the underlying analysis,

the elder trust factors by definition

spill over a little bit.

The town is seeking documents from 2016

in support of their case,

even though this case is up on appeal.

So again, the financial documentation and the proof

collapses on itself a little bit as well.

So again, we're not saying that the town had to burden,

but under the circumstances,

the town had to do more than sit quietly.

In August, the minutes show

that they're reviewing the application.

If it was untimely and it was time barred,

why didn't they just say it?

And then in August 29th, when they denied,

I think it's very important to look at the minutes.

There was a motion actually to deny it solely

on untimelyness basis and that motion failed.

They denied it untimely basis and also on the merits.

So that's a merits-based decision.

The town is trying to argue this sort of construct

where you have to be,

you have the debt,

they couldn't even receive the application.

Well, that is belied by the conduct of the town anyway.

And if that were the case,

the logical extension of that is the town,

if you missed 415 on any tax year on 416,

the town could deny it and say,

you didn't submit anything for on time

for accident mistake or misfortune.

And therefore you're out of the gate

and if you take their arguments to the logical extreme,

and oh, by the way, the trial court

doesn't have any ability to review that

because there was no presentation

of accident mistake or misfortune

to the selectman below,

which would then undercut the ability

to have a DeNovo review.

So essentially it creates,

you can't have a system where the selectman,

essentially by their own actions,

get to decide the level and scope

of what is presented on appeal.

Have we noticed that?

Is it your position that there is a material issue

of fact as to accident mistake or misfortune

that precludes the entry of summary judgment?

Absolutely, your honor.

The affidavits in supporting material submitted

on the summary judgment most

would create multiple material issues of fact

relative to the town's conduct,

relative to the interactions

and relative to whether that would give rise

to accident mistake or misfortune.

But Judge Tucker ignored that

because he determined that the hospital waived.

That's right to make that argument, is that right?

Yes, Judge Tucker's order did not weigh

any of the evidence

or make any of those conclusions

because Judge Tucker concluded

that he couldn't even get beyond it

or he could not consider the accident mistake

or misfortune.

So what was the mistake

that your controller didn't realize

that had to be filed on an annual basis?

Mistake was two-fold.

One, New London had never done it before in Newport.

She mistakenly thought it was like the federal tax,

tax exempting which once you seek it, you get it.

It's a one-time event.

And so it was just a mistake

and then they lost their counsel

as some of the BTLA cases say

it's also function she wears many hats.

This is a nonprofit company

and while it provides medical care,

the administrative staff wear many hats

and it just was not aware as a mistake.

The classic example of mistake of overconfidence

or mistake on that front.

So that's why that happened.

But again, there's all this timeline there

where the town could have said,

hey, give us some information about this, explain it.

There's information in the record

that the judge didn't consider

that the town actually reached out

to another potential nonprofit on May 19th,

the same date that we filed our A9.

And so that can't possibly be too untimely

and they denied their application

but not on timeliness grounds.

They reached on the merits.

All right, I see my time is up.

Yes, and you still have two minutes.

All right.

Thank you, Mr. Johnson.

Mr. Hage.

Good afternoon, Your Honor.

May it please the court.

My name is Jamie Hage

and I appear on behalf of the town of Newport in this matter.

First of all, just in terms of context,

I'd like the court to understand

that the Newport Health Clinic was taxed,

has been taxed every year by the town of Newport.

The first year they applied for a tax exemption

was a charitable tax exemption was in 2015

and that exemption was denied by the board.

But we're talking about the 2016 tax year.

So why should that first point you make

matter to our analysis?

It doesn't matter to your analysis, Your Honor.

I just wanted you to understand the context

because a Pellant has articulated a number of facts

that are clearly irrelevant and immaterial

and I just wanted you to understand that context.

So the issue of tax exemption on the merits

has been fully joined for a number of tax years

and the question here if we were to say,

well, they should have been allowed

to go ahead on the merits

then the case would just get lumped in

with the 15, 17 and 18 tax years?

That's correct, Your Honor.

But you have to look at the issues in this case

and what Judge Tucker did in this case.

The procedural requirement under the statute

under 72, 23 C is a mandatory requirement

because the hospital failed to follow the statute

and the mandatory requirements under that statute.

It's as if it didn't file an application

for a tax exemption for the 2016 tax year.

But it seems that argument.

Excuse me then, how do we deal with the fact that they,

the town reviewed this application on the merits?

As Judge Tucker pointed out,

what the board did was make two alternative findings.

They found it was untimely

and they made an alternative finding

that they didn't qualify.

But the fact that they made alternative findings

doesn't vitiate against a finding that it was untimely

and therefore that motions that summary judgment

should not have been granted.

So in other words, I think it was just a belt

and suspenders approach by the Board of Selectment.

They just made a decision that it was untimely

and on the independent grounds that,

in the alternative that it didn't qualify.

I mean, that happens all the time in pleadings

where people plead alternative grounds.

At what point does the applicant have to submit

and to whom the evidence of accident mistake or misfortune?

That's clear in the statute, Your Honor,

that it has to be submitted to the Board of Selectment.

They have to consider it.

And that's what the statute says.

They must be satisfied that the reason it was late

was for accident mistake and misfortune and not neglect.

In this case, the 2016 tax year,

they presented no evidence.

They offered no evidence or reason for the late application.

It says rate on the A9 application

that it's due on April 15th of the year.

So when they filed in 2015, they knew what the procedure was.

They're being disingenuous to say after the fact

because they blew the deadline in 2016

that somehow they should be able to resurrect it.

These procedural require, if you don't affirm

the decision of the trial court

in granting this motion for summary judgment,

then you will be rendering the procedural requirement annullity.

Well, but the procedural requirement here,

it seems to me you're sort of reading out

the last sentence of 23C because it gives,

this isn't a hard deadline.

I mean, it's one of the more forgiving deadlines

we have in the statutes that,

oh, well, this is the deadline, but if you miss it,

you can go to the selectman

with this accident mistake and misfortune.

So there is built-in flexibility.

A narrow, there's a narrow exception

to the mandatory April 15th deadline.

And the narrow exception is,

and the burden is on the taxpayer,

they must proper the reason for a late filing.

And you're saying that wasn't done in this case?

Oh, clearly it wasn't done in this case.

They never, and they had ample opportunity to do it.

What was the proper standard of review by the trial court?

Your opponent says it's de novo

and that was not followed.

No, well, the proper standard for review

by the Superior Court was to really make an adjudication

as a matter of law based on the statutory

interpretation of the statute.

In other words, it didn't have,

if they didn't preserve that issue for appeal,

then there was nothing for the Superior Court

to consider on appeal.

But there's no process by which they could file a motion

for re-hearing or reconsideration

of the selectman's decision, is there?

Well, sure.

If you look at the statute, Your Honor,

the drop dead date, if you will,

no exemption can be granted after the tax rate is set.

That's also when the statute,

and that happens in November of each year.

These dates that are in the statute are not arbitrary.

They're there to be consistent with the process

for establishing the tax rates for the town.

And so the April 15th deadline is important.

The June 1 deadline for the A-12 is important.

And once the tax rate is set,

after they got the decision that their application

for 2016 was denied, I think they got that in September

of 2016, they still could have offered,

because the reason was that it was untimely,

they never offered a reason to the board

for the late filing.

Had they offered a reason,

then there would have been a record

that the Judge Tucker or the trial court could have reviewed.

That didn't happen here.

Not only, and also, when they appealed this decision

to the Superior Court for the 2016 case,

there was nothing in their pleadings,

in their complaint about a late filing

or any circumstances to justify it.

These were all, I say, a contrivance after the fact.

There was nothing in their complaint about it.

Yet in our answer, we made it very clear

that it was a late filing

and that it was a jurisdictional,

it was really a jurisdictional prerequisite.

And in other words-

Where is it stated in the statute

that failure to argue accident mistake

or misfortune will operate as a waiver

and that you can't pursue that at BTLA

or the Superior Court?

I guess it's just in the fair reading

of the statute itself, Your Honor.

In other words, the only exception

to the mandatory April 15th deadline

is if you taxpayer file late

but offer circumstances that show

that it was accident mistaken and misfortune

and not neglect to the satisfaction

of the Board of Selectment.

And truth be told, there was no evidence

the trial court could have reviewed.

Exactly, and Judge Tucker said that.

There was nothing to review.

If nothing was preserved,

there was no record at the Board level,

then there was nothing for the trial court to consider.

So I come back to this,

he granted a motion for summary judgment

because there were no issues

of material fact and dispute.

Despite everything that the hospital has said

about all these facts,

there are only three facts that are important here

and there's no dispute about them.

And these are the only material facts.

Number one, they didn't file by April 15th.

Number two, they failed to offer any circumstances

to justify a late filing.

And number three, they didn't offer,

they didn't make, try to make any offer

to come back to the Board

before they set the tax rate for 2016,

which was set in November.

And I would-

How would they have done that

by a motion to reconsider?

Oh, they could have just-

Any number of ways, Your Honor.

If you look at-

Show up on the doorstep or what?

Excuse me?

Showing up on the doorstep?

No, there were a couple cases cited in our brief.

The Union Congregational case

and one other case

where these were decisions before the BTLA.

And in each of those cases,

what the applicant did

is what the statute you would logically tell you to do.

When they filed the late application,

they filed it with written reasons why it was late.

So in this case,

even though they didn't offer reasons

when they filed the application late,

they could have offered those reasons at a later time.

When they met with the town on the 2015 tax case,

remember the exemption for 2015 had been denied,

but they still wanted to meet with the Board

about the 2015 tax case.

When they met with the Board,

they never talked about the 2016 case

or any reasons for the late application.

That burden was on them to do that.

And when they got to the decision,

they still had from September to November

to offer some explanation for the late filing,

especially when one of the reasons

that was given by the Board for the denial

was the late filing.

Mr. Hayes, do you agree with Mr. Johnson

that if we were to not find in your favor on waiver

that there is a material issue of fact

as to accident mistake or misfortune?

No, and I think we make that very clear in our brief.

The facts that they cite,

there may be facts that are in dispute,

but they're not material.

And the reason is because on accident mistake

and misfortune, even if you assume as true

the facts that they allege, which we dispute,

they do not rise to the level

of accident mistake and misfortune

as that law has been established

where there are circumstances beyond our control.

The most their facts show is that they were negligent

and that can never be a basis for excusing,

that is never accident mistake or misfortune.

Ordinary negligence is all they can,

is all those facts alleged.

So what's the difference between negligence and a mistake?

Well, a mistake can occur for reasons beyond your control.

I'm mistaken about the deadline, the date of the deadline.

That's negligence or a mistake?

That's negligence, that's negligence in my opinion.

Because again, the taxpayer has that burden

and has that duty and has that duty under the statute,

the forms say it, and they've already been through the process.

And so, and there's further requirements to justify

that you need to justify a late filing

if you're gonna file a late.

Let me ask you this.

Do we have to decide what the superior court's standard

or review of the town's actions is

in order to decide this case?

And what is the standard of review

and what's the basis for it?

Not our standard of review, but the superior court's standard?

I think the superior court's,

the superior court standard of review

on the merits of the case is de novo.

But with respect to the procedural requirements

that are mandated by the statute,

the trial court makes a determination

whether or not as a preliminary matter procedurally,

whether those requirements were met.

So let me ask you this.

So if the select men have a lot of evidence

in front of them about accident, mistake, or misfortune

and they just say, no,

there was no accident, mistake, or misfortune,

then it goes to the superior court,

I take it you agree that it's a de novo review

of the facts and the superior court

is empowered to substitute its judgment

for that of the select men

as to whether there's accident, mistake, or misfortune.

Is that right?

That's right.

I would agree with that, your honor.

As long as there was some record established

before the board and the board made its decision.

In fact, that happened in one of the cases

before the BTLA, where the taxpayer offered circumstances

that would justify the late filing

and the board refused to consider it.

So there were no discussions during these meetings

that happened in May or the summer of 2016.

There was no occasion when the board

had the factual information

as to why the application

may not have been filed on the 15th.

That's correct.

In fact, your honor, I believe that those meetings,

the board of select men weren't even at those meetings.

So those, remember, the board has the authority to decide.

I think it was maybe the town manager or.

But if those statements were made

to the town manager or the assessor,

they're not imputed to the board of select men?

No, because only the board of select men

have the authority to make the determination

of whether or not an exemption should be granted.

So if the charitable organization

writes to the assessor or the town manager and says,

well, these are the reasons why we didn't file it on time

and these are the reasons why we should get

a charitable exemption, that information is not,

cannot be deemed to have been shared with the select men.

Well, I would say that if that happened,

those facts would have been shared

with the board of select men.

You know, unfortunately in this case,

unfortunately for the hospital,

they never raised any circumstance

or offered any explanation for a late filing

for the 2016 tax year.

And in fact, the only time they raised

circumstances of accident, mistake, and misfortune

was in response to our motion for summary judgment.

Thank you, councilor.

Your light is on.

Oh, okay.

Can you see it?

Yes, I can.

I was looking at my podium.

I'm sorry.

It's okay.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Attorney Johnson, you have two minutes.

Thank you, Your Honours.

I just want to, we've covered that topic,

but there were two aspects of the appeal.

I have just one final point on the topic

that has consumed most of our time,

which is I would note that if there was

a jurisdictional prerequisite and the statute

was to be interpreted as the town manager

interpreted as the town wishes it to be,

why does the A9 form, which often is prepared

by taxpayers and not necessarily with

the assistance of council, why does that form

not have a box at the very end of it that says,

hey, if you missed the April 15th deadline,

you need to put in here the details of the explanation.

As Justice Bassett had indicated,

the statute is far looser and fuzzier on that.

So I think there's room and that's an important point.

I did want to touch on the other aspect

because we did appeal the denial of the motion to amend.

The motion to amend was the first motion to amend.

It was done early in the case.

The amendment was driven only because we were able

to conduct discovery in the case

and learn for the first time about this mailing list

and this notification process that happened

and we brought an Equal Protection Claim

under to amend the complaint.

Again, Justice Tucker engaged in very little analysis.

His order is basically one page.

He cites a couple of the buzzwords,

but again, there's no analysis about how he reached it.

It wasn't on timely.

Can I just, sure.

Are you precluded from bringing that claim

as a freestanding complaint at this point?

I'm not sure, Your Honor.

The reason we brought it within this context

is because all of these cases are consolidated.

They all relate to the tax exemption case.

We frankly had already done 90% of the discovery

because we already did the papery discovery

on the predicate facts for the Equal Protection Claim.

The parties were together, it would seem like

a tremendous waste of judicial resources

to try to have a standalone case

when one of the reasons I objected to the court's order

was that it would cure the defect

because the Equal Protection Analysis, were we to prevail,

we would, the untimeliness defense would be stricken.

I see my time is up.

Okay, I have a question.

Is there anything you can direct this to

in the record that would indicate

that there was any communication between the taxpayer

and the town in the period between April 15th

and the denial of the exemption

that indicated anything regarding accident mistake

or misfortune?

The only thing in the record is that meeting

that took place where there was not a discussion

about that and the point from the hospital's perspective

is there wasn't a discussion

because it was never identified

that they needed to put on that evidence

and that's part of the mistake.

That had anyone at any point in time said,

hey, we need a background for why you think you qualify.

We of course, absolutely would have done it

and that's the lynchpin.

And you can say the same thing

about the time period from September

when you received the board's decision

to the November date when the tax rate was set?

Contrary to attorney,

Hey, I'm not sure how you,

I don't think there is a mechanism for a motion

to reconsider a selectman's decision

on an exemption under the statutory predicate.

The only remedy at that point was the appeal

was our view of what happened next.

Thank you.

Okay, submitted.

Thank you both.

All right, adjourned.
