Thank you, sir. This is case 2019 0739 appeal of HG Wood Industries LLC. Mr. Stewart. Good morning.

My name is Kevin Stewart. I'm from Bernard & Merrill representing the interests of the lumber

industry's self-insured group, their administrator at the Lawson Group workers' compensation carrier

for HG Woods. I'd like to reserve one minute for a rebuttal. And this is a case where my

client has met all the requirements for second injury fund reimbursement. And what we're here today

is about a denial of this claim from a 21419 letter. And there's, in this letter of denial, there's

four, that's at page 58 of my appendix, there's four paragraphs and there's four arguments.

There's legal error with all four of their arguments. The first reason for their denial

is they said that the claimant had never reached MMI where a PI could be determined.

MMI meaning maximum medical improvement? Yes. Thank you, sir. And they said MMI in the denial.

The problem with this is that there is no MMI requirement in the statute in section 54,

the second injury fund statute. So there is no limiting language in the statute that says you

have to be at MMI. What they've done is confuse section 32 and section 2. There's two definitions

of permanent impairment in the statute. One deals with second injury fund, that's section 2.

And one is section 32, which deals with a permanent impairment award, something totally

separate. Section 32 does have an MMI requirement. So they've simply confused the two sections

of the statute. They're applying the wrong section to this second injury fund case.

So if they remove the MMI requirement, then that reason for the denial goes away. It's legal error.

The second reason for their denial is they said the 825-17 disability was for surgery

and therefore a continuation of the 3-2-15 date of injury. So this is error. This is

exactly the same issue we dealt with, the court dealt with in the appeal of CNA.

Appeal of CNA, there wasn't a second injury. There's a second, there's a subsequent disability

of injury, not a second injury. So it was a continuation of the original injury. And here

they're going on to say the subsequent disability cannot be from surgery.

But again, the statute doesn't have limiting language that says the subsequent disability

can't be from a surgery. In this court, in the appeal of CNA, talked about that language.

In this court, in the CNA said, the statute discusses subsequent disability by injury

in general terms and does not distinguish among causes of future impairments.

So when exactly does your client maintain that Mr. Young's permanent injury occurred?

Is it after the surgery?

He had a permanent impairment prior to the surgery when he was diagnosed with scaphate,

advanced collapse arthritis. And that was the permanent condition in his case.

And you do acknowledge that the only evidence with respect to a permanent injury in the

treatment record stems from nurses filling out a workers' compensation form back in April 2016?

That's the only evidence of a permanent injury?

No, because there's two things going on here. We have Dr. Forrest who says that this arthritis

condition is a permanent condition, which is consistent with common knowledge that arthritis

is a permanent condition. And it's the purpose of the statute is not to hold employers to some

medical standard. It's to encourage employers to hire and retain people with a permanent

condition. And in this case, we have the nurse who says that checked it was a permanent impairment,

but we also have Dr. Forrest who said that that was a permanent condition.

Well, the board is entitled to reject even an unrefuted opinion of an expert, correct?

It does, but it needs to cite medical evidence or some other evidence.

And there's plenty of evidence in the treatment records that other

treaters did not find that this injury was permanent, isn't there?

Those, what they, they never refuted Dr. Forrest's opinion that arthritis was a permanent condition.

What they checked was on the workers' comp forms, they checked either there was no permanent impairment

either for, they said no, or they said it was undetermined, but that's dealing with Section 32

of the statute. That's dealing with the permanent impairment condition

of where there's a permanent impairment award. There's not second injury fund forms.

So there was no doctor or any medical opinion that refuted Dr. Forrest's opinion that this was

a permanent condition. And there was nothing submitted after Dr. Forrest that said this was

a permanent condition. None of those doctors opined on the issue of whether this was a

permanent condition. They were opining whether there was a permanent impairment under Section

32 of the statute. And most of those were talking about conditions other than arthritis.

Would you even need a medical opinion? I mean, arthritis doesn't disappear.

The statute doesn't actually call for a medical opinion. And I think we have a medical opinion

because the part of labor requires it on their administrative forms. But I agree with you,

it's common knowledge. I mean, if someone comes with an amputated arm,

we don't need a medical opinion to say that that's a permanent condition.

And that's the whole purpose of the statute is to encourage

employers to retain people who have permanent impairments.

So it really bears its irrelevant whether or not the employee continued to work.

Is that your position? It's irrelevant. I'm sorry?

That the employee continued to work. That the injury did not prevent the employee from working.

Well, there is evidence that there was accommodations made. But it does go to the

third point. You don't need two periods of disability. That's the third reason

they gave for the denial. They said that the one and only period of disability

happened after the surgery. So they were saying there had to be one period of disability.

But the statute, again, doesn't say two periods of disability. It says subsequent

disability by injury. So whether the claimant had a disability prior to this

is irrelevant in the sense of the statute doesn't require it.

When you read the statute, it says subsequent disability by injury. But the beginning of the

sentence doesn't say prior disability. It says prior impairment. That's the key.

Is whether there was a prior impairment, permanent impairment before the subsequent

disability. If we were to take this argument that you have to have two periods of disability,

a prior disability, every traditional second neutral claim would be ruled out.

Because when someone comes in, take the example of the person who has an amputated

arm and they come in for a job interview, there's been no prior disability paid on that

because it wasn't even a worker's compensation claim with the employer.

So the point of the statute is to encourage employers to hire and retain people

with permanent impairments. Not the prior disability that the fund denied this claim on,

saying you have to have two periods of disability, is not in the statute.

The CAB compounded this error and they said that there was no evidence the fund in the past

had paid for claims where there was no medical treatment for medical treatment following the

original injury. And then maybe the case, this really wasn't before them, but they may have

made errors in the past like an appeal of CNA. They were denying all those appeal of CNA

claims and it wasn't in the statute and the court rejected that.

So it may have been the practice of the fund that denied these kind of claims in the past,

but that's not a proper reason for denying this claim. They need to follow the statute.

How about paragraph number four?

So fourth paragraph says they disagreed with the subsequent disability by injury

that resulted in a greater compensation liability. For disability there's greater by reason of

the combined effects of the preexisting impairment than that would have resulted from

the subsequent disability alone. So they recited back the statute, but they don't make any argument

here about why they're saying we denied the stat, you know, we didn't meet the requirements.

And this is the issue with Dr. Forrest. Dr. Forrest addresses this issue about the combined

impairments. They didn't say there was anything wrong with Dr. Forrest. They didn't put us

on notice and said Dr. Forrest did something wrong. They didn't say anything about the exhibit queue.

They completed the exhibit queue, which the department were asked for. He completed it.

They didn't say there was anything wrong with it. They didn't cite the competing

medical opinion in their record. They didn't say we're relying on this independent exam,

we're relying on this other record, this court and appeal of Wingate. So the CAB should never

even have considered these arguments against Dr. Forrest in the first place.

This court and appeal of Wingate said that the CAB couldn't consider an argument that

the carrier made about reasonableness of medical treatment because they didn't put it in their

medical bill denial and they didn't raise it at the first level hearing. So in this case,

they didn't raise any arguments about Dr. Forrest, the exhibit queue,

cite the competing medical opinions or the medical evidence. So we had no notice of what it was

supposedly was wrong with Dr. Forrest's opinion. In appeal of Wingate, this court said you can't

raise these new arguments at the first time on appeal. The state, the Secondary Refund,

raised appeal of Hisco in their brief. Appeal of Hisco, this court explained what is proper notice.

In that case, the carrier wrote to the Department of Labor and said this independent

medical exam says the condition is no longer work-related and therefore

that was proper notice. There was no mention of the competing medical opinion here

and so they should never have addressed it. But if they did,

Dr. Forrest gave uncontradicted opinion about the combined impairment. None of their

treating doctors addressed that issue. He's talking about the surgery. They're not citing

any medical records post-surgery like Dr. Forrest is talking about the surgery. So none of them are

even relevant. They're mostly red herrings. Their workers' comp forms, again, they're focused on

Section 32, check no permanent impairment, which, again, is not relevant to this issue of the

combined impairment. They don't cite any doctor after Dr. Forrest. So there really is no,

even if they get to that argument, they're talking about a bunch of evidence that has

nothing to do with the issue that Dr. Forrest addressed. So we don't think any reasonable

fact finder could object to this based on the evidence that was presented when they never

presented any documents post-Dr. Forrest to say this is why he's wrong or in the evidence

they cited simply has no bearing on this. So are you saying the disability occurred when

original injury to the rest and the permanency occurred post-surgery?

The original, the permanent impairment occurred when he had permanent arthritis in his wrist.

And then the, there's evidence in the record that the employer had to accommodate that. It's in

the medical record and that they've accommodated by moving him to a different job. The guy was a

laborer at a lumber yard and they moved him to become a forklift driver. And instead it's in the

medical record it says it's an accommodation. They're talking about his wrist arthritis injury

and they say the employer has been accommodating him by moving him to, so that's when

and the employer had documentation that he had arthritis. And the evidence, there really

is no other evidence. Again, we don't, the Department of Labor requires a worker's comp form,

excuse me, but the statute doesn't actually say you need a medical opinion, although we've provided

it, but there's really no competing it. They don't have a doctor that says arthritis is not a

permanent condition. They have worker's comp forms saying this gentleman doesn't have a permanent

impairment on section 32, which is a different issue and not the one addressed by Dr. Forrest.

If there's no further questions. You still have one minute and rebuttal if you need it.

Thank you. Ms. Neville. Good morning. Good morning. Good morning and may it please the court. My

name is Heather Neville and I represent the special fund for second entries in this appeal. I'm

willing to take questions at any time. What about the argument about the confusion between

section 2 and section 32? As far as permanency goes. Yes. It's interesting the argument that's

being made because the record that's being relied upon by the carrier in this case is that a record

from Nurse Sylvester, which is dated April 4th, 2016, and the only documentation of a permanency

is that worker's compensation form that's being identified by the carrier as pursuant to

RSA 281A section 32. So the one solo document they have from a treating provider that references

a permanent impairment is that exact form. So then the fund considered the form that was

completed by that nurse April 4th, 2016 against the exact same form completed by the treating

provider, the doctor, about a month later. But do you agree that there appear to be arguing

that section 32 isn't the applicable standard? No matter what form was used, that's not the

standard that should be applied. I agree with that statement. But they can't have it both ways,

right? That's basically what you're saying. If they're going to rely on Nurse Sylvester's form

under that section, then they should consider all the forms under the same section. Yes.

As relevant to the standard at any rate. Right. Because I think we're all in agreement that

the standard is under section 2 RSA 281A 214. That's the permanency standard. As far as when

arthritis becomes permanent, that's the standard that we're using to make that determination. So

the documentation that the carrier and employer are using to say that they had noticed that there

was a permanency in this context under that section of section 2 is that form that's being

argued as under pursuant to section 32. So is it relevant whether or not the employer

became aware of the injury and the permanency of the injury? Is that an element? Yes. So

employer knowledge is an element under 281A 54 section 3. And so there needs to be written

documentation that the employer was aware of a preexisting permanent impairment.

So what's the evidence of the knowledge of the employer?

The evidence submitted in this appeal by the appellant is that

documentation by Nurse Sylvester, that one form. Excuse me. Justice Hans Marconi has a question.

Oh, thank you. Isn't the treatment plan evidence of the impairment

to the extent that there were three options watchful waiting, a series of injections,

which the claimant had, and ultimately culminating in the surgery? And so wouldn't we take from that

that pain from the arthritis was a continuing condition? So my response to that is the pain

from the arthritis or the risk condition as it was developing from the initial date of injury

does not in and of itself qualify for reimbursement under the Second Injury Fund. So it's completely

appropriate in the underlying work workers compensation matter to consider that and to

consider those arguments related to other issues. But for reimbursement from the fund,

we're bound by the statutory elements in RSA 281A 54. Can pain be an impairment?

Pain may be an impairment, but we would be bound by what the documentation and evidence in the case

is. And again, to have a permanent impairment in this context, you specifically must have

that the condition is permanent. That's the first section of a three prong definition.

The second is that the condition must be due to injury or disease. And the third

is that the condition must be of, quote, such a seriousness to constitute a hindrance

or obstacle to obtaining employment. So that's right. And here and here was there any evidence

that the condition resolved? No, and I think that's what the carrier takes issue with is the

reference to not reaching maximum medical improvement or MMI. My position is that that

language or that additional commentary does not in any way take away from the statutory

requirements in order to access the fund. So the fact that there was additional language

provided in the denial letter, the denial letter is part of the packet, it clearly references the

statutory elements that must be met. And it's our position that those elements have not been

satisfied. And finally, and then I'll mute myself again. Does there need to be documentary

evidence of the accommodation by the employer or is the employer's assertion enough?

So as far as the accommodation, the fact that there may have been an accommodation, I think,

is being used to fit into that third prong of the definition of permanent impairment in this

context. So whether or not it constitutes constituted a hindrance or obstacle to obtaining

employment. My reading of the evidence in this case is that a medical provider did not

suggest or recommend the accommodation that the employer gave. Rather, I believe it was

Mr. Young providing that additional information. So the recommendation that he used a splint

or a brace on his wrist, that's not an accommodation? Arguably that could be an

accommodation, but that doesn't make it a permanent impairment. So the fact that

there's an accommodation during the course of treatment from the original injury where

conservative treatment is being attempted and ruled out and the next phase of the

treatment occurs doesn't make it a permanent impairment. Does the record support the

carrier's assertion that the fact that Mr. Young became a forklift driver

constitutes an accommodation by the employer?

There is documentation in the record that supports that that occurred and that the intent

of the employer, which I'm not taking a position on, was to accommodate Mr. Young's

evolving wrist condition, but that accommodation in and of itself does not meet a statutory

requirement. Even if we assume, which I'm not admitting, that that did somehow satisfy

the third prong of the definition, it doesn't get us to where the carrier wants us to be at the

end of the day because the other required statutory elements have not been satisfied.

You make the same argument with respect to just a sixth observation that

arthritis doesn't go away?

That arthritis doesn't go away. The argument I make to that is that we are bound by the

statutory definition of a permanent impairment in this context, which are those three

elements. So whether or not a condition is permanent and may not go away, like diabetes

or arthritis or anything else, it may not rise to the level of being a permanent impairment

in the context of the second injury fund reimbursement until those three prongs are

meant to meet the definition of a permanent impairment and then we move on to the

remaining statutory elements.

I thought it was just the condition, not necessarily the impairment that had to be

permanent under the statutory language.

It's a preexisting permanent impairment. That's the statutory language.

And then the permanent impairment in this context is defined by that definition under

RSA 2A1A214.

If we conclude that Mr. Young suffered a permanent impairment, do we have to then

conclude that the surgery is a subsequent disability?

No. That's another element. So RSA 281A541 has three elements.

One that the employee has a preexisting permanent impairment.

That's what we've been talking about. And I think at that point the discussion's over.

We don't move on. But if that was found, there was a permanent impairment,

as defined by 281A214, the employee must have suffered a subsequent work-related

disability by injury. And it's in the evidence, it's the carrier that's making

the assertion that the surgery is an injury. And the case that's being relied

upon frequently is the appeal of CNA. That discusses what an injury is, a harm

in our opinion. It's certainly not surgery, which is ongoing treatment for a condition.

The intent of the surgery was, presumably, that was voluntarily underwent,

presumably not to further harm or create a greater disability than what the individual

had prior to opting for that surgery. And then if we find the permanency existed,

which I dispute, and if we find that the surgery was a subsequent work-related

disability by injury, which I dispute, then we still have to fill the third statutory

requirement that the combined effects of the preexisting permanent impairment

and the subsequent disability, in this case, the surgery and following,

resulted in compensation liability for a disability that is greater than would have

been resulted from the subsequent injury alone. So I don't see how we meet that

prong either, given the evidence in this case and the undisputed facts.

And our standard of review is deferential to the CAB.

I apologize. What was it?

Our standard of review is deferential, correct?

Yep. The standard is in our briefs. I don't think there's any dispute there.

And it's the burden remains with the carrier, the appellant in this case,

to prove that the board was unreasonable or legally erroneous.

And yes, everything, all the facts before them are considered prima facie, a lot of

all.

Don't we have law that says that Dr. Forrest's opinion should basically control in this case?

No. I disagree. I have the case law in my brief.

The board appropriately evaluated Dr. Forrest's expert medical opinion and then

articulated in their decision that they relied upon the competing underlying medical records.

We've cited the appeal of McDermott, 142, and New Hampshire 807.

And the board's decision discusses Dr. Forrest's opinion.

And then specifically notes the competing underlying opinions contained in the

treating records from Mr. Young's providers.

Again, the decision is that the appendix at page 30 to 32.

And then the board specifically says it's giving more weight to the treating providers

records, which is consistent with our case law.

And then easy references appeal of Keyhole, 142, New Hampshire 412.

And then I cited the case law that says even if you have an

contradicted expert opinion, you don't necessarily have to take that as fact

if there are other factors that you can reasonably rely upon.

In this case, the underlying treating providers.

So I'm happy to further flush out permanency or if there's any other aspect

of the case that you want me to touch upon before we submit.

Here's just a question.

If the surgery were unsuccessful and caused additional injury, would that change our analysis?

You just mentioned previously this was treatment for an ongoing condition, but

let's just say it didn't work out and caused further impairment.

Is that a different analysis then?

I mean, not to be flippant, but every case is fact driven.

So that would be a separate analysis, but I don't think that that would satisfy the

statutory requirements.

Because again, in my position, there's no pre-existing permanent impairment to

even get to that part of the statute.

But hypothetically, even if there was, the surgery ends up being unsuccessful.

And it's yet another mechanism of treatment for the original injury.

I do not think that the intent of this fund, as defined by statute, or the plain language

of the statute would fit surgery that one voluntarily opted for to fix an existing

condition.

I do not think that that is a subsequent work-related disability by injury as

required by the statute.

Your position is that the claimant here voluntarily underwent surgery?

I believe that's noted in the records that, yes, there were a variety of conservative

options.

He went through with his providers at different visits.

There were discussions about the splinting, the quarter zone injections,

the other opportunities to have conservative treatment.

And then he opted and elected for this.

And I think the operative note does say this is a voluntary surgery,

attempting to correct his condition.

And I'm not taking any issue with the choice that he made to have that surgery.

I am just taking the facts we have in this case and applying it to the statutory requirements.

So if he had made a different choice and stayed with more conservative treatment,

would that affect our analysis?

I don't know if we would be before you, because I don't know what the subsequent

period of disability by injury might be to be here on this appeal.

But you don't even get there, because it's your argument that the original injury is

not permanent injury.

I think there's one injury.

So that the date of injury, the March 2nd, I think it's 2015 date of injury,

is the injury that then evolves over time, which I think is pretty consistent in

a variety of injuries, including many before the workers' compensation

appeals board, and that as part of the treatment, there was this option for surgery.

So we don't see the surgery as a distinct injury or as a distinct event

that caused a work-related subsequent period of disability.

Just to confirm, this issue here has nothing to do with whether Mr. Young can continue

to receive benefits, right?

I think that's an important point.

I did have it at the beginning of my paper, but I slid right over it.

Mr. Young, the claimant in the underlying workers' compensation matter is not

impacted in any way.

This is a fund created by money from the insurance carriers

to reimburse the carriers in these specific instances as defined by the statute.

So he's not impacted in any way.

Thank you.

You don't have to use all your time.

I appreciate it.

I was looking at you because I wasn't sure if I completely answered a prior question,

but I appreciate it and I submit the dates.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Mr. Stewart.

Thank you.

So a couple of points.

One, in regard to the workers' medical form, we're not relying solely on the workers'

medical form to check yes.

We're relying on the fact that there was a diagnosis of arthritis,

which the employer was aware of.

The statute doesn't actually even call for a medical opinion,

but we've provided that, that arthritis itself is a permanent condition.

And that, when the employer had that knowledge,

that's when they had the knowledge of a permanent impairment.

And there's no dispute that they had in the evidence that they had that knowledge.

And that's, and there's no dispute.

There's nobody disputing that arthritis.

There's no medical opinion disputing that arthritis is a permanent condition.

So that's that first point.

The second point is that the CAB also committed error here

when they said the accommodation had to be from a medical doctor.

Again, in the statute 54, there's nothing that says the accommodation

or section two that says it has to be from medical doctor.

If the employer is accommodating the work injury,

which is what the evidence supports,

that is sufficient to show a hindrance to employment.

This is the facts here.

He's working as a lumberman.

He no longer can work that.

They have to accommodate it for the work injury and move them to a forklift.

That's obviously going to be a hindrance to employment in that field.

And if there's a statutory interpretation,

it should be liberally interpreted in favor of granting access.

Thank you.

Thank you, council.

Case submitted.

Courts in recess.
