Okay. All right. Good morning. Good morning. Good morning. The matter before the court is Bellevue properties versus Town of Conway and 13 Green Street properties. Bellevue is represented by Attorney Royal Tilsley. The Town of Conway is represented by Peter Malia. And 13 Green Street properties is represented by Derek Lick.

Mr. Tilsley has reserved one minute of rebuttal. And when you're ready, Mr. Tilsley, you may proceed.

Thank you. May it please the court, Roy Tilsley from Bernstein, Shore, Sawyer, and Nelson. On behalf of the petitioner repellent, Bellevue Properties, Inc., I'm joined off camera six feet away by my colleague, Christina Ferrari.

And as Justice Hicks noted, I have reserved one minute for rebuttal. In Town of Hinsdale versus Town of Chesterfield at 153, New Hampshire 70, this court established a substantive legal standard for review of road discontinuance cases.

That standard balances the aggrieved party's interest in the road's continuance against the burden that maintenance of the road will impose on the top.

Our position in this appeal is that the court misapplied both elements of this balancing test.

McMillan Lane provides the only public access to my client's hotel from the busy Route 16, Route 302 corridor in Conway.

That's my question, and sorry to interrupt. There's a, if you will, there's a maze of access points, but my understanding is this is the only public way access point.

The others all cross various sections of private roadways.

From Route 16 and 302, this is the only complete public access, correct?

Is there a public access from North South Road?

There is.

Okay.

Obviously, 16302 is the busy corridor. We have no frontage on that corridor, so public access is very important to the hotel.

McMillan-

Your client has an easement over McMillan Lane, is that right?

They do not have an easement over McMillan Lane. They have an easement over Settlers Green Drive.

So they rely on settlers to honor and maintain that easement.

I would point out that in the 21 years or so that my client has owned the property, we've already lost some easement rights on the parcel actually in question in this case, as a result of frustration and purpose and changed economic conditions.

So even an easement doesn't provide the same level of protection as a dedicated public way that the town is obligated to open and maintain.

In this case, the replacement for McMillan Lane will not involve a private easement, it will be a privately maintained road, but we will not receive an easement on it.

Was there consideration for Bartlett Road extension to be dedicated as a public road?

It certainly wasn't put before the voters in that sense. There's no obligation for the town to accept it as a public road.

Is it possible that when it's built that the town might put it to a vote of the voters?

It's possible, but there's no promises or guarantee on that. And as best I can tell, there's no plan to do so.

And the last question, and I'll stop interrupting you. Did the mortgage holders for your client weigh in on this?

The mortgage holders for my client have not weighed in on this. But certainly, you know, there is possible concern if we were ever to lose our access from Route 16 and Route 302.

So I'm going to interrupt you for a minute, Mr. Stillsley, so I understand. This proposed new road, did you say your client will not even have an easement over the new road?

Correct. It will be a private way. It is a condition of planning board approval that in order to build their grocery store, the settlers, interveners, will build and create and provide access over this private way.

To your client?

To the public in general, including my client.

But it will be a privately maintained road. It will not be a public highway.

The Hibsdale balancing test was carefully crafted by this court in 2005.

It is similar to the test that the court uses in analyzing appeals of road layouts.

That's sensible. If you look at RSA 231, 48, proceedings are very similar in terms of layouts and discontinuances in the standards.

But the statute doesn't provide that the maintenance costs are the sole consideration that needs to be taken into consideration, does it?

I mean, I think as the court said in Hinsdale, the statute doesn't provide much.

And the court in Hinsdale crafted the standard and said, you know, in so many words, this is the best we can do.

If we have a wrong legislature, feel free to craft legislation to change it.

That hasn't happened.

But in Hinsdale, the only consideration for Chesterfield to discontinue that road would have been the maintenance cost.

So that's why, isn't that why we crafted that balancing test for that case?

No, I think the balancing test is the burden that maintenance of the road would impose on the town.

That's that fraud.

Obviously, one piece of it is the cost.

There could be other burdens on the town.

But in the Hinsdale case, the court said, well, one of the alleged burdens was that it brings in traffic from other town to our town.

And the court said that's not enough to justify discontinuous, but it was a burden.

Here, the only burden in the record is the cost.

The other factors that the trial court looked at in saying there's no burden to the town were not burdens.

They were things peculiar to the developer.

So for a burden, you can have cost.

I think you can have, you know, if it attracts people from other town, if it creates traffic problems, that could be a burden.

If you look at the Hampshire practice treatise by Peter Laughlin on taxation and roads, section 54.04, which was cited by this court in the Hinsdale case.

Attorney Laughlin suggests that if a road is no longer necessary because it's not being used or it's been replaced, say, by a railroad, that that could be a reason for discontinuance.

In this case, it's not everybody was very clear.

We have to replace McMillan Lane.

We can't just discontinue it and let it go.

The only evidence in this case of any burden on the town was the minimal maintenance cost of seven to seventy eight hundred dollars per year.

The court went further, perhaps, than our jurisprudence allows and included the multiple benefits to the town to have a low income housing and a more taxable development.

I think that that's improper to look at benefits to the town.

It's what is the burden of the roadway on the town.

And in this case, you've got two things at play.

This discontinuance was requested by a private developer, settlers, and conveners solely to benefit the settlers and conveners.

There's no evidence that they couldn't develop their land, just that they could develop it more intensely if McMillan Lane went away.

So you're discontinuing valuable public rights to benefit a private developer.

So what would you have us do in this case?

Reverse and remand?

I'd have you reverse.

I think when you when you look at the burden here and you mentioned residential housing in the record, settlers, principal Robert Parsimian testified.

I believe it's at page 108 or so, 108, that there's no plan for residential housing.

So the only burden here is the minimal cost to maintain this small roadway.

When you balance that.

Didn't that same, I'm sorry, I'm sorry to interrupt you, but didn't that same witness testify that he expected that at one point they would develop residential units and on that property for his employees?

I think there was discussion early on the court in this case decided to hear evidence as to what happened at the planning board process after the vote.

So that's now part of the record.

There is nothing in the planning board process that develops any residential housing on the parcel that's being created by discontinuing McMillan Lane.

And Mr. Barsamian testified, I currently have no plans for residential housing.

When you balance that against the interest of my client and the public in the roads continuance, I think the court will have to reverse and remand.

And in this case, I think the trial court fundamentally misconstrued the difference between a public highway and a private road.

We had testimony from Douglas Cohen, the principal of Bellevue, of the importance of access from Route 16 and 302 public access, of the role that it played in their decision to...

Well, I'm sure you pointed it out to the court during the course of the trial.

Did you not?

I did, but the court didn't appreciate the legal distinction between a public highway and a private road.

The court said, well, if it's a private road and we have to rely on settlers or their successors or their foreclosing mortgagees or their bankrupt trustees to maintain it, that's okay.

That's kind of speculative.

Who knows if that's going to happen?

The interests of the parties are aligned right now.

Everybody wants to get customers into the shopping center, hotel, and park.

So their interests are aligned, nothing bad can happen.

Maybe that made sense in 2018 when times were good.

In 2020, where retail has been closed for the last two months, where major retailers are filing bankruptcy.

You know, I hope...

And malls are empty, and many malls are empty.

Hinsdale and Rogers were both decided before the amendment to the Constitution, Article 12A,

Does that change the balancing at all, given that, I mean, it looks like this public roadway was taken, if you will, for private use without an equivalent substitute being provided?

So do we take a look at the balancing test differently?

I think under the balancing test as it exists, we clearly prevail.

That you can't take a public roadway and the benefits that come with a public highway and replace it with a private roadway and say, it's good enough, it's the same thing.

We have to rely on the wherewithal and good intentions of a private party to have access, as opposed to being able to rely on the town's legal obligation.

To say nothing, as you suggest, of its solvency and continuation.

Absolutely.

If that retail mall is empty and they are paying their taxes, they're not going to be plowing.

And we don't even have a right to plow that.

We don't have an easel if we could go maintain it ourselves.

It's a condition of planning board approval.

So this is a true loss to my client.

I mean, the Hampshire law favors the ability of the public to use public highways.

There's a reason we have public highways and not private highways.

For example, you cannot adversely possess against public rights or eliminate public rights by prescription under the statute.

Under the statute, even if a road is no longer maintained or abandoned, the public retains its right to access it as a class six highway.

The loss of a public right to access the property is a serious loss.

And it's not speculative to wonder what's going to happen when settler sells or settler gets foreclosed on or it gets converted to something else.

It's already happened to us in another case where we lost an easel because of changing economic conditions.

So this is not far fetched. And once McMillan Lane is discontinued, it's discontinued.

There's no ability to bring it back.

There's no promise that if settler doesn't maintain Barnes Road extension, that McMillan Lane will be restored as a public way.

We are losing valuable public rights to access our property from the key commercial corridor.

We're a zone commercial. We're a commercial operation.

And all we have now is a planning board condition and the hope that settlers will maintain it and provide us with access and the hope that their successors will closing mortgages, bankruptcy trustees, whatever happens in the future, will continue to do so.

I think when you do the balancing test.

Is there any evidence in the record that settlers have failed to maintain their obligations to maintain the road in the last 21 years?

There's no evidence that they have failed.

There was a threat at one point not to provide access or not plow.

It's in the record.

But I think that's the mistake that the trial court made.

It looked at it and said settlers has been reliable.

Settlers has, you know, there's a common interest right now to provide access.

That's fine, but we're talking about property rights and property rights change as times change.

And when settlers isn't there because they've sold or been foreclosed on, I don't have to rely on the next person to exercise the same good faith.

Or if the mall closes because, you know, COVID shut things down for long enough, I now have to rely on somebody who's got no incentive to buy access.

That's the critical distinction between a private road and a public highway.

When you do the balancing test, I think you'll see that the court heard and that the discontinuance should not have been upheld.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Mr. Lick or Mr. Malia?

Yes, thank you, Your Honor.

May it please the court.

My name is Peter Malia.

I represent the town of Conway.

I will be sharing my 15 minutes today with Attorney Derek Lick, Counsel for Settlers Green.

I'd like to say a few words about the warrant article being challenged today.

And then I would like to share, with your permission, a couple of exhibits from the appendix, which I think will be helpful.

They'll provide an overview of the roads that we're talking about today, as well as the new road that is going to replace McMillan Lane.

So, first, regarding Article 27, I think it's important to point out that the idea to propose the discontinuance of McMillan Lane was the idea of the town's public works director and town engineer, Paul DeLiangeli.

So, it was proposed by the town engineer.

It was supported by the town planner, Tom Irving.

Both of them testified at trial.

It was supported by then-town manager, Earl Sires.

He testified via video deposition.

He recommended it to the board of selectmen.

They supported it unanimously when it was placed on the warrant as Article 27.

I understand the politics of it, Mr. Malio, but isn't this actually a taking or, at best, an inverse condemnation?

I don't believe so, Your Honor.

It's merely a discontinuance, and it's going to be replaced by another road that's going to provide the same access to and from Common Court and Barnes Road,

and it's going to be required to be maintained by Settlers Green at no expense to Bellevue.

Why didn't the town require Settlers to provide an easement for the hotel?

I don't think the town had the legal authority to require Settlers to provide an easement to the hotel.

I believe, if I recall correctly, during the trial, Mr. Barsamian testified that he would give them one if they wanted it,

but I'll let Attorney Lick speak to that.

Why did the town not consider laying out Barnes Road extension?

Excuse me?

Why did the town not consider laying out Barnes Road extension as a public road?

The public works director slash town engineer said that he's always looking for ways to save the town money.

I understand that $7,800 a year is a fairly insignificant amount of money as compared to the town's overall budget,

but it's nevertheless a cost savings.

And Mr. Dele Angeli saw this as a way to save the town a little bit of money and not having to maintain the new road.

Currently, the town owns half of Common Court and Settlers Green owns the other half of Common Court.

And so there's kind of a mixture of town-maintained roads within Settlers Green and Settlers Green-maintained roads.

And maybe this is a good time, Attorney Lick, to pull up the aerial view, number 396.

And while he's doing that, I'll just conclude by saying the vote in April was overwhelmingly in support of Article 234 in favor and 250 against.

The voters were in favor of discontinuing Macmillan Lane.

The planning board later approved the plan, approved them by Settlers.

And you can see the planning board's notice of decision and approved plan in volume 2, pages 27, 98, and 99.

So I guess my point is this discontinuous idea had widespread support in the town of Conway.

And I think the court should be reluctant to overturn a decision that had so much support within the town.

We're looking at an overhead, sir.

Can you show me where Macmillan Road is?

Yes.

Attorney Lick, I believe, I'd like that for you.

While he's doing that, isn't it the case that the town, during the hearing on the warrant article,

considered many things beyond maintenance costs with respect to this proposal?

Yes, that during the deliberations on the warrant article, Your Honor, is that what you said?

Yes.

Yeah, during at the deliberative session in March of 2017, the voters were mainly concerned about making sure that they,

if Macmillan Lane was going to be discontinued, that there was going to be a substitute road put in its place

because it is a heavily traveled connector road, which gets the traffic to and from the north-south road and Barnes Road.

And on the other side of Barnes Road, you have Home Depot and some other shops.

And so the way the warrant article was originally written, it said that Macmillan Lane would be discontinued,

and then the planning board had the discretion to make sure settlers built a replacement connector road.

The voters at the deliberative session changed that language to require the planning board.

I think that the planning board would have done this anyway, but the voters didn't want to take any chances.

So they amended the article to make sure that the planning board would require settlers green to build a new connector road

and that that connector road would not connect to the north-south road because that's a bypass

and the voters didn't want any more disruptions in the north-south road.

So you can see on this...

Were there any considerations about the benefits to the town with respect to developing land that's not developed at present in the tax base increase?

During the deliberative session, Scott Sebald, the general manager of Settlers Green, spoke about, you know,

in general terms, settlers' plans to develop the land on either side of Macmillan Lane.

When the warrant article was brought to the town manager and when he brought it to the board of selectmen,

his recommendation in support of the warrant article included the fact that development of this land on both sides of Macmillan Lane

would be consistent with the town's master plan, which calls for large-scale commercial development in this area of North Conway.

It would allow currently unused parcels of land surrounding Macmillan Lane to be developed.

It would allow more retail and a grocery store to be built.

It would improve the town's local economy and tourism and things that, you know, we hope will be coming back after this.

That land couldn't be developed off Macmillan Lane the way it is?

I'll let Attorney Lick probably speak to that when he speaks about his clients' development opportunities.

I think there were probably some development opportunities in between the current Macmillan Lane

and the state-owned, which is adjacent to the North-South Road.

Right, and there was some public testimony that the abutters feared additional traffic on North-South Road,

and that was the reason for the removal of the condition, if you will, making Barnes Road extension conditional,

because they did not want more traffic on North-South Road,

which now would be the only public way into the Bellevue property, right?

Do I have that right?

Yes, so if you look, well, the two amendments were made to the warrant article at the deliberative session.

One was to make sure a new connector road was built, take the discretion away from the planning board.

The other was to make sure the new connector road did not have a curb cut onto the North-South Road.

You can see Macmillan Lane, which connects Common Court to Barnes Road,

and then Barnes Road then empties back out into Route 16, 302.

Macmillan is the least-traveled access point for the North Conway Grand Hotel,

which you can see in the middle of, Eric, I don't know if you can circle the hotel.

It's in the middle of Common Court.

And Fairway Lane, can't we interrupt, but Fairway Lane is the other public access from North-South Road.

Fairway Lane is the other public access.

So the hotel will still have all public access from the North-South Road and Fairway Lane,

taking a ride onto Common Court.

That's the portion of Common Court that is still a public road,

and that's public access right to the North Conway Grand Hotel.

The hotel has signage on Fairway Lane.

The hotel has signage on its primary access, which is Settlers Green Drive.

The hotel does not have any signage on Macmillan Lane,

which is the least-traveled access point for hotel guests.

The most heavily-traveled access point is Settlers Green Drive,

over which the hotel has a recorded easement.

The next most heavily-traveled access point for the hotel would be Fairway Lane,

often called Common Court Connector.

And then Macmillan Lane, because as Mr. Cohen testified at trial,

there's no signage on Barnes Road or Macmillan Lane for the hotel.

There's no way for the unfamiliar-traveling public to know that they can access

the North Conway Grand Hotel over Barnes Road or Macmillan Lane.

I don't see a clock, so I don't want to take up all of attorney's time.

I think you may have.

Then I will yield to attorney Lick, and Derek, if you want to show the other exhibit,

then feel free to do so.

Good morning, may it please the court.

This is Derek Lick.

I represent the three interveners in the case.

We've been referring to them as Settlers, but they're actually three different entities.

They own all the properties on both sides of Macmillan Lane.

A couple of points that I think are worth noting, given some of your questions.

My clients do own the three parcels on either side of Macmillan Lane.

When Macmillan Lane was created, it actually created a couple of orphan lots.

In other words, lots that are broken off from the other ones that were not developable.

The court will bear with me.

I want to share that screen so I can show you those orphan lots and why those were important to my client.

It's coming up in just a moment.

You should now see a plan with the roads highlighted in yellow and green.

Does everyone see that?

We do.

Thank you.

My clients own three parcels.

This one labeled TG for Tennis Green.

That's actually owned by 13 Green Street.

This property is owned by 1675, and this one is owned by R2.

The property lines are shown here.

Before, with Macmillan Lane as it currently exists, as I'm showing you on the screen,

there are two orphan lots, this one, which is actually connected to this lot over here across the road,

and this little lot, which is actually connected to the Tennis Green lot.

When the town created this road in 1992, it did in such a way that it bisected my client's properties

and made them unusable.

Did your clients own them at the time?

My clients owned two of the three parcels.

It did not own the 1675 lot at that time.

That has been created since 1992.

Was there any eminent domain or taking or damages awarded for those orphan lots?

I do not believe so, Your Honor.

My understanding is that the town took that road because of the beginning construction of North-South Road,

which is ultimately built over to the east of the property.

The important point for us today is to show you that this new road that's going to be built in place,

this Barnes Road extension, goes here.

And you can see how it basically connects the exact same roads and in a very similar location.

The condition of the planning board was to require that this road be made available and open to the public

and accessible 24-7 before McMillan Lane could be demolished or taken away or closed in any way.

Additionally, a testimony at the trial confirmed that if for any reason whatsoever this road is not maintained appropriately,

that the town had leverage over Settlers Green or whoever owned the property at the time.

And that leverage is in the form of revoking their certificate of occupancy,

shutting down all of their development on the lots,

and two, fines that would be imposed by the town.

And ultimately, I understand the court's concern and Belby's concern about potentially the road not being maintained.

But ultimately, the worst possible case scenario here is that for some reason,

Settlers goes belly up, and then the town starts taking over the maintenance again.

And what it's left with is a brand new road.

There's certainly no guarantee that they would.

There's no guarantee that they would, Your Honor.

The place to complain or to raise concerns by Belby is to go to the Board of Selectmen in both instances.

If the town is short on cash or doesn't think McMillan Lane is appropriate for being plowed

as much as they think it should be, for example,

they go to the Board of Selectmen and complain.

If they want to make sure that the Barnes Road extension, they can do the same thing.

But in any event, that road is going to be built to town spec.

It is by requirement, by planning board condition.

It has to be maintained by the public.

And an important point, I'll move on this prior exhibit.

This, again, is in the record.

It's on page 396.

The primary access point for the North Conway Grand Hotel has always been Settlers Green Drive.

This is the main access point to all of the outlets to the hotel.

And, indeed, when the hotel was first constructed in 1990, 89 and 90, McMillan Lane didn't even exist.

It was all through Settlers Green Drive.

And since 1980, actually 88, when the project was created, there's never been a single complaint

that Settlers Green Drive was not properly maintained, not utilized.

And it was testified to at trial by Doug Cohen, the principal for the hotel.

Additionally, the signage for the hotel is down here on Settlers Green Drive.

There's a pylon here and a pylon here.

This is where the public sees the signage for the hotel.

Additionally, there's signage for the hotel.

Yes.

How do you respond to Trent Killsley's argument with respect to the letter that was sent threatening

not to maintain Settlers Green Drive?

Yeah, I think it actually works in our favor.

Let me explain why.

There's been more than a decade of litigation between these parties.

And the hotel has ceased making payments.

It's obligated to provide a share of payment for maintaining these roadways.

The hotel stopped making payments.

There was a lawsuit.

And despite 10 years of non-payment, Settlers still continued to maintain it.

That threat was made prior to that lawsuit being filed.

They sought judicial intervention and actually prevailed.

And frankly, there's yet another suit now in Carroll County working its way to you

because the hotel has stopped making payment again.

But despite not making payment that it's obligated to pay, Settlers has not blocked the road,

has not stopped maintaining the road, continues to plow the road.

So even in times of great acrimony where they haven't received payment from the hotel for 10 years,

in some occasions, they continue to maintain it.

And it's in their best interest.

The testimony at trial was...

Yes.

Does Settlers require the limited balancing test advocated by Attorney Killsley?

We don't think so.

Let me stop the sharing of the screen so we can get to a better view.

Bear with me one second.

The answer is no.

We think the balancing test should consider all the benefits and all the burdens on both parties.

Attorney Killsley is correct.

Is that still allowed post the 2006 amendment to the Constitution?

Are we still allowed to consider benefits to private parties?

I don't think this is a benefit to the private party is what we should be looking to.

It's the benefit to the town.

So here, I think the burden on the town is indeed the $7,800, the expense and the hassle of maintaining the road

that the town engineer said he didn't want to maintain anymore.

That's fine.

But in addition to that, the road also did burden the town in other ways.

It burdened commercial development in an area where the master plan says it should be done.

That's with the orphan parcels, for example.

It also burdened the ability to increase development in that area.

It burdened the ability to increase the tax base.

It burdened the ability to increase jobs.

And frankly, when you balance all of that economic...

Aren't those key low arguments that have been questioned by the Supreme Court, U.S.?

Say that again.

Aren't those key low arguments?

Just indirect benefits.

Private development benefiting the town indirectly.

Isn't that key low?

I think the difference here, Your Honor, is this is not a town taking of somebody's roadway.

This is the town's road.

It's a taking of a public access point.

I mean, is there, does that support a claim for damages?

Even though there are other access points, it is an active access point on a public...

A couple of points, Your Honor.

First of all, we must realize that Bellevue doesn't own any property on this road.

If there was supposed to be any damage, it would be to my clients who ultimately asked

the town how to proceed.

Bellevue doesn't...

Access part of their bundle of sticks, property rights.

Well, if that's the case, Your Honor, then the ability of the town, any town to discontinue

any road would never be able to go forward because the argument would be somebody somewhere

down the road to which this road connects may have a right and an interest in the public

road and therefore the town can never discontinue any road.

I don't think that's the way the statute should be read, nor the New Hampshire Supreme Court

case.

You know, this ultimately started as the idea of the town.

My clients went to the town and said, we have an issue.

We want to develop this parcel in a way that makes sense, is consistent with the master

plan, has the right setbacks, all of those types of things.

And the town said, but we think we have a way to solve this problem.

And as the town engineer, again, all the town officials and the town itself went

forward and did what they did because they thought it was an appropriate thing to do.

And again, we're balancing the interests of Bellevue on multiple fronts.

One is they have other public access.

They have primary access that's always been there for 20 years.

And this third access point, we're talking about a third access point, even that still

is retained.

And the risk of it being shut down is incredibly minimal, given that the town can always step

in if necessary.

And I think it's important to note that the town was careful in its analysis.

And we shouldn't be, in our view, this court should not be basically substituting its judgment

of what benefits the town for an 870 foot small road in the middle of a commercial development.

It should be the town that makes that decision on its own, what interests are best served by

this, it is best served, and they should be able to discontinue a road as allowed by statute.

That's all they were doing here.

Yes, Your Honor.

So you're basically saying that the town took a lot of information, benefits, burdens in

deciding whether or not to discontinue this road, right?

That's correct.

So when the trial court is required to review that decision, why should it be limited to

just the burden?

I don't think it should, Your Honor.

I think that the ultimately, the case that's relied upon, the Hinsdale case, did in fact

focus on the burden in that case, you know, the road expense burden that was imposed upon

the town.

But that's because that was the fact that was raised in that case.

That's what was looked at.

Here, I think the court has the right, and I think they should, in a balancing test, look

to all factors on both sides of the equation.

And here, there's great benefit to the town as determined overwhelmingly by the town.

And there's great protection of Bellevue by requiring an alternative road that has all

kinds of leverage to make sure it's maintained as the town requires.

The town did, in fact, require it.

With respect to the easement, I think one of the justices asked the question of, well,

is Bellevue given an easement?

You're correct.

The town did not require that, but my client has on multiple occasions, and I believe at

the hearing in this case, said, yeah, he'll grant an easement to Bellevue.

It's in his best interest to get this road fully constructed and up to good town spec and

open and used because he needs it to feed his development.

That's the point of building the road and not just seeking to terminate and discontinue

McNeiland Lane.

He wanted a replacement.

Until I can't see the clock.

How much time do you have, Rob?

I don't see the clock either.

It looks like it's all up.

All right.

Thank you very much for the opportunity.

Thank you.

Mr. Tiltley, you have one minute.

Thank you.

Three quick points.

I think Attorney Lick made the point that I've been trying to make about the distinction

between public highways and private roads.

He said that, well, if Settlers goes belly up and doesn't maintain Barnes Road extension,

surely the town will step in and do it for us.

Well, frankly, if it's a private road, we have to hope for that.

If it's a public highway, we're entitled to that.

That's what this case is about.

The second point concerns the argument that McMillan Lane is not the main access to the

hotel or our signs are not there.

Our signs are not there because we don't have property there.

We don't have a right to put signs there.

We'd be happy to have signs there.

The point is not that it's our main access.

The point is that it provides us with a public highway to reach the hotel on commercial property

from the busy commercial corridor.

That's what we're losing in this discontinuous.

Are you saying, Mr. Tilsley, that if I engaged my GPS and drove up Route 16,

it would take me to the hotel through McMillan Lane?

I don't know, number one.

I think if you were coming from the south, it likely would take you through Settlers Green Drive.

If you were coming from the north, it would likely take you McMillan Lane, but I'm just guessing.

Last point, and one of the benefits of this format is when I punt on a question like

Article 12A, I can scramble and research it while anyone else is talking.

I do think that Article 12A supports our point that the court, in doing the balancing test,

cannot look at the benefits to a private developer and use the old, well, this helps the town,

this helps the tax base, the town wants this.

I think 12A clearly establishes that those are private benefits and they're not applicable

when you're taking people's rights away.

Is that an argument you made to the trial court?

No, but I was asked the question and wanted to give a better answer.

In terms of the orphan lots, last thing, all those lots are controlled by settlers.

They could easily do a lot line adjustment to create contiguous lots on both sides of McMillan Lane.

There was an eminent domain taking.

I presume that there was compensation in 1992-93.

I don't know what it was, but certainly there were easier solutions than eliminating the public

highway of McMillan Lane.

Thank you.

Thank you all.

Thank all three of you for your fine presentations.

If you think of any way to improve this process, please pass your suggestions along to Mr. Goudis.

Having said that.
