This is case 2019-0039 in the matter of Glenn Anderson and Laura Anderson.

Good morning, may it please the court. My name is Peter Decato. I represent Glenn Anderson.

I'd like to begin by saying there were three things that we couldn't get out of our minds about this case, and so we appealed.

The first was what was said in the transcript by the trial judge.

That's where the judge said that she knows some judges do cross-calculation

and as the court either knows or learned from the briefs,

trial's calculations occur routinely in the state of New Hampshire

where each party in a shared parenting arrangement becomes an obligor

and you take the difference between the two calculations and somebody pays child support at that level.

She indicated, the trial judge indicated, that she knows judges that do cross-calculations

and she said she might actually do cross-calculation in an appropriate case.

She didn't explain what might constitute an appropriate case.

Isn't that within her discretion?

I think that's the basis of the appeal.

We feel that New Hampshire has a uniform or what they strive to do with the legislature has said

is that in RSA 458C-1 the legislature is telling us the purpose of the statute

is to establish a uniform system to be used in the determination of the amount of child support.

I think the bar is reacted to this and maybe some judges by saying,

well, this is fair if the child's 50% of the time with one person,

50% of the time with the other person,

why don't we just use, see what the numbers are with each being treated as an obligor.

The second thing we can't get out of our minds is the cross-calculation was done originally

in November of 2010 when the parties were first divorced.

So on that occasion there was a shared parenting schedule that was agreed upon

and then they created, that is the parties created child support guidelines

which showed that Mr. Anderson's support obligation would be $2,734.67 a month

and then they flipped it around.

Ms. Anderson's support obligation with her as obligor would have been $1,026.

The difference was $1,708.67 and the parties agreed to a figure of $1,500.

That was the law of the case for eight years and by the way the court approved those guidelines.

With an order to share major expenses, luxury expenses by the parties.

Yes.

Which wasn't fully adhered to allegedly according to the briefs.

I agree.

I think they had an agreement as to quote luxury expenses, things of that nature.

Probably every situation is different.

The third thing that concerned us was that under the New Hampshire law,

guideline was determined this time to be $3,076 which was 100% increase from previous.

Now I practice in the state of Vermont.

And no further sharing of those high luxury expenses.

That's right.

Okay.

I practice in the state of Vermont.

So I knew under the Vermont shared parenting guidelines the result would have been $93.31.

So why should we consider what would happen in Vermont?

We're in New Hampshire.

Well, I think you ought to consider three numbers.

I'm offering the Vermont number to show you what shared guidelines are in another state.

But the third number is if the cross calculation had been used in this case.

I think I have it here someplace.

Yes.

Mr.

Well, I'll just have to go by memory.

I think it was $2,100, something like that.

I know I have it in my notes.

So for that reason, we brought this court case to your attention.

So our basic argument is this.

I've already mentioned RSA 458C1.

In RSA 458C4, the legislature requires the Department of Health and Human Services to do a study to review the guidelines at least once every four years.

And the legislature has said that it wants to ensure that the application of the guidelines results in the determination of an appropriate, I'll emphasize that word, child support award amount.

And I'm suggesting that it's difficult to find this appropriate under these circumstances where you really are leaving it up to the discretion of the judge to deviate from the child support guidelines when the goal is to have a uniform system.

But isn't that part of what the legislature set out in 458 given a presumption and then a set of factors to consider for the trial judge to use to deviate?

I think you have a dichotomy of what the legislature said.

They said on the one hand they want a uniform system to determine the amount of child support.

On the other hand, they said, well, we'll allow a deviation if you prove special circumstances.

And then you have the practice.

I'm suggesting to the court that in practice, many judges, many practitioners used the cross-calculation method.

And I think it's always a concern.

But that doesn't mean it's error or not to.

I'm sorry?

That doesn't mean it's error not to.

It just means that one person is being treated differently than another person.

And I'm giving you these numbers because they can be wildly different.

In this case, for example, if I was correct that it was $2,100 and I think I am, he's paying $3,000.

That's $900 more.

That's quite a difference.

And Ms. Conner says that the first four arguments that you put forth in your brief aren't preserved.

What's your response to that?

Well, I've tried to determine how you preserve.

I was not trial counsel, but I've tried to determine what is it that trial counsel needs to do to preserve an argument.

This issue sort of came out spontaneously when the Appalachian Council brought up the fact that there is no law, he said,

no law that says that you can cross-calculate.

There's a discussion in the record about this, and the trial judge took up that issue.

So I think you have enough in the record so that the issue is preserved.

You have her comment saying she's aware of it, she's aware that other judges cross-calculate, and therefore I think the issue is fairly before you.

Putting aside the preservation argument, it does seem to me that the majority of your brief is really a policy argument about why the law ought to be different than it is,

which would be generally more appropriately made across the river at the legislature than to us.

And I didn't write a very good brief, Judge, because I'm arguing that it's really discriminatory because you have one set of results one way for those that are cross-calculating.

And that's been going on for years. You have one system this way in courts throughout the state, and you have another system the other way where you just apply the strict guidelines, as in this case.

Doesn't that argument apply to any deviation or any different circumstances between families? You'd have transportation, you'd have visitation, you'd have number of children, you'd have all kinds of factors.

I'm saying that the guidelines are really, I think the guidelines are saying to us, the law is saying to us, treat each person as an obligor and subtract the difference.

Somebody certainly has seen the wisdom in that. In fact, the legislature is considering that now.

Council brought up one thing in her brief, and I just wanted to address it, and that is the whether or not Miss Anderson has suffered because of the cross-calculation.

The affidavit in 2010 versus 2018 shows that during that time, despite getting $1,500 a month instead of something else, her retirement account increased by $287,538.

Quite an increased rate of years, and her child expenses decreased by $407 in that time period, yet the child support in this case increased was doubled up to $3,000.

Was there evidence of your client's increase in asset value?

I don't have that, but what was significant in this case is that my client, who is an anesthesiologist, he retired from Dartmouth-Hitchcock, then worked full-time down into London, and he took his retirement.

So he had this surge, and I think that's probably what brought the motion to modify. He had this surge in income of $100,000 a year, and that's what kind of spiked the child support.

I have nothing further. Thank you.

Thank you.

Miss Conner.

May it please the court. Doreen Conner, and I represent Miss Anderson. This court should affirm the guideline-compliant child support order.

The appellant has conceded in his brief that there is no law that supports the relief he seeks. Therefore, this court cannot find that the trial court aired if its order complies with existing law.

As the court just indicated, the policy argument of whether there should be something different, a different uniform support order for shared parenting, is something for the legislature to decide, not this court.

And in fact, it is interesting when you look at the history of the child support guidelines in the context of shared parenting, the legislature has codified this court's decision from 1993 in Wheaton-Dunberger.

That's the first case in which this court looked at shared parenting, and it concluded that despite shared parenting, in order to provide the child with some parity of financial stability between the two households, that it would order support.

That was 1993. At that time, the deviation statute said that the court could simply consider shared parenting or the parenting schedule.

In 2007, the legislature made a very specific change to the statute, and it codified in the statute that, quote, equal or approximately equal parenting residential responsibilities in and of itself shall not eliminate the need for child support and shall not by itself constitute ground for an adjustment.

The legislature has specifically addressed this.

Do you know why?

Excuse me?

Do you know why?

No, Your Honor.

I do not know why.

That prompted that amendment.

I do not know the reason for the amendment, but the fact that the legislature has the ability to change the law if they want to and chose to modify it in a way that codifies this court's decision indicates that the relief which is requested a per se deviation because we have a shared parenting.

That shared parenting is something that the legislature has rejected.

Now what the legislature also did in 2007 is it set for three circumstances that the court could consider in shared parenting to deviate downward.

Mr. Anderson didn't take advantage of any of those, presumably because they weren't going to assist him in his request to lower child support.

Frankly, I don't know why we are here when we have a guideline compliant order because there's nothing that the trial court did wrong.

With regard to the preservation issue, if this court was to address cross calculation, it certainly would need a record to do so.

It has not been my firm's practice to understand that this is, quote, routine.

There's nothing in the record to indicate that it's routine.

There was no evidence presented of other instances where the courts have done such a thing.

In fact, what the judge said is I look at each case individually.

Sir, if you think that there's an appropriate situation for deviation here, give me the evidence.

There was no evidence presented.

And in fact, what the court found here is that there were substantial reasons why a guideline compliant order was appropriate.

First of all, the parties couldn't agree on luxury items.

This child is on a travel hockey team.

The parties were spending $2,250 a year just on hockey.

Now that there's a guideline compliant order, my client is entirely responsible for paying that.

In addition, the court found we're dealing with, it was then a 13-and-a-half-year-old, now 14-year-old growing teenage boy

who eats a lot, is tall, and is expensive to feed and clothe.

And therefore, the court found that a guideline compliant support order was appropriate.

Mom earns $8,400 a month.

Dad was earning $24,000 a month.

Mom was running a deficit each month.

Dad has an extra $8,600 left from his income each month.

The court found specifically that in order to support the child, a guideline compliant order was appropriate.

The House bill that Council references, again, was not in the record, but if you pull it, it's in committee.

But even if that were the law under that particular bill, it contains a provision to give the court the authority

to modify the child support order even in the context of child parenting, or shared parenting.

So even if you were to adopt cross-calculation, the legislature under this bill that has not become law,

it contains a provision to do exactly what the judge did here, where the judge found,

I'm not going to deviate, because it's in the best interest of the child here,

to make sure that there is enough financial resources in the House of Mom to take care of the child.

Therefore, if there are no further questions, we would ask that you affirm the guideline compliant order,

as there's a rebuttable presumption that is correct, and it has not been challenged. Thank you.

Thank you, Council. The court will stand and brief recess.
