This is case 2019-0130 and 2020-0331, State of New Hampshire versus Pamela Mansoula.

Ms. Hausman, before you begin, the record will reflect that justices McDonald and Bassett are disqualified for this case.

So you are looking at the three of us and please proceed.

You're free to take your math stuff if you desire.

I actually would prefer to leave it on, but if you're having a hard time hearing me or understanding me, please let me know.

We will let you know.

Thank you.

Thank you, Justice Donovan.

May I please record Stephanie Hausman on behalf of Pamela Mansoula.

I've reserved one minute of my time.

I intend to focus on the second issue.

In a misdemeanor animal cruelty case, the court may limit the defendant's ownership or possession of animals.

For any period of time, the court seems reasonable for the protection of the animals.

This is not a case where the defendant acted purposely or knowingly or even recklessly.

Ms. Mansoula was convicted of neglect.

And the court feared that Ms. Mansoula, if she owned two or more dogs or cats in the future.

Did I hear you say that it pertains to just the animal, did you say?

And is that you're going to be your argument here that it's only applicable to the animal, if you will, before the court?

I think that it anticipates future animals.

But it is for the protection of the animals that may come to the defendant's possession in the future.

So the court feared that if Ms. Mansoula came to possess two or more dogs or cats in the future.

That those animals could reproduce and then she would again find herself with more animals than she could care for.

However, the lifetime limit on animal ownership that the court crafted was not reasonably related to this concern.

And that's for basic biological reasons, the most pertinent of which is that no animal that has spayed or neutered can reproduce.

This was therefore an excessive limit that was not related to the court's concern or the statutory rationale for such a limit.

Does the sentence also prohibit the defendant from breeding animals?

It doesn't say anything specific about breeding, but the nature of the limit that the court imposed would make that impossible.

So if the court had said put limitation on the number of pets that your client could have possessed.

But put a prohibition on breeding, a lifetime prohibition on breeding, would that have been lawful?

I think that a specific prohibition on breeding will get to the timeframe of that prohibition in a moment.

But a specific prohibition on breeding would have been related to the court's concern and therefore would have been much more appropriate given the circumstances.

In addition, the length of the limit for the rest of Ms. Menzula's life ran afoul of constitutional principles governing finality and sentencing.

And it also didn't reflect the statutory scheme.

Why does it offend constitutional principles of finality and sentencing?

This court has said in cases starting with Ingerson 35 years ago that there is a limit to which courts can for Ms. Menzula's cases hold a sentence over a person's head

and has said that a lifetime suspension is an indefinite suspension is unconstitutional.

That's just a suspension. This isn't a suspension in this case unless I miss something.

I think that brings us to another problem with this order, which is that the statute gives this kind of limit as a sentencing option,

but doesn't create a mechanism for enforcing it other than it being a condition of a suspended sentence.

How does that arise to a constitutional dimension?

That is separate from a constitutional question, but I point this court to RSA 651-67,

which explicitly authorizes a contempt prosecution for failing to pay restitution.

So that's an example of the legislature saying, here we're going to create this enforcement mechanism

so that this sentencing condition can exist regardless of whether there is a suspended sentence or not

and can exist past the lifetime of a suspended sentence.

RSA 644-8 paragraph 4b contains no other enforcement mechanism other than the implied enforcement mechanism

that it is a condition of a suspended sentence.

Because the statute does not authorize a limit that extends beyond the period of the sentence suspension,

because it doesn't enact any other enforcement mechanism.

How do you respond to this? Don't courts do this all the time, though.

With respect to AFSA cases, for example, defendants are routinely prohibited from using computer devices

or contacting the victim forever.

And that doesn't violate the Constitution, does it?

I think that... I'm trying to remember the case, but there is a case that says

that no contact provision has to be attached to a suspended sentence or a condition of parole.

So it can't just be a free-floating condition, no contact.

Other prohibitions are collateral consequences of a conviction.

So there is a separate crime of having this conviction and engaging in certain types of behaviors.

Another example of that is somebody who's convicted of domestic violence or a felony,

and then there are other crimes that prohibited them from possessing guns or that sort of thing.

Aren't you asking us to rewrite the terms of the statute?

No, I'm just asking you to read the statute as written and to read the entire context.

So read that there's no other enforcement mechanism other than a suspended sentence.

Read that for misdemeanor defendants, the court may impose a limit,

but for felony defendants, the court must impose a limit.

And that limit is a minimum five years, a mandatory five-year ban on ownership.

And that gives some insight into the legislature's view of the appropriate limit

given the varying degrees of criminality that's contained within the statute.

So because there's a constitutional issue with having a lifetime condition

that is may or may not be a condition of a suspended sentence,

because there is no mechanism for this condition to exist outside of a suspended sentence,

and because of the statutory scheme, this limit was too long.

And also, don't we look at the purpose for the protection of the animals

and can we review that in terms of what's reasonable for the protection of the animal?

One litter a year under supervision of a veterinarian,

or two dogs so they can keep each other, two pets so they can keep each other company.

Do we get to get behind the trial judge's thinking?

I think so, because the court's concern about the protection of animals,

the only articulated concern was that concern about overpopulation

and suddenly she can't care for the animals anymore.

And so that then limits the type of a ban that the court can impose

because it has to be related to the court's concern about the protection of the animals.

So if the court had applied some conditions to this ban,

for example, education or training, sufficient so that this individual would be able to care for multiple animals,

without putting a time frame on it, would that have been awful?

I think, again, that that could absolutely be a condition of a suspended sentence.

That's something that we see pretty frequently in various contexts,

a batterer's evaluation and counseling, driver's education, et cetera.

Those are terms that the trial courts often turn to in their job of creating a sentence

that effectuates the goals of sentencing.

But in those circumstances, they're not free-floating conditions,

but they're conditions of a suspended sentence.

Can you think of another misdemeanor offense where your first strike renders you out completely?

And that's another way that the context of this statute doesn't support the trial court's conclusion

because in the context of this statute, it says a first offense is a misdemeanor,

a second offense is a felony.

And so it conceives that a misdemeanor defendant won't ban for life

from having pets or more than one pet at a time.

And so I think that's another way that the scheme, the statutory context,

provides some insight into what the legislative intent was.

Then again, if you commit first-degree murder, it's the first time you've ever committed,

you'll get a lifetime sentence of incarceration, even though it's your first strike, right?

That's true, but there's nothing about the murder statute that indicates the conception

that there could be more than one and the sentence is going to be based on

whether this is your first or your second offense of this type.

No misdemeanor murder.

That's true.

Probably should be.

Well taken.

Finally, the court aired in basing its ruling in part on information outside of the record

about Ms. Mansoula's actions on the day of the hearing related to mask wearing.

The court should have at least granted her request for a hearing

to address that consideration on the record.

For these reasons, the court should reverse the lifetime limit

and remand for further proceedings.

Thank you very much.

Ms. Halman, you've reserved.

Sorry, will you finish?

Yes.

Okay.

You've reserved one minute.

Okay.

I realized that there's also a first issue.

I didn't have too much to say about the first issue

unless the court had questions about the suppression issue.

Thank you.

The only point I wanted to make about it was that this is a unique case

in which any person who observed the condition of Carmella

could reasonably conclude that that condition was a result of neglect.

But what we knew about Carmella was that she suffered from multiple medical conditions,

naturally occurring medical conditions that endured over many months

and persisted despite having several owners

and despite those owners all seeking treatment and treating her.

And her ultimate owner took a while to resolve those conditions.

Exactly.

And so for the magistrate who's ruling on this affidavit

to determine whether the condition that's observed is a result of neglect

or the medical condition,

that magistrate needs all the information Sergeant Duby had

about Carmella's medical treatment,

any opinions that the medical providers gave,

and about Ms. Mandula's following through with that treatment

and providing appropriate treatment.

That information was missing from the affidavit

and for that reason the magistrate couldn't properly balance

the competing inferences that her condition was a result of negligence

or the medical conditions.

Intentionally missing from the affidavit?

We don't know.

Well, there is quite a lot in that affidavit

including information, obliquely references, the veterinary records.

Sergeant Duby talks about Ms. Mandula saying that she took Carmella in

on a particular day in December and then took her on another day in March

and then there's one line that says Ms. Mandula didn't take her in

in between those visits.

That information could only come from the veterinary records

and so clearly Sergeant Duby is pulling out what suits one inference

while purposely omitting what might support the other inference.

Thank you.

Just give me one minute if you want it after Ms. Woodcock.

Ms. Woodcock.

Thank you, Your Honors.

May it please the court.

I just want to take one minute to talk about the veterinary records

and then I'll answer any questions that you have.

As the court is aware I didn't write this brief

and so I spent a fair amount of time looking at things perhaps

from a different perspective than Mr. Steger who actually wrote it did.

And what I noticed about the veterinary records first of all

was that they were never introduced at the suppression hearing.

They're attached to the motion to suppress

but they're not admitted as actual records.

Now I'm not sure where that leaves this court in reviewing them

but the police officer was asked during the course of the suppression hearing

if she thought that she had received the records

and she said something to the effect of I believe I had looked at the records.

But since they weren't introduced

nobody ever presented the police officer with the records.

So attaching them to the motion before the court doesn't put them in the record?

It puts them before the court

but the problem is that when I looked at these records

as I was preparing for this case

if you look at the bottom of the patient history report

it says North Country Animal Hospital page one of four

date 328, 2017, 953 a.m.

That to me suggests and I don't have any evidence of it

in my own experience with fax machines

that the records were faxed to the police department

three days after the warrant was signed.

So assuming that the police officer who says in the hearing

I believe I had the records but she's never confronted with them

it suggests to me for no reason other than just my experience

with fax machines which are quickly getting outdated

but I'm old enough to remember when they were new stuff.

It suggests to me that the police officer did not have these records

and therefore was only going on her collection of whatever information she had.

And that's assuming the date stamp on the machine was accurate?

It would assume that the date stamp on the machine was accurate, Your Honor.

I appreciate the candor but where are you going?

What's the point?

Well the point is that if you're going to say that the police officer

intentionally omitted certain records

it seems to me that if you're the defense

you have to make the record that that intention was made

and the way that you do that is to present the police officer with a record

you make sure that it's admitted before the court

so that the court can look at this

and the police officer can actually look at the records

and determine whether or not she had them.

I would say on this record there's no indication that she actually did

and that her recollection was probably faulty.

Having said that, I'm not sure that the records

even if this court were to go through them carefully

would suggest that they were particularly exculpatory

and I say that because the records say that they're going to be on March 2nd

it says that they're talking to the police officer

and the notice, our plan was to see how the skin does on the prednisone

it says pred in five to seven days

but there's no follow-up appointment according to these records after that

so the dog is brought to a different animal hospital on the 25th

that's when they get the telephone call from the veterinarian

one of the veterinarians is in North Conway

and the other is, I'm trying to see, I wrote it down

but it's noted but there are two different directions

so you're not bringing the dog to the same veterinarian

and on the 25th when the call comes into the police department

the veterinary hospital is extremely concerned

but at least the animal is being brought in to be seen

right, the animal is being brought in to be seen

apparently according to the search warrant

so that the animal can get a re-homes certificate

now I'm no expert in veterinary affairs

I'll assure you your honor

and I'm not certain what that effect is

I think it may be connected to whether or not the animal can be sold

certified as a particular kind of animal

you're nodding your head

you clearly know more about this than I do

the record will reflect

the plan had been when the animal was brought into the North Conway Animal Hospital

the plan had been to try to get the animal stabilized

and eventually re-home

when the animal is brought into the other

the

I have it written down here somewhere

the second

the Cape Horn Pet Clinic

the Cape Horn Pet Clinic

which calls on the 25th of March

they're concerned about the condition of the animal

and they say that they will not issue this certificate

the response of the defendant under those circumstances

is to become extremely angry

it would seem to me if you were

if you were going to just try to bring the animal in

to get re-homed you'd keep bringing it back to the same

veterinarian so that

we don't know in this case

why there was a switch

we don't

I will say that if you look in the

again the documents that were not admitted

there is an indication at one point that they are

planning to try to breed Carmella

and there is a question about

some kind of treatment

and the defendant and her

significant other I think he is

to tell the veterinarian that they're going to bring

the dog to a second veterinarian

and the Cape Horn veterinarian for a second opinion

it's clear that the both veterinarians

somehow at least from the records

which as I said they're not admitted

so we're then on that kind of situation

there is some indication that they're going both places

but it's not clear to me that the veterinarians

are in touch with each other

and they're not local

they're in two different, essentially two different directions

so I would

talk about the sentence in this case

well I think

the court acted

within the discretion that is provided

in the statute and it's a very broad

discretion there's no question about it

the legislature didn't see fit to limit

the court's authority although it certainly could have

and this court has set on a number of occasions

it will not read new words into

the statutes and that it will give the words

their ordinary meaning and it seems to me

that any period of time the court deems reasonable

is any period of time

to protect the animals

so in light of the court's concern that

this defendant would breed and then get overwhelmed

is one spade animal reasonable

reasonably related to that concern

I can understand

the court's concern about that

but the court took into account

a lot of different

factors

it knew for example that she

that the defendant had this kind of short fuse

when she went to the

Cape Horn pet clinic and was told

that she could not they would not issue a health certificate

she berated the staff

but the short fuse didn't at least as far as I can see

factor into her treatment of the animals

the short fuse was directed at people

well

I will say that there is no

testimony that the animals were actually

subjected to the short fuse

but I think that a lot of times people have a short fuse

because they have a lack of patience

and patience

as a person who owned both cats and dogs

patience can be a very helpful thing

in having animals and indeed

multiple animals because if you have multiple animals

you need even more patience

and that seemed to be

what was lacking with this particular defendant

and I think that is the most

comment that the court made about wearing the mask

it's not that she

she couldn't express

her disagreement with the mask policy

or anything like that it's not that kind of thing at all

it's whether you are mature enough

or responsible enough to understand that under certain circumstances

you do what the

so her but her

misdemeanor conviction

wasn't based on any kind of purposeful

intentional or even reckless conduct

that might be fueled by impatience

it was a neglect type of situation

so I'm not seeing the connection

between

taking stock of her maturity or her

mental state and this particular restriction

I'm just not seeing it

I disagree with the court there I think that

a lack of maturity can lead people to be neglectful

they're not paying attention

and I think it's fairly clear in this particular case

that the defendant was not paying attention to all of the animals

certainly the cat that was in the cage

with no litter box near it

papers that's

that shows neglect certainly

and it also shows a lack of maturity it shows a lack of appreciation

or if the papers are swapped out

from time to time it might be the process

that this particular individual used

but that's getting into the weeds I guess I'm just looking

for more of a connection how one animal

spade for life

is reasonably connected to the

conduct that issue here

well I think that the court

took into consideration all that it had

in front of it and reached a conclusion

and if the defendant is not happy with her

sentence she can always go back to the court

and ask for reconsideration down the road under

29 there's

a prohibition against her doing that and I think

if she presented a different picture

to the court she might very well be successful

if in the meantime she had taken

some courses on

how to treat animals or had

volunteered at an animal shelter

and learned how to take care of animals

done that kind of thing something that was affirmative

to the court that she was capable of taking on

that responsibility I think it might very well be a different

matter would anything have prevented the trial court from imposing

a similar ban for say four years

in each of the convictions and run them consecutively

I don't think so based on

the statute your honor but I can't say

that it's something that I've given a lot of thought to

it would ultimately come

out I assume

well it could certainly

as I say I haven't considered that but I think

that it certainly could have based on

what the language of the statute is

I see my yellow light is on

if the court has no further questions for me I will

yield the floor to Ms Hoffman

thank you I just have one quick point to make about rule

procedural rule that tells people

how to go about finding a motion to suspend

their sentence or amend their sentence that is already

allowed by other law so that's not a substantive rule

it doesn't allow a person in Ms Menzula's position

to ten years from now ask the court to reconsider

its sentence so thank you

okay thank you case submitted
