The matter before the court is state of New Hampshire versus Joshua L. Shaw. It is case

number 2019-0072. The state of New Hampshire is represented by Susan P. McGinnis. The defendant

is represented by Stephanie C. Hausman. The docket should reflect that Justice Donovan

was disqualified in this case. And Ms. Hausman, when you have 13 minutes up front and then

you've reserved two minutes of rebuttal, you may begin whenever you are ready.

Thank you, Judge. I'm just going to wait until the timer begins. Thank you. May I please support

Stephanie Hausman on behalf of Joshua Shaw as you mentioned I've reserved two minutes

of my time. I want to start with the first issue and then address the second issue.

The governing principle for the first issue is the constitutional obligation of the state

to disclose exculpatory evidence in its possession. This includes material contained in police personnel

files. The defense requested in-camera review of two sets of items, disciplinary records

of the officer witness, witnesses, and use of force reports from other cases involving

those officers. The defense argued that given his defense of self and others' defense,

these records would be important in cross-examining the officers and for material and relative

to his defense. In the trial court, the state treated the two categories of material

as being governed by different law, asserting that disciplinary reports implicated RSA

10513B, whereas use of force reports didn't implicate that statute. RSA 10513B makes

police personnel files confidential. In order to nonetheless comply with their constitutional

obligation, the attorney general's office has created a voluntary mechanism to provide

exculpatory materials within the personnel files for the defense. The prosecutor did

not assert that she followed the attorney general's or any other mechanism to comply

with her obligation. Instead, when asked for these materials, she said she could

not provide any of them without a court order. If she had been following the attorney general's

protocols as indicated in the state's appendix, she would only say that if she had actually

looked in the personnel files herself. But the state now asserts she never did that.

As to information contained in police personnel files, the defense does not have to show

that the records are admissible to obtain in-camera review. Rather, the defense must

show a reasonable probability that the records are material to the preparation of his defense.

The court has said that the that showing was not made in this case. Did you hear me, Ms.

Housman? I did. You asked whether the trial courts found that that showing had not been made.

Correct. And that is what the trial court found. But our point is that when a trial

boils down to a decision about who used unlawful force first, the officer's prior

use of force and disciplinary records would be material to that defense and to the officer's

credibility. And to illustrate that point, consider an employee of like a convenience store,

whose job it is to reconcile the cash and the registers at the end of the day with the

computer given total. It's normal for there to be discrepancies from time to time, and those

discrepancies would not likely result in discipline for that employee. But consider

an employee who knows that for 10 of her last 15 shifts, there has been a significant

discrepancy. If during her 16th shift, she again finds a significant discrepancy. Whether

she's guilty of anything or not, she may nonetheless fear her employer's reaction and

may therefore be motivated to shade her explanation. Same rationale applies to police

officers who have used permissible force numerous times in the past. The relevance

isn't the rightness or the wrongness of their use of force, but in the effect that

history can have on an employee's concern about their employee. And that concern then

may shade what they say about a subsequent use of force. Her argument in any way

get impacted by the fact that we have pretty we have the video about what

happened here and how force was employed.

The video is when you are able to watch it does not show very much. I mean, it has a

complete audio in three segments, but the video camera itself is sometimes

pointed towards Mr. Shaw, sometimes pointed towards the officers and

sometimes not. And so the video does not show what contact occurs before the

officer smash it does not show what contact occur before the officer first

use of taser on Mr. Shaw. But it does show the trial court. Did the trial court have

the video at the point at which it made this determination?

That is a good question. I think not because the trial court made this

ruling without a hearing. And so there wasn't an opportunity to submit it

as an exhibit, but it was an exhibit at the trial. The state argues that your

arguments on this first issue aren't preserved. What's your response to that?

Every argument raised on appeal was raised in the trial courts. In the

trial court, the defense made some additional arguments that were then

addressed by the state. And so we haven't pursued those on appeal. But

the core arguments that we're making that they asked for a in camera

review that they said that the records that they were looking for were

material and relevant to their defense that the defense was self defense and

defense of others. All of that was made in the trial court.

Was there any showing other than sort of general reputation of the sale and

police department? Was there any specific evidence that something might

be located in these particular officers files?

There was no evidence of that, but there would be no way for the defense to

have that information before this trial.

Other than perhaps newspaper reports or sort of other anecdotal information?

Right. They did cite another sort of contemporaneous event that had

occurred with the sale and police department that the state asserted

didn't involve any of these officers. But again, the problem with the

evident, the exculpatory evidence schedule, if it's being employed

correctly, is that the defense would never know whether any police

officers that will be witnesses in their case are on that list or

whether there's anything in those police officers personnel files that

would be relevant to the particular case.

In the DeSoppelist, if I said that correctly, there was at least a

showing that the police officer, I mean, given the activity that

perhaps the driving record of the police officer would be pertinent,

if you will, what was the showing here that would relate to that sort

of direct link?

Sure. The showing here was that Mr. Schall was raising a defense of

self and defense of others' defense and that there had been contact

both back and forth that was alleged. And so that was the context that

made the use of force reports, particularly material in this case.

But it would seem then that your argument is almost too good

because any time there's use of force issue in a case, then

that would in itself almost satisfy the showing as you describe it.

Except that not in very few use of force cases, use of police force cases,

does the defense raise a defense of self or others' defense.

But there was enough of a showing that the trial judge gave that

instruction at this trial. So it was enough in play that it made

those use of force reports in other cases and the disciplinary

records material to this, the preparation of the defense in this case.

And as you say, not necessarily admissible, but certainly background

fodder for cross-examination.

Yes. I mean, again, the standard is an admissibility, which the

state really focuses on the standard is, is it there a reasonable

probability that it's material to the defense?

And so depending on what's in those records, again, we're sort of,

we have to talk hypotheticals at this point, given what we know,

but it could have been relevant to the officer's credibility.

The officer's motivation in their testifying against Mr.

Shaw. It's hard to anticipate that now.

Help me out, Ms.

Housman, and I won't take up any more of your time.

Do I recall a hint in the record that there was a represent

representation made that nothing was in these guys' personnel

personnel file, but the information might be located somewhere else?

The state, so when the discovery request was initially made before a

motion was filed, the state responded, I can't provide any of

that information without a court order.

So the defense filed a motion for the in-camera review and the

state's response to that in terms of what was available or not

available was if there was exculpatory information contained

in the officer's personnel files relating to their credibility,

it would be disclosed to the defendant.

That is not the case here.

The defendant is simply on a phishing expedition to obtain any

disciplinary actions taken against these officers, regardless

of whether or not it had to do with credibility issues.

So the state never says I'm using the

exculpatory evidence schedule set forth by the Attorney

General's office.

I have spoken with somebody.

I have looked at a list.

None of those representations are made.

And so in this way, the the representation about what has

been done was similar to one aspect of the Amaral case.

In turning to the second issue, the trial court erroneously

interpreted the disobeying statute and thus misinstructed the

jury on the critical element whether Mr.

Shaw had produced his license.

The interpretation the trial court used is contrary to this

court's statutory interpretation in Woodbury and the last

antecedent rule of interpretation.

The trial court's instruction added a phrase that altered the

scope of the offense charge and introduced the concept of the

officer's purpose in observing the license.

There is no absurdity here.

An officer can ask a driver to produce his license, failure

to do so being chargeable under one variant of the

disobeying statute.

If that production is insufficient for the officer's

purpose, she can take the license in hand for the

purpose of examining it and failure to comply with that

order is chargeable under the other variant of the disobeying

statute.

It's happening and you agree that this issue we take up under

plain error?

Don't you?

The statutory interpretation portion of the argument is

plain error because that argument wasn't made below,

but the trial court knew that the defense was objecting to

this aspect of the instruction.

So if there are two plausible and reasonable explanations being

offered as to the interpretation of the statute, how can we

say it was plain error even if it was error in terms of how

the court instructed the jury?

Sure, that would be the conundrum if this was an

unsustainable exercise of discretion issue.

But statutory interpretation is an issue this court looks at

de novo.

So in a de novo review, there's no difference given to the

trial court's interpretation or if there is no interpretation or

no trial court ruling on the particular issue, it is sort of

of no matter because the court reviews it de novo.

That would seem to open the door always to statutory

argument and always be made without without the trial

court having been apprised of the issue and we'll always take

it up because it's de novo.

Well, I think the court will always take up an issue that's

raised as plain error.

I appreciate the point, but there is a distinction between

issues that this court reviews for an unsustainable

exercise of discretion and those that the court reviews de

novo. I think particularly in this context where it's not

an evidentiary issue where it is a de novo review, it is

the trial court looking at the statute and coming up with a

statutory interpretation on his own that he knows the defense

objects to that that should almost always be considered by

the court de novo.

Your initial time segment is up, but you still have two

minutes.

Okay, Miss McGinnis.

Good morning, may it please the court. I'm Susan McGinnis.

I'm here representing the state of New Hampshire. I'd be

happy to take questions at any time.

With respect to the-

Why isn't Ms. Townsend right on that last point about plain

error and why shouldn't we just decide the legal issue

without any sort of, well, it's reasonable either side. So

how could the court have aired? Why isn't she right?

Because this court has repeatedly held that issues

must be preserved and if they're not under plain error

review, an error is not plain unless it's equivalently

obvious, clear and obvious. So it doesn't matter if you're

making a de novo review or a discretionary standard

review, you're still you, like you said, you would be

allowing any statutory interpretation argument to be

made on appeal without ever being considered by the

trial court. And that is not fair, particularly to the

state, which never had a chance to respond to any of these

types of arguments, and you would be reversing a trial

court based on an error that is not plain, that could have

been brought to the court's attention. The defendant

never objected to the court's interpretation of the

statute, never argued that for the purpose of

examination didn't apply to the produce variant. What he

argued is you can't add that because it wasn't part of

the complaint to begin with. And that would be a

substantive amendment, which is an argument they've now

abandoned on appeal. Even if you would for me to the

the in camera and the failure of the trial judge to

conduct an in camera review, given the fact that there

was sufficient evidence to put the issue to the

jury, shouldn't wasn't it error for the judge not to

at least conduct an in camera review of these records

which could have provided fodder for cross

examination? No, because the defendant never met his

burden, the statute puts a burden on the defendant to

prove probable cause that the records are material

and relevant. The defense has made a lot of

arguments on appeal about going to motive,

default, suffice, bias, all of those things, but

the defense never made those arguments in the

trial court. And they did not limit the request

to exculpatory information. In fact, they never

used the word exculpatory never cited Lori. And

the reason they did it is because under the

protocols that prosecutors follow, if the evidence

had been exculpatory, it would have been turned

over. The evidence was not exculpatory. Instead,

it was how do we do that? How do we know that?

Because the prosecutor said if there was

exculpatory information, it would be turned over

to the defendant. That is not the case. And

because the were the records reviewed, do we

know where the records reviewed by anyone at

that point in time when that representation was

made? I know now because I made phone calls

and because that's the only way I can respond

at this point because the defense never made

the argument. So I called the prosecutor,

she checked the exculpatory evidence

schedule. The information was not on there. She

also called the police department and spoke

to the same person I did who told her there was

no exculpatory evidence in the officer's files.

There still is no exculpatory evidence in any

of the files. So because this is evidence

that's not exculpatory and is in internal

police files, the defendant has to show

probable cause that it's relevant material. And

all the defendant ever said is I'm raising

self-defense so it's relevant material.

They never explained why they never said bias

modus motive to fabricate. And I have never

seen a case where an officer has been

disciplined for using reasonable necessary

force too often. You just happen to be

unlucky enough to have defendants who

needed force used against them. And I don't

really think it matters anyway because

there was overwhelming evidence between

the audio and video on those recordings

and the officer's testimony. There's

overwhelming evidence that before a taser

was ever used. The defendant had tried to

assault the officers with a key and had

actually kicked several of the officers

and the entire video makes it clear that

the defendant's purpose was to provoke the

officers into using force against him to

make it necessary for the purpose of

suing them. He needed money.

So does the trial court have the video

available at the time it made its ruling?

I am not sure. I don't think the court

had it at that time. I because this was

all done on paper. The defense never

requested a hearing. And this whole

thing about the prosecutor not making

assertions that she had complied with

the exculpatory evidence schedule. She

didn't need to because the defense wasn't

asking for exculpatory information.

Obviously there were some discussions

between defense counsel and the

prosecutor before this denial was sent.

And the reason the prosecutor said

I can't release the information you're

requesting without a court order is

precisely because it was not

exculpatory. And that's what the

statute requires. A court order if

it's not exculpatory information.

And you're right. One of you justices

said that doesn't this open the

door. Well yes. So any time a defendant

claims excessive force or self

defense all of the officers prior use

of force reports whether founded or

unfounded excessive or not all the

sudden become fair game. It would be

the same as saying that with respect

to any defendant any person any

victim who the defendant claims self

defense any time that victim had ever

been involved in any type of

altercation. All those records would

be available just because you raise

a self defense claim. There's a

higher bar than that.

And unfortunately because the art

you know the arguments are entirely

different on appeal than they were

in the trial court. There's

information that we probably that

we don't know about but there are

no excessive force complaints

against any of these officers. There

is no exculpatory information and

any of their files and the defense

never explained how it was relevant

or material. And it clearly wasn't

admissible. It's propensity evidence

and unless the defense had actually

been aware of their prior use of

force against others. It had no

relevance to a self defense claim

which is what this court held in

Fergal and inferred. How would the

defense be aware? Would they have

access? I mean RSA 10513B only

protects the officer's personnel

files. So would there be access to

police reports that might sort of

convey this information? How would

they be aware? Well if there had

been well the only thing that would

have been relevant is prior claims

of excessive force that were either

founded or not yet resolved. And

generally when there's a claim of

excessive force that's generally

known in the legal community. At

least when I was a public defender,

I would hear about certain

officers and there are generally

police people who claim self

excessive force generally do it

pretty vocally and pretty

publicly. So there are usually

news reports. So generally

defendants know these things

and they could have made a

showing. Even if they didn't know

how our use of force reports for

non excessive reasonable

necessary force at all relevant. I

have never heard of anyone being

disciplined for using reasonable

force, necessary force. And

watching this video, I think these

officers showed pretty

remarkable restraint. Their

language was not great. Some of

the language was inappropriate,

but using bad language was

better than beating him up. And

they didn't use tasers until they

had to and he put them in the

position where the only other

thing they could have done is

simply let him drive off was

what's also not acceptable. There's

a statute that allows them to use

reasonable necessary force and the

defendant is really dumb here

because he was looking at a

violation level offense and ramped

it up until he's in the

position he is now. And there was

overwhelming if they had let him

if they had let him drive off,

they could have still sent him a

summons for the license plate

violation. If they could have

found him, if they'd known where

he lived, I mean, the officer

couldn't read his license. So he

didn't. And there was a Michigan

license plate on the trailer. We

don't know what kind of license

plate was on the truck because

it was covered with snow and

couldn't be read. So that's

presuming they can find him. And

that's presuming he doesn't do

anything else crazy on his way

home. I mean, he's really wound

up. And he and his girlfriend

are both lying to the 911

operator screaming that the

officers assaulted them before

the officers ever even touch

them. I mean, I don't see that

they had any other choice. The

only way to affect the arrest

was to get him under control

and the only way to get him

under control is exactly what

they did. And the fact that

they did not injure him, I

think shows a lot of restraint

on their part. Was there a

colloquy over the jury

instruction? At the time it

was given that sort of pointed

out this definitional issue of

what the jury should be

instructed to and why did that

not preserve that statutory

interpretation argument?

Because the defense didn't make

a statutory interpretation

argument. They argued that

regardless of how the statute

is interpreted, you can't add

this language because it wasn't

in the complaint and that would

substantively amend the

complaint. They never made an

argument. But isn't there an

interpretation of the statute

argument buried in that? In

that discussion, if you will?

I mean, it was charged. The

charge was under the statute.

So what does the charge entail?

Isn't it sort of buried in

there? It's not because the

defense never said you can't

add this language because

that's not that's not part of

the produce charge. It's

like the state left off any

part of a statute, whether

it's an element or not. And

the defense argument was you

can't add it because the state

didn't put it in there. They

never said that that's not

part of the to produce variant.

They never disagreed with the

court that it was not part of

the to produce variant. And

they never disagreed with the

definition of produce the court

intended to give either. The

only argument they made was

that this would be a

substantive amendment of the

complaint and would

prejudice me. And the court

said no, it wouldn't. And

it's not too late. And this

wasn't an indictment. It's

simply a complaint. So it

could be amended. And I don't

know how it could possibly

prejudice the defendant

because to produce means to

show something to exhibit it

the definition they agreed to

and flashing something at

someone for less than a

second would not do that. And

you can't really interpret

the statute as doing that

because then what purpose

would producing the license

have? I mean, I can tell you

I wrote a brief flashed like

that. You don't know if I

wrote it or not. You don't

know if it's my brief. You

don't know if it is a brief.

I mean, it completely

defeats the purpose of the

statute. It would make the

produce part a complete

nullity.

Because again, I understand

your argument correctly that

even if we were to agree

with Ms. Houseman as to the

interpretation of the

statute, it's still the

state still prevails on that

issue because it's not plain

error. So we could rule

substantively going forward.

This is what the statute

means. But because it was

unclear and not argued and

it certainly couldn't have

been plain error for the

court to go in that

direction. Is that your

position?

That's my position. And this

court has said it in

several cases when a

defendant's argument turns on

an interpretation of the

statute this court has never

adopted. Any error by the

trial court cannot be

plain. So when the defense

takes the risk of raising

something is plain error,

that's the standard they

have to meet, whether this

court's review is de novo or

not. You will only reverse

on plain error if the

error is plain. I mean,

it's built right into the

name of the rule. There's

nothing further.

Thank you, Ms. McGinnis.

Ms. Hausman?

Yes.

Just on that.

I'll wait for

the time.

I think you can go.

I'll wait for the time.

Here you go.

Just to address that last

point, the court engages in

statutory interpretation by

first looking at the plain

language of the statute.

And if the plain language

supports the interpretation

in addition to this court's

jurisprudence in how to

interpret this type of

phrasing, then I think that

meets the definition of a

plain error because it's

looking at the plain language.

Unless there are other

questions that the court has

about points raised, I have

nothing further to add.

Oh, actually, I do have one

more thing.

Go ahead.

And it has to do with the

instruction issue. Again, the

jury really struggled with

whether Mr. Shaw produced his

license.

And again, they were given

that definition, which means

to show or exhibit.

And still they had questions.

They asked how long is a driver

required to show a license and

whether the officer must be

able to to read it.

The jury instruction that the

court gave changed the focus

from officer, from Mr.

Shaw's actions to the

officer's purpose.

And in doing so, the erroneous

instruction prejudices.

Now, I really don't have

anything more to say unless

there are questions.

I'm just going to ask, does

anyone else have any more?

Thank you very much.

Thank you both.
