This is case 2019-0099, state of New Hampshire versus Kyle Perkins.

May it please the court. I'm Joshua Gordon. I represent Kyle Perkins.

The Constitution guarantees a reasonably present and reasonably competent lawyer.

Attorney Keith Matthews failed in both these regards in three ways.

First, you didn't really pay attention. In public defender training,

you learned to make a list of the elements of the crime,

listen to the state's case, check off each element as the state proves it,

and make a motion to dismiss on the weakest one.

Matthews didn't do this. He didn't notice that the state missed an element of value.

And there's no conceivable strategic reason for not asking for dismissal after the statement.

Judge McNamara disagrees with that view.

If there was anything lacking, if there had been a motion to dismiss at the end of the state's case,

Judge McNamara says that wouldn't have gone anywhere because there was enough evidence.

How's that wrong?

I think Judge McNamara's wrong and had this issue been preserved for appeal through a motion

may have prevailed on appeal because in Judge McNamara's order,

he says that he recollects that the officer did some research about the value of iPads

at the time of the theft.

And there is nothing in the record to support that.

The only evidence of value is the purchase price that the school paid for the iPads

in 2011, four years before the receiving, and that's the only evidence.

And Judge McNamara just misremembered the evidence,

and I think you'll see that from both Kathy Green's motion to set aside the verdict.

She has all the evidence of value appended to it and in the record at large.

And it's not enough, my recollection, as there was some testimony as to the condition of the iPads

very close to the date of the, that we're talking about here, the date of valuation.

Why isn't that and the purchase price sufficient to get it to a jury?

Well, the jury didn't know for the second allegation of error here

is the jury had no way of knowing what the law of value was.

The jury could have assumed, a reasonable juror could have assumed

that purchase price was a reasonable valuation or the existence value

for the kids to educate themselves with an iPad or resale value or replacement value.

And none of those are the measure of value.

Value has to be measured at the time of the crime, the time of the receiving,

and it's an arms length appraisal.

And the jury had one data point which is the purchase price.

In all the other cases that this court has decided, there's many data points.

In Hamill, the stolen car case, there was an expert who testified.

In Belanger and Moody, the older cases, there was the price that the thief got for it after the crime.

So if I bought a car for $50,000 three years ago and it gets stolen today

and I come in and say it was in fine shape, that's not enough.

No, it's not enough to know what the value is.

To know that it's more than $1,500? That's not enough.

Pardon me?

It's not enough to satisfy the burden of establishing that it's more than $1,500?

Well, let's say you bought a car for $1,200 or something very close to this amount

and the issue was you don't know how much the value matters.

What it was worth four years ago isn't sufficient data to know what the value is today.

And purchase price isn't a measure of value.

It's at the time of the crime.

But it's a piece of relevant data in figuring out the value at the time of the crime.

Absolutely relevant and admissible but not sufficient.

And if that's the only data, that's not enough.

Then the state didn't put in enough evidence.

So again, my hypothetical, if I bought a car two years ago for $50,000 and it gets stolen a month ago

and the testimony at trial as well, it was in good shape.

I drove it a normal amount of time.

That's not enough to satisfy the state's burden?

I don't think it's enough to satisfy the state's burden.

In Hamill, that's why there was an expert and testified what the value was at the time of the crime.

The state argues that Detective Wormersley testified that he researched the value stolen iPads in 2015.

Did that happen?

No, it did not happen.

Wormsley testified that the only basis for his knowledge of the value was from the school and it was the purchase price.

He misstated it.

He said 429 rather than 479.

But nonetheless, he said very clearly that that was his only basis was from the school.

He researched the value of some parts and unrelated things but not the value of the iPads.

Remind me here.

How many iPads are we talking about?

26.

26.

And so the value per iPad we're talking about is $40.

If it's $40, it doesn't reach.

If it's $50.

If it's $57 change.

Okay.

All right.

So that's the threshold here, really.

Yes.

And Attorney Matthews told the jury that they were worth between $50 and $60 apiece.

And that's really your argument, right?

That he gave the jury the basis for the conviction.

My client gave the jury the basis for the conviction.

And that's the third allegation of error here is that whether or not it was a good decision to put the defendant on the stand,

going ahead and asking the one question that filled in the whole in the state's case is just ineffective assistance.

Well, the testimony of counsel was that he didn't expect that answer.

That he thought the answer was going to be nothing.

That does not borne out from his opening.

And if he knew the law, if he knew the law that the question that the issue was how much was the value at the time,

he would not have asked the question.

He wouldn't have put the man on the stand.

He would have made a motion for directed verdict after the state's case.

And he did none of these things.

He didn't even ask for an instruction with the accurate statement of the law.

So a juror could have thought that value could be the value of education to a child in school.

There was just no basis for a juror to make a rational calculation of value.

And so he did a series of three things.

He didn't make a motion for directed verdict when the state didn't have any evidence of value.

Then he asked his client the question that filled in the gap,

and then he didn't ask for an instruction with an accurate statement of the law.

But on the second issue, the client, there's no testimony from the client,

no affidavit from the client on that issue of what the expectation of the trial testimony was going to be.

You mean the ineffective assistance procedure?

Yes.

No.

Okay.

The only testimony on that point is from counsel.

The only test?

Oh, it's an affidavit from counsel.

Yes.

Okay.

There's no other questions.

Thank you.

Ms. McGinnis.

May it please the court.

Susan McGinnis.

I'm here today representing the state of New Hampshire.

The problem with the defense counsel's arguments is they're based on factual misrepresentations of the record and an erroneous reading of the law.

When the New Hampshire legislature got rid of the larceny statutes and codified the criminal code in the theft statutes,

they did not continue and adopt the common law definition of value this court had been using under the larceny statutes,

which did not have their own definition of value.

Under that definition of value, you had to prove market value, the highest price someone would pay for the items.

Instead, the legislature adopted a definition of value that is consistent with the one in the model penal code.

And under that definition, it's the highest amount determined by any reasonable standard of property or services.

And what constitutes a reasonable standard of property or services depends on what type of property or services.

For instance, in Leith, where this court acknowledged that that is the test.

In Leith, it was brand new clothing stolen from a store that had price tags on it.

In that instance, it is market value because it's goods being sold in a market.

As other courts have found, when you have a unique item with a very limited market, that is not an accurate measurement of value.

Because, for instance, in this case, you have iPads that are used by students in a school that have been modified for that purpose.

Special applications have been put on them and iPad locks have been put on them.

So only authorized people, even some of the students could not use certain programs on them because that was not what they were authorized to do for their classes.

Doesn't those unique characteristics make it all the more important that there be specific testimony about, well, these are different than normal, so this is what their value is?

Well, there was testimony about what had been done to them and the fact that there were locks on them that prevented certain people from using them.

There was testimony by the school personnel and it was on an exhibit that the original cost of the iPads was $479.

And that did not include any of the cost of any of the applications that didn't come with them, the special education applications.

They had also bought expensive covers for each iPad.

And how many years before was the purchase?

The purchase was four or five years before.

And I want to correct the record because Defense Council has repeatedly argued there was no evidence of replacement value and Detective Wormsley testified only to the cost of them and based it solely on the school.

At page 128 of the trial transcript, Defense Council asks him,

you testified previously that the value of the iPads you believed to be $429.

Where did you get that information?

Detective answers, it's from the school.

Question, the school district document with all the list of the items and the price on that list.

And Wormsley says yes.

Obviously that's not correct because the price listed on the school document and testified to by the school was $479.

The purchase price.

Then Defense Council asked Wormsley,

so you're relying on that information and no other information regarding the value of these items.

Wormsley answers, I also look them up online.

Question, and the value of a used iPad was $429?

Answer, no.

They were new for that at the time, meaning 2015 when he was doing his investigation.

That's the value I looked up.

So he looked up the value of new iPads like the ones that had been stolen and the 429 was the replacement value.

That came in through cross examination?

That came in through cross examination, yes.

Because Detective Wormsley, well he testified that the value of the iPads was somewhere between $400 and $480.

So somewhere between what he estimated they were worth salvage value if you take the parts off and sell them.

And for someone like the defendant who's in the business of fencing and repairing items, quite frankly,

the repairing of iPads, they had a lot of value.

The defendant testified that he bought and sold these kind of things from China

and that he made a lot of money selling screens to China.

And there was evidence of the condition of these iPads at the time they were stolen.

The people who stole them told the defendant in the text messages that they were in mint condition

and the screens were in mint condition.

And quite frankly the defendant's testimony that he took them in for repair was not credible whatsoever.

His testimony that they were already broken when he took them was not credible.

So was trial counsel then incompetent by putting them on the stand?

Well first of all it was the defendant's choice to be put on the stand

and counsel does not get to tell a defendant not to get on the stand.

And it's clear from the record that what defense counsel intended for the defendant to say,

although counsel phrased it in his opening as these iPads, what he meant was iPad twos.

These types of iPads are generally worth $55 to $60 used.

But these particular iPads were worth nothing because they had the iPad locks on them.

So no one could use them for anything other than using applications that didn't require the internet.

That was in the opening?

In the opening, yes, he fairly much.

He said the defendant will testify that these iPads are worth about $55 to $60.

But he's going to tell you that these particular iPads from Parkside were worth nothing

because they had an iPad lock on them and you can't take it off.

Well instead of testifying like that, like they had planned,

the defendant testified that he sold these iPads for $50 to $75.

He gave a market value for them and then defense counsel walked him backwards

into, well these particular ones have locks on them so they're valueless.

But in this case, market value is not a fair price.

When you have a unique item, limited market, because the item has been modified

and no one else can use it, it's no different than a piece of manufacturing equipment

that doesn't have a general market.

And in this case, only replacement value is a really fair value

because the school has to replace them.

The students need them. It's an Apple school.

They use these to do their homework, to do their classwork, to get their assignments.

So the school has to replace them.

That's the only fair value.

And even in states where market value is the test,

those states have held that when you have some items like these,

replacement value is the fair market value.

And in any event, you only need $50 an iPad, approximately $50 an iPad to meet the value.

And even the parts where someone like the defendant who buys and sells parts

and uses parts to replace iPads,

the parts themselves will be worth at least $50.

So whether you use salvage value, replacement value, or purchase price,

those are all reasonable standards of value and they all add up to over the amount.

Who testified as to the salvage value and when did that testimony come into the record?

Both officers testified as to salvage value on direct examination.

One officer testified that he looked up used iPad screens online

and that they were worth about, they sold for about $20 a piece on eBay.

The other officer testified that he was well aware that someone in the defendant's position

could use these parts and make a lot of money off of them.

And then when he talked to the defendant, the defendant had admitted to him

that he bought and sold these things to China,

that he made money buying and selling parts,

buying parts from China, selling parts to China.

So that did not come in on through the defendant's testimony.

That came in through the detective's testimony as to statements the defendant had made

at the time of the crimes.

One more point I want to make in the reply brief,

the defense counsel has said that apparently for the purpose of prejudicing

the court against the defendant,

the state has made, and I've made a statement in my brief,

that prior to trial the defendant had a prior conviction for the same thing.

That is absolutely true.

There was no misunderstanding.

He was arrested for the charges at the same time.

They rose out of the same investigation,

but in September, four months before this trial,

the defendant pled guilty to another count in a different court

of felony receiving stolen property.

So he did have a prior conviction at the time of trial,

and neither I nor the prosecutor below ever told the court

that he had been arrested and released on that charge

before he was charged with this crime.

In fact, the prosecutor told the court that they arose out of the same investigation,

and defense counsel then told the court

that the defendant had been charged with that other crime around the same time.

Thank you, counsel.

Submitted.

They submitted.
