Three, two, one.

Good afternoon. The matter before the court is state of New Hampshire versus Kyle C. Buffam.

It is case number 2019-0668. The state of New Hampshire is represented by attorney Zachary Hyam.

The defendant is represented by attorney Stephanie Hausman. And Ms. Hausman, did you reserve any

time? I have. I've reserved one minute. Very good. Thank you. And you may proceed whenever

you are ready. Thank you. May it please the court, Stephanie Hausman, on behalf of Kyle Buffam.

This case is indistinguishable from Fitzgerald, decided last September. In this case, as in

Fitzgerald, trial counsel grossly misinformed the defendant of the maximum possible sentence.

In addition, both counsel in this case and in Fitzgerald also gave unrealistic forecasts

of the likely sentence after trial. This combination of mistaken advice impacted Mr.

Buffam's assessment of the plea offer. When the offer was 20 years, counsel advised him he was

likely to receive 20 years after trial, and he was told the maximum sentence was 30 years.

It was rational to conclude that going to trial presented a better option.

The trial court's factual finding that Mr. Buffam was advised of the possibility of

consecutive sentences at the plea hearing is not supported by the record.

Notably, in making this finding, the trial court did not rely on the trial attorney's

inconsistent testimony about whether he had advised Mr. Buffam of the risk of consecutive

sentences. And Mr. Buffam testified... If you don't mind, isn't this distinguishable from

Fitzgerald? Because in Fitzgerald, the defendant was more actively considering the

plea offer. And second, in this case, the defendant had an expectation for an extremely

brief sentence five years. So how do we evaluate those distinctions?

Sure. That goes to the prejudice of the deficient performance. And that prejudice needs to be

shown by a reasonable probability that he would have, but for counsel's egregious errors,

accepted the plea offer. In this case, Mr. Buffam admitted his culpability for all elements of

all three offenses. And by doing so, he put himself at risk of a lifetime commitment to the

Secure Psychiatric Unit. So you're right, Justice Hans Marconi, that this case is different

than Fitzgerald in that way. But his choice of an insanity trial meant he risked either

five years to life at the Secure Psychiatric Unit or a likely 20-year or no more than 30-year

sentence in prison. He knew that under no circumstance would he be walking free after the trial.

But didn't he testify in his motion for a new trial that he understood when he entered his plea

that it could get 60 years if they stacked the sentences?

No. The trial court never addressed the question of consecutive sentences at the

plea hearing. And the record reflects that his acknowledgement and waiver of rights form

indicated that he was charged with a special felony that had a maximum of 30 years to life.

He did testify that he did his own legal research about consecutive sentences. And in so

doing, he had come to the erroneous conclusion that it wouldn't be applicable

to the facts of his case. But his own misguided legal research efforts doesn't

negate the assistance that his counsel gave and the ineffectiveness of his counsel not advising

him of the possibility of consecutive sentences. Again, looking at the different...

It wasn't at the court that suggested his maximum was up to 30 years for conspiracy.

And then the court also addressed the other charges. So it was more than just one charge

in mind. So the conversation between Mr. Buffum and the court began with, I believe you

write, the conspiracy charge. And he said he thought that that was a 30 to life. I think

he said he thought that was a 30 to life. And then the state said, actually it's the

accomplice to attempted murder that has a maximum of 30 to life. And then the court said,

is that your understanding, Mr. Buffum? And are we 100% sure that that's what the maximum is

in the trial counsel for Mr. Buffum said, I'm looking at the law right here, Judge. I was

looking at him, at it when I went through the acknowledgement with him. And so that's how the

error came about. And then that's just Donovan's question. All the three charges were on the

table with separate sentences connected with them. That's true. They went through the three

charges and the three sentences. But at no point was it communicated to Mr. Buffum

that those sentences could be imposed consecutively. Just a second. Is there any dispute,

is there any dispute that Attorney Barnes's representation was deficient?

The court found it absolutely clear that Attorney Barnes had misinformed Mr. Buffum

about the maximum possible penalty. And the state doesn't feel it. The question is so what?

The question is, okay, I'm sorry. I didn't hear Justice Donovan's question. So I'm going to

start with Justice Hicks. And then Justice Donovan, please jump in. Justice Hicks asked,

so what, that he gave the wrong maximum sentence. Am I understanding that correctly? Okay.

Interestingly, neither party in their briefs in this case has found a case where the defendant

was misadvised about the maximum possible penalty and a court did not find prejudice.

I'm not saying it's a per se rule, but I think it really skews the defendant's ability to assess

the choices before him of trial or plea, or in this case, an insanity trial, when he's given such

a disparate information about the maximum. Here he was told it's 30 to life. The actual maximum

accomplished to attempted murder is life as a minimum sentence. That is a huge difference between

ever being able to see the light of day and never being able to see the light of day.

But as a practical matter, he could get much less than life.

He could, but a defendant needs to know what is at risk in making, in being able to make those

choices. And a defendant needs and is entitled to rely on counsel to give accurate advice,

both about the law in terms of what the maximum sentence is, and about what's a realistic

possibility. If you don't take the plea offer, what could happen after trial and the court,

this court focused on both of those things and fits Gerald.

What did he wind up with 35?

He ended up with a 35 to life sentence with the possibility that he could get seven years off

the minimum for good behavior.

How does the fact that, let's say a trial judge or a judge

like yours truly finds that to be a completely appropriate sentence play into the ineffective

assistance of counsel playing? In other words, I'm telling you, I would have sentenced him to that

at a minimum.

The second prong of the prejudice inquiry looks at whether the state has presented

evidence that the offer would not have been accepted by the court.

It's a low bar again, a reasonable probability. It's not dependent, as this court said,

and fits Gerald on the particular personality of the trial court.

What we know is that Mr. Buffum's codefendants, similar plea deal, was accepted by the trial

court. That meets that low threshold of a reasonable probability on prong two.

Yes, I come back to, again, the reasonable probability that he would have accepted

the offer, but for the misinformation, there is no scenario, unless I'm wrong,

that he would get the five years he was anticipating.

So doesn't that factor into our evaluation of his rejection of the 20-year plea?

So I think you're referring to his counsel's testimony at the hearing on the Motion for

New Trial that he did not want to accept any offer above five years.

But in reality, we have to assume trial counsel accurately informed him about the

consequences of an insanity trial. In reality, he was facing no less than five years at the

Secure Psychiatric Unit and a commitment that could have lasted the rest of his life.

So this isn't a case like Fitzgerald, where a defendant makes a choice about going to trial,

hoping that he walks free after trial. Here we have somebody who knows going into trial.

Because of the particularities of this case, I'm going to be locked up for at least five

years and up to my life. That's my best case scenario. So if he had known that and he's debating

between an offer of 20 years or a best case scenario of five years at the Secure Psychiatric

Unit, if he thinks 20 years is what he's reasonably going to get after trial anyways,

from a sentencing judge, I think it's a rational conclusion to say,

on these odds or on these circumstances, I'm going to take a risk at trial. But if he had

been adequately informed, look, you're realistically looking at more than 20 years after trial,

and your outside risk is the rest of your natural life. I think a defendant would have,

any defendant would have looked at that differently. And I think the evidence here

therefore shows that a reasonable probability that he would have accepted the plea offer.

I'm just trying to square what you said about his reasonable expectation with

what I understand from the state's brief or memo is that he was asked at the time of the

plea colloquy or reflecting back on that time says, but as you stood there, you knew you could do

60 to life possibly. And he answers, yeah, I suppose that could have been possible for them

to stack the charges. So didn't he know that it could be consecutive?

Again, the testimony at that hearing was that he had done some independent legal research

and he had learned about the possibility of consecutive sentences, but his research led

him to conclude that consecutive sentences were reserved for situations where crimes are

committed one after another or somebody's already in jail or prison and they commit

another crime. And so he didn't think that it was a realistic possibility in his case.

Again, what he knows going in, what the court should look at is what his lawyer has informed

him about because it's his lawyer's obligation to inform him about the possibilities after trial

and to talk to him about the benefits of the plea offer. And that did not happen in this case.

So there's no evidence that his counsel informed him of the possibility of consecutive sentences?

Trial counsel's testimony at the hearing was all over the place. And he testified that he talks

to his clients, not really specifically about numbers, but he talks about the gestalt of the

case and the possibilities. And so sometimes the lawyer testified, I would have told him

that he could face 60 years, there was times when he said, I don't remember ever having talked to him

about consecutive sentences. His testimony in that regard was internally inconsistent.

And I think it's significant that the trial court didn't rely on that testimony in finding

that Mr. Buffham was aware of the possibility of consecutive sentences.

In fact, Barnes testified at the motion for a new trial that the sentencing judge

informed your client about the possibility of consecutive sentences. And that's clearly not

in the record. That is correct. So I think there were reasons on the record to doubt the attorney's

testimony, not only because he testified that consecutive sentences were explicitly

discussed at the plea hearing when they were not, but also he testified on the record that

he had not misinformed Mr. Buffham about the maximum possible sentence when the trial

court found it absolutely clear that he had. To continue more on the point about prejudice,

this court indicated in Fitzgerald and other courts cited in our brief talk about a defendant's

showing of reasonable probability is shown when it is apparent that the defendant

takes would have taken responsibility. Here Mr. Buffham did take responsibility early on when

he decided to pursue an insanity trial, a trial that his counsel told him he was not likely to win at.

So his willingness to take responsibility and to put himself to these risks of either

commitment to the secure psychiatric unit or prison. So that had he been accurately advised

by counsel about the risks after trial, he likely would have accepted the 20-year

plea offer as in Fitzgerald. Does that really does his willingness to go forward with an insanity

defense? Do we really accept that as accepting responsibility for the crime?

I think by admitting all of the elements of all of the offenses and by taking on the burden of

proving insanity exactly was a long way towards admitting responsibility for the crimes.

So Fitzgerald, the evidence here met the low threshold of a reasonable probability.

The second part of the first prong talks about whether the state would have rescinded the offer.

There's no evidence here that the state would have. We've talked about the second prong,

the third prong, it's uncontroverted that Mr. Buffham ended up with a sentence

significantly greater than he would have received under the plea offer. Yes,

he had a chance to earn seven years off his 35-year minimum, but whether he earned that

discount or not, the sentence after trial was distinctly worse than it would have been under

the plea offer. Thank you, Ms. Hausmann. Your red light is on and you have one more minute.

Thank you. Mr. Hayam. Everyone hear me? Yes. Good afternoon. May it please the court,

Zachary Hayam, for the State of New Hampshire. The state asked that you affirm this

conviction for the simple reason that there is no prejudice in this case.

The defendant has not shown by a reasonable probability that his case was prejudiced.

The facts taken from the hearing on the motion for a new trial make it clear

that the defendant knew about the possibility of consecutive sentences. He was reluctant to

admit so, but he did admit so. And the fact that he could have gotten 30 years to life as he understood

it for the accomplice to attempted murder, 15 to 30 on the conspiracy and 15 to 30 on the

solicitation means that he understood that if these charges were stacked to use his term,

he was looking at a potential 60 years to life. Now, for a 24-year-old, I believe he was

24 at the time of trial, prison until you're 84 years old is the effective equivalent of life.

He was looking at the spending the rest of his life in prison and he knew he was looking at spending

the rest of his life in prison. And so he elected to go forward with an insanity plea,

knowing that he'd already been found competent to stand trial and that at some point he would

likely be found restored. As a result, he wasn't expecting to spend the rest of his life in

the Secure Psychiatric Unit. He could easily have expected that if he rolled these dice and went to

trial that he could be out of the Secure Psychiatric Unit in five years if he were successful. That's

a much clearer balancing act for him than this. Was he thinking about 20 years? Was he thinking

about he wasn't? The record is clear that he knew what he was looking at if he lost a trial.

He knew the potential that he could be out of the Secure Psychiatric Unit in five years if he was

successful at trial and he decided to take that risk and it did not pan out in his favor. He ended

up taking a conviction that was not far from 30 years to life that his counsel had originally

told him was what he could expect. Mr. Hyman, you acknowledge that the Sentencing Court did

not discuss the prospect of consecutive sentences with the defendant? I don't believe so, Your Honor.

I don't have the record in front of me immediately, but I don't believe so. But he was informed that

he could be sentenced to life? Yes, absolutely. As a maximum? Well, yes, life is always a maximum.

Life can't be the minimum because any other sentence is going to be less than life. So by,

de facto, life is always a maximum. The way that the statute is worded is life or

such other term as the court shall order. The reality of that language is that it is life

as a maximum and then the court fills in the minimum. Does it make a difference to our analysis

where the vernacular is or the misinformation here was 32 life and the statute puts life first and

then backs off from it to a lesser number of years? Are those equivalents? I think it's just a

matter of discretion. The statute opens up the sentencing options to a wider range of discretion

on the trial court's behalf. You know, the 32 life simply shrinks what that possible discretion is

really. So I don't think that it really changes the analysis significantly. And finally, or maybe

finally, does the record support that the defendant was fixated on only a five-year term

during negotiations with the state? The record does support that to the extent that his

trial counsel testified to that and the the trial court accepted that testimony. And

not for for nothing. This hearing court was the same judge that heard him throughout his trial

had ample opportunity to to gauge his credibility and to kind of understand the inner workings of

this case. So these credibility determinations aren't based on on simply one hearing with the trial

counsel and the defendant. This is a credibility determination made over the long span of his

pretrial trial and post conviction proceedings. And there's no evidence that there was a counter

offer from the defendant for anything other than five years? Is that right? That's the only

evidence, yes. Prior to trial, the state offered him 20 to life and and he rejected that outright.

I don't think that there was another counter offer made. At least the record doesn't support that

there is by the defendant other than five years. Now let me ask you, Ms. Hausmann pointed out that

defense counsel's testimony was all over the place about consecutive sentences and

internally inconsistent. How should that you agree with that? And how should that impact our thinking

about the case? I don't agree with that characterization of of trial counsel's testimony.

He made it clear that he discussed he discussed the reality of the case with his client. He

told him what he was looking at that these were serious charges and that he was facing a lot

of prison time potentially including the rest of his life. So I don't think it's internally

consistent. And as to my co-counsel's point that he did his own research, that can go to the

performance prong that his lawyer didn't tell him about consecutive sentences. That's a

performance prong question. The fact that he knew about it himself supports the conclusion

that there was no prejudice because frankly it doesn't matter how he knew about the possibility

of consecutive sentences. The fact is that he did know about the possibility of consecutive

sentences and he can't backtrack now and say, oh well I thought this and maybe it was this.

When the reality is that he understood the mechanics of consecutive sentences,

consecutive sentences, it's not a mysterious concept and the fact that he understood that

this was even a possibility means that he knew the risks he was facing. And as we noted earlier,

a defendant going in to decide whether or not they want to accept a plea

needs to understand the risks and that means understanding the worst case scenario.

And frankly the evidence supports that he understood the worst case scenario here

and he rejected the 20-year sentence and left it to go to trial. So now for him to backtrack

and say that he didn't understand he could spend the rest of his life in prison,

doesn't track with what everybody in the courtroom agrees that he knew,

which is that he was looking at three very serious charges and a potential for 60 years

to life in prison. And to that end, should this court decide that the defendant

was prejudiced and is entitled to some remedy, the remedy should be very specifically tailored

in this case. His expectation was when he rejected the plea, his understanding was

that he was facing 30 years to life on this charge. And so the difference between his expectation

and the reality, which was 35 to life, is only five years. So his detrimental reliance for lack

of a better word can only be up to five years. There's no reason to suspect that if he had

known this, he wouldn't have gone to trial all and so he should be offered the plea he was

originally offered. Given what he knew at the time, the difference between that expectation

and this reality is five years. So on a remedy's question, that is the appropriate remedy

at the most. So long as there is evidence that he understood he was at risk of consecutive

sentences which were imposed. Yes, Your Honor. Which he was and there's really no wiggle room there.

I mean, I believe Justice Bassett or Justice Hicks read the expert excerpt from the hearing in which

he acknowledges the possibility of consecutive sentences. Now reasonable minds can differ as

to whether he thought he was going to get that or if he thought it was unlikely that he would

get that. That's not the question. The question is did he know that this was a possibility?

Did he understand that this was a risk? Even if he didn't consider it to be a

likely risk, did he understand that this was a fact he was facing and the evidence that he did?

Isn't the remedy really that if he had been provided with competent advice that he would

have taken the 20 years and so his remedy really should be that he should be offered,

he should be given that plea offer? Well, Your Honor, no because the reality of the situation is

that he was still there was one other factor that he was considering which is that he could

win at trial and be committed to the Secure Psychiatric Unit but potentially only spend

five years there. Which is as the evidence has shown which is what he thought he deserved

for lack of a better word. Surely his lawyer would have told him that there was a 1% chance of that.

If he was confident. I don't know that he would have done so. I mean

there's absolutely a chance he would have gotten out. He was found to be competent to stand trial

and frankly the evidence in this court's own record from his direct appeal shows that he was

very intelligent and very capable of working these sorts of things out and for lack of a better term

gaming this system. I don't think that the that it was I don't think it would have changed his

calculation that significantly if he had known the difference between what he thought he was

looking at and what he actually was looking at. Because at the end of the day he knew the

high watermark. He knew that he could spend the rest of his life in prison and that's really what

you're weighing when you're weighing going to trial versus taking a plea is is worst case scenario

what am I looking at here and the worst case scenario for him was that he would spend the

rest of his life in prison. If Your Honors have no further questions I'll see the rest of my time.

Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Ms. Hausman. I just have two quick points I want to make.

There's no question in this case that Mr. Buffum was trying to game the system.

This misunderstood it misunderstanding about the maximum possible sentence was given to him by

his lawyer and reinforced by the prosecutor and the judge at the time of his plea hearing.

And second I just want to make sure that the court understands he was told that the

maximum possible penalty was 30 years to life. That means that he had a chance of parole if he

was given the maximum possible sentence at 30 years. That is significantly different than a

sentence that is 40 years to life 50 years to life 60 years to life or life all sentences

which were possible under the actual statute. And so that distinction is what warped his

ability to make a decision about whether to go to trial or to accept a plea offer. Thank you.

Thank you all very much case submitted.
