This is case 2019-0371, state of New Hampshire versus John Gates.

May I please the Court, Christopher Johnson on behalf of John Gates. I've reserved one

minute for rebuttal. This case presents a very narrow fact specific question about the reasonable

expectation of privacy in a vestibule and a utility closet. I plan to focus on the

utility closet because that marked the farthest incursion into privacy. My plan is first to

make a few general points about the content of the reasonable expectation of privacy analysis

and then to focus on the most unusual, the application of adherence in this most unusual

setting. I'm happy to take the Court's questions.

The burden of proof is on the stage, correct?

Yes.

Is it beyond a reasonable doubt, or is it by the preponderance?

You know, I'm not sure. I think it's by a preponderance.

I'm happy because I'm not sure. Yeah.

We both should know.

Yes, you're quite right about that. And it comes up, I think, I'm not sure there's much

of a difference in this case between the burdens because to the extent there's a fact that's

missing, they didn't prove it by either a preponderance or beyond a reasonable doubt.

But to begin with the reasonable expectation of privacy analysis, the first point, there

is no per se rule about common areas. Each case requires a case-by-case analysis, and it's

a totality of the circumstances test. So for example, you could take the identical building

and pick it up and move it somewhere else and put different people in it, and there

might well be, they might have different reasonable expectations. So the test,

it's not sort of a building-centered analysis as such.

So on that point, what evidence was there concerning the nature of the relationships among the family

members that lived in this building?

Right, right. So it sort of is, the test focuses on the people and their interrelationships,

which gets, I guess, to my second point about the content of the standard, which

is reasonable expectation of privacy is defined as against uninvited general population.

What I mean by that is you don't lose a reasonable expectation of privacy because

you are a renter who has a landlord, and the landlord has the authority to invite people,

or because you live with other people, and they have the authority to invite other people.

It may be in those circumstances that the state or the police have more ability to

get consent, but the existence of other people who have authority over the premise doesn't

change the reasonable expectation of privacy.

Is that with respect to objective or subjective?

I think both. And here again, I think there's a lot of overlap in this circumstance because

it's not the case that there's any of these sort of objective circumstances about this building

and lived in it was unknown to Gates. He sort of knew it was just his family. He

knew this was just a farm. You know, those kinds of circumstances on which, my argument

depends, we're known to him. And so my third point about the general content of the analysis

is that privacy in this context, it's not like the difference, as I understand it, between

like my mudroom and my bedroom. Privacy is defined by who is an insider and who is

an outsider with respect to the reasonably expected uses of the given space in question.

And so here again, it's a vestibule and a utility closet. And so who is it? Who are the

people?

I know you're on a roll with it. Was it the next door neighbor, his mother?

Yes.

Okay.

Did she testify at the suppression hearing?

No, I don't believe so.

But the cousins, did they testify in the suppression hearing?

They didn't testify at the suppression hearing either.

So again, what evidence at the suppression hearing was introduced regarding the relationship

between your client and his cousins?

Right. None, really. And so I think in part, I think the state makes some points in

its brief on appeal about the kind of deteriorated quality of that relationship, but that's not

in the record on the suppression hearing. And so what is in the record is that these

people are all members of the same family, and it is because of that membership in the

family that they can live here at all.

And that family owns the property? Or this four-unit structure?

That's right. That's right. It's the Magnuson family farm. Conrad Magnuson owns the

farm, and he owns this building. And all of the people who live in it are his relatives.

And if you're to position that, the fact that the landlord could invite workmen to service

the equipment in the utility closet, that's not relevant for an answer.

That's not really relevant because, I mean, you know, it shows that Conrad Magnuson

has the power and authority, unquestionably, to consent or to invite outsiders. And so

if Conrad, if the police had talked to Conrad and said, could we go into the utility

closet, and he said, yes, I mean, I wouldn't be here. You know, that would be a consent

issue. But it doesn't mean that...

Would it be said that the closet's not mine? Nothing in it's mine?

Well, then it would be they really couldn't rely on Conrad Magnuson in that case he would

have been holding consent by a disclaiming authority. But I don't, for the purposes

of the record, I mean, everybody agrees that he owned this building. And it's

not a centerpiece of my argument that Conrad Magnuson didn't have authority over

the utility room. You know, he's the landlord, the landlord.

Yeah, I'm talking about your client, so...

Oh, okay.

The fact that your client disavowed any interest in the boots in the utility

closet, does that affect you now?

No, no. And so this gets to the question... So if the police... I think there's

a sense in which if the police, the test for reasonable expectation of privacy is

not police can go as far as they can get until somebody objects. And so the state

makes this point, well, Joe Gates didn't complain about their presence in the

vestibule. Of course, they didn't ask him about the utility closet. They just

opened it. But he didn't complain about their presence in the vestibule.

You know, I don't think that matters. If I wake up one morning and the

police are standing in my kitchen, I may or may not... And apparently on an

important errand, I may just choose to answer their questions. It doesn't mean

that they rightfully entered. You know. But I want to address on the facts

here. I think what I take to be one of the state's most important points, which

is the self-contained nature of these apartments within this building. That

is that they each had their own kitchen, they each had their own bathroom,

that kind of circumstance. So in the ordinary apartment building, it's my

position that each resident is, to all the other residents, in essence the

uninvited general public. They are outsiders to each other. The only

link they have with each other is that they all happen to live in the same

building. They are a random collection of people. And in that circumstance,

what is functionally for the Constitution's purposes, outsiders are

roaming the hallways all the time, you know, if you're thinking about it from

the perspective of one resident. And so privacy, of course, begins at the

individual apartment door. Here, this is not a random collection

of people who live here. Insider status is defined by their

membership in the Magnuson family. And that is what's

gotten them to be able to be here. The light is on at 3.30 in the morning,

right? And people can look in through some window or some light.

Well, many of us would have sort of front doors that are

surrounded by kind of windows. And so I think the fact that the police can

look in doesn't mean that they are, the uninvited general public

in whose shoes the police stand can just open the door and go in.

It's, again, I think in the ordinary. Well, my point is, and maybe it's illogical,

but the light on is almost an invitation to enter.

Well, tell six anyway. I don't know. Yeah, at Halloween, I mean, I take

that point, but some people just leave that light on all night.

And it doesn't mean that anybody is welcome to enter that space.

You know, should it matter in our thinking that there's a

driveway and a walkway that goes up to that door?

No, I think what matters is that this is not a residential building set

amongst a neighborhood of residential buildings, as to which sort of the

customary expectations about ordinary apartment buildings would apply.

This is a building on a farm. And so, you know, I mean, of course there's a

walkway because the people who live in it have to get to it,

but this is not the kind of building that the Girl Scouts are going to come

to to sell their cookies so that the Jehovah's Witnesses are going to knock on the door.

I don't know what's the basis for you saying that.

I mean, if somebody came up to deliver an Amazon package, wouldn't they go up to the door?

The evidence doesn't reflect that this door is where the mail gets delivered,

either. There's no testimony that there was mailboxes there.

And again, it's a fact that we don't know in the record, but I think

the suggestion that this is where the mail carrier comes would have to be shown,

and it isn't shown. So there's no indication that it had a discreet address?

No. But there are access routes leading to the store, right? Yes, yes.

And isn't the law such that access routes doesn't have to expectation of privacy

access routes? Isn't that the law? Right. Well, that's right. And again, I don't want to

spend too much time on this when my focus is really wanting to be on the utility room,

because even if they can get into the vestibule for these kinds of reasons,

you know, and again, the only way would be if finding that the uninvited general public

comes here with some frequency, or, you know, it's clear that there's their title to come here

with some frequency. And, you know, setting, I think that's not shown in the record,

but certainly the uninvited general public doesn't get to go in the utility room.

There's no reasonable expectation on the part of the residents that the uninvited

general public could enter there. Well, I think Justin Sonov had brought this up before,

but isn't his saying, well, those boots belong to my cousin or somebody? Is that a recognition

that, in fact, that space is available to others? Well, again, I think that's,

and this is where I get back to, it's available to people on the insider

within the family. He doesn't say neighbors across the street use this for their boots.

It's... But if you're in an apartment house with 50 apartments, and there's a place where people

can put their shoes to dry out, then even though the general public doesn't go in there,

can't go in there, is there not an expectation of privacy there? Yes, but that's different,

because my position is in a court's analysis of the status of reasonable expectation of privacy

in the ordinary apartment building and a 50-unit building in particular, which is much bigger

than we have here, every resident is the uninvited general public vis-a-vis the other residents.

To be sure, every resident has a right to go in there because they pay their rent,

but what I'm saying is, as to any one resident, the rest of these people are strangers,

and maybe friendship developed, but from the point of view of the law,

they are a random collection of people, and the only thing they have in common is that they live

in this place. It's not a community that is independently defined in the way this community

in this building is independently defined by membership in the Magnuson family.

And so the fact that the cousin's upstairs, so my point is that in the ordinary building,

privacy rightly is understood as beginning at the apartment door, because the people down the

hall are strangers. Right. Is there some obligation to put no trespass sign, to no access sign?

No. No. I mean, I know many people or some people even in Concord who don't lock their front doors.

That doesn't mean they don't have a reasonable expectation of privacy against the police

coming in. Well, and if this vest, if you had no windows, but just a door, it might be the

front door to the family compound, if you will. Right. Right. Right. And again, but another

important point I think goes with that is that it's important to remember this is not a police-centered

test. There are many areas of law where it's sort of the reasonable officer is the measure of what's

lawful and what's not. Reasonable expectation of privacy is very much a citizen-centered

test. What do these people actually, what is their subject of expectation

and is society prepared to recognize that it's reasonable? So the fact that the police might

from time to time encounter a building that's a little hard to classify. So let me ask you this,

is the, do you read the court order as having made, the court having made a finding as to the

subjective understanding of your client? I think court, yes. As to their location? Yes.

My recollection of the order, again, is possibly imperfect, but is that the court found

the defense to have failed on both of those prongs. And again, for purposes of the argument here,

the factors that bear on them are very much the same. So how, what's the standard of review on

the trial court's finding as to a subjective understanding of your client? Don't we owe that

deference to that unsustainable exercise of discretion? I don't think so because I think

deference is due only to fact findings and that is sort of a take to be a question of fact and law.

It's on a given set of facts. The court below found, you know, that the two prongs of the

standards were not met and that is de novo review. This court looks at the same fact.

It's not like a fact finding. Who testified at the suppression hearing? Was it just the

police? It was just the police that I recall. Mr. Gates did not testify.

There needs to be, be established both as subjective and objective expectation, correct?

Yes. Yes. And there was no lock on me. Excuse me. There was no lock on the utility room door.

That's right. The police officer just opened it, but there were locks on the other two

doors, apart from the doors. Or do we know that? I'm not sure we know that they knocked

and he answered. Mr. Gates answered, but I'm not sure we know that whether there was a

fact that the utility closet had a door with a different color. Does that make any difference to

it? I mean, I, I think, I don't think what the police thought was behind the space matters

very much. It's what in fact was behind the space that matters again, because it's a

police centered test. It's, did these people have a reasonable expectation of privacy in this

place that got intruded upon? And so, um, you know, I thought it was a stairway.

It wasn't. It's a utility closet in the utility closet. There's an expectation of privacy. So let

me ask you if one possible reading, I think the correct one of the trial quarter is that the

trial court sort of assumed a subjective understanding of privacy in the, in the

closet. But it, then it's, but there's no reasonable expectation. So if we were to find

there's a reasonable expectation of privacy, do we go ahead and decide the subjective

issue or do we send it back to the trial court? Again, to the extent that it's a fact finding,

I guess you would send it back, but I continue to think that they're not being disputed facts

really in this record. The record is what it is. And it's a question of law as to how the law

maps onto those facts. You're right. Thank you. Thank you. You still have one minute.

Mr. Hyman, you corrected my pronunciation of your name the last time. Did I get it

correct this time? Hi, I'm your honor. Thank you. Good to see you again. Likewise.

Good afternoon. May it please the court. Zachary Hyman for the state of New

Hampshire. The state asks that you affirm this defendant's conviction because he had neither

an expectation of privacy in either the vestibule or the utility closet.

As my co-counsel pointed out, this is a two-prong analysis, the first being his subjective

expectation of privacy, which the state argues he did not, he did not have. The second being

the objective expectation of privacy, the circumstances of this search show also did

not exist. I'd like to talk briefly about the vestibule, but I will also try to focus on the

utility closet. The vestibule in question, my co-counsel has focused predominantly on the nature

of the apartment building, that it was on a farm, that it was family owned. But the analysis

here isn't about the place. The Fourth Amendment protects people, not places. The issue here

is whether the defendant believed subjectively that this vestibule was part of his home functionally.

But aren't those factors relevant to that subjective belief that he's living

in an apartment, in a house that contains family members?

It's certainly a factor, but I don't believe that it weighs as favorably towards a finding

of a subjective belief as my co-counsel has presented. The fact that these apartments were

in this house on a farm doesn't change the fact that they were separate apartments. These people

live separately. There's no indication that there was an open door policy, or I mean it was

his mother, so I want to assume that there was back and forth, but still we need to treat it

differently than we treated the boarding house in Smith, don't you think?

Absolutely, Your Honor. The boarding house in Smith was a much less

uniquely confined situation. In Smith we have a situation where it's a mix of private sleeping

spaces and public living spaces, public kitchen, I believe, and we don't have that situation here.

Each apartment had its, as to my understanding, had its own separate living and sleeping

spaces shoveled the walk to the benefit of all four apartments.

I don't know the layout of the walk as it pertains to the upper two apartments,

but it would certainly have been to the benefit of himself and his mother.

So the state has a burden of approving this?

Yes, Your Honor.

Is it beyond a reasonable doubt or by a preponderance of the evidence?

I believe it's by a preponderance, not by not beyond a reasonable doubt, Your Honor.

Is our review confined to the evidence that was presented at the suppression hearing?

My co-counsel has brought this up in his reply brief,

and even if this court does stick strictly to the four corners of the suppression hearing,

the evidence presented at the suppression hearing is more than enough to show

that the defendant lacked a reasonable expectation of privacy.

The testimony at the suppression hearing showed that the door to the vestibule was unlocked,

there was a window, a light on, there was clearly other apartments within that vestibule.

This was not a private space.

This was a space that was a thoroughfare for anyone who was going or going.

And if we consider how someone might come or go in this space,

it shows the lack of expectation of privacy.

When someone wants to visit with one of these apartments,

they have to go through the vestibule and knock on the door,

otherwise they're going to be standing outside knocking on this main door,

either getting no response or getting a confused response from

one or both of the apartment's occupants.

I'm inclined to agree with you as to the vestibule,

but it seems the utility closet is a different matter.

And for example, the defendant put his boots in the closet and closed the door.

Usually you don't leave your boots or your shoes out in an area

where you expect the public to be going all the time.

I don't necessarily agree with that, Your Honor.

If you even looking at large apartment buildings,

you can walk down the hall and see people who have left their boots outside of their

apartment as well. They're not exhibiting an expectation of privacy in this hallway.

I mean, in my own building, I've seen people leave bicycles and boots and all sorts of things,

some of which are fairly expensive articles out in the hallway without exhibiting any kind of...

What about behind a closed door?

Not necessarily, but the fact that there's a closed door shouldn't be dispositive

in this instance. The door was unlocked.

There's no indicator that there was any attempt to keep people out of this space.

And most crucially, the defendant denied a possessory interest in the closet and its contents

when police confronted him with it.

Well, the trial court came down and finding that there was certainly...

There was no objective expectation of privacy in the utility closet.

What evidence was there concerning the defendant's subjective expectation in the closet?

I think there's very little evidence that the defendant had a subjective expectation.

Anything he did or said would have been more of an objective consideration,

but just the fact that he lived in this building with an extended family doesn't

point conclusively to a subjective belief that the public wouldn't access this utility closet.

As we've already discussed, the owner of the property, Conrad Magnuson,

had access to this space. He could bring utility workers and others into this space

seemingly without the consent or even the knowledge necessarily of the occupants.

But he owned the property. It seems to me that the owner having a shared right of access to

that utility closet is different than an expectation that the public has access to it.

That may well be the case, Your Honor, but that doesn't necessarily mean that the defendant

had an expectation of privacy in this utility closet. There's very little evidence that he,

other than putting some boots in there, had any reason to suspect that people wouldn't be coming

and going from that closet. It's a space that's meant to be accessible. You put

electrical lines and hot water tanks and things of that nature in a utility closet

so that you don't have to intrude upon the privacy of the apartment's occupants.

Or it just happens to be where the closet is when the building was constructed and

the people can also use the available space. Absolutely, but use doesn't necessarily

guarantee an expectation of privacy. Would it be the same if there were a lock on it,

but all the residents of the apartment building or the house here,

had he as did the landlord? I think that would be a different analysis, Your Honor. The presence

of a lock would certainly be more of a red flag in terms of an expectation of privacy.

But we don't have a lock here. If you hear you don't have the lock, but they're

correctly, if I'm wrong, there's no evidence of the public accessing this space unless

accompanied by the landlord or being one of the folks living in the house.

I don't know that we have that here, Your Honor. When he said those boots are my cousins,

I don't know that he was specifying that it was a cousin who lived in the building. He just

said those boots are my cousins. He was based on the record a fair number of cousins who live and work

on this property, but it's not likely they'd come from, well, they work there but not live there.

Precisely, yes. There could be a number of people who are coming and going into the property.

If a cousin is leaving boots in this utility closet, one who may or may not live here,

then that's a much broader swath of the population than simply the occupants of that apartment.

And the fact that they're family, well, it's a factor. It's certainly not a dispositive factor.

Families are large. They don't necessarily interact with one another. They can be,

as co-counseling out, a collection of strangers. I mean, they may share a surname from time to

time, but that doesn't mean that they have some sort of collective family expectation of privacy

in these spaces. Now, the fact that the defendant did not, the defendant disavowed his accessory

interest is particularly important in this case because there's nothing else tying him to

that closet. The closet's in his building, but there's no indication that he used it.

There's no indication that there are other connections between him and this closet. It's

only the boots, the possession of which he disavowed the moment police confronted him with them.

If we were to conclude that the trial court aired and there was a reasonable and subjective

expectation of privacy in the vestibule, is that the end of our inquiry?

I'm sorry.

We don't have to address the utility closet, right?

If you decided that there was an expectation of privacy in the vestibule,

yes, I believe that would end the inquiry, Your Honor. Yes.

But in this instance, I think that the case law in terms of the vestibule is far more settled

here. We have this court has said in the past, it's beyond cavalry that people don't have a

reasonable expectation of privacy in the common areas of an apartment building,

and that's what we're looking at right here is the common area of an apartment building.

Is the utility closet a common area of an apartment building?

I think it's arguably arguable that it is.

Certainly the vestibule is, right?

Certainly the vestibule is, and I think the utility closet, excuse me, is also a common

area. It's particularly, we don't know the setup, but particularly if this serves both

apartments, then we have a situation where it's a shared common space. It is by definition

a common space if it's shared with apartments. So we don't know if the utilities in the closet

serve more. I don't believe the record indicates one way or the other on that point.

Note that you don't make a harmless error argument. Is that because the boots were

critical evidence to identify the defendant? The boots were very important evidence linking

the defendant back to the crime. However, the footprints leading from the scene of the crime

directly to the defendant's door, even without the boots to accompany them, is still a fairly

damning evidence in this case. Right, but you don't make a harmless error argument?

No, you're not. So if we find that there's a reasonable expectation of privacy in the

utility closet and that the trial court actually didn't reach the issue of the subjective expectation

of privacy as the utility closet, what do we do? Do we decide it ourselves or do we send it back

down? Do you decide whether there's subjective expectation of privacy? I think that you

can do that, Your Honor. I think that the record is, there aren't a lot of factual disputes in this

record. I think that there's enough evidence within even just the motions here. So we can decide it

on the record? To decide on the record. Yes, Your Honor. If Your Honors have no further

questions. Thank you. Thank you. Mr. Johnson. Just very briefly, one quick point. I think

it's been mentioned about Gates's use of the closet and his disavowal of the boots.

Strikes me that what's important here, because he certainly had access to the closet,

is not his use, but did the general public use it? And there being no evidence that they did.

The general public or the rest of the people on the building? Well, I would say the

uninvited general public didn't use it. And so the rest of the people in the building might

be like, you know, in the way that my wife and I both have access or that the Conrad

Magnuson and Mr. Gates would both have access to this room is not a question. The question

is, does the uninvited general public have access? Thank you. Thank you. Case submitted.

Well presented, gentlemen.
