This is case 2019-003 in the matter of Shannon Badger and Benjamin Badger.

Council, please proceed.

Thank you. May it please the Court. My name is Kaisa Krusko and I have the pleasure of representing Ben Badger.

I'm happy to take questions at any point.

In this case, in order, the other side argues that you have to, that the Court has the inherent power to correct a decree.

And I think in order to correct a decree, logically, there would have to be an identified mistake or a problem with the decree.

And so even if we agree that you could correct such a decree, the problem here is that there are no findings in the Suez Fonte order

that changes the property division by $25,000. That's what my client lost when the Court changed the property division.

Was it $25,000 or was it $18,000?

It was a swing of $25,000. It was $18,000 was what Shannon would have owed Ben, but then Ben would have owed less back and forth.

And that was part of the separate transactions piece of it. Our original premise was, well, let's make it one big transaction.

And then Ben will just owe Shannon $35,000.

And those numbers were discussed back and forth at the hearing.

They were.

And there seemed to be agreement that that was the exchange, if you will.

Right. We agreed on the numbers.

And even when Attorney, I'm not sure if it was Attorney Shazer, Attorney Brown filed the motion to correct because there was a mistake in the number.

We agreed that that was the number. We just, what we wanted was a one big transaction instead of two separate transactions.

So from that perspective, so then to correct, yeah, you have to have a mistake.

And when you look through that decree, I still don't know why.

It's a mystery to me because there were no findings.

And so we're asking this Court to reverse it one because I don't think that the Court has the authority to change a final decree.

And this Court has ruled time and time again that you can't modify a final decree.

And I think the dangerous precedent that could be set in something like this, this wasn't a long timeframe.

We had had the final decree. It went final in September.

And then there were no appeals.

And so this only happened two months later.

Isn't it possible, you're getting to my point, that timing was the real problem here?

That insufficient cash could be generated to satisfy the marital residence transaction.

And that because of that, and your client's request for an offset, in order to achieve the crowd court's intended result,

it had to go back and adjust based upon the actual net results.

And then that came out to be 45, 55.

I don't think that's one. There's no finding.

You know, Master Love didn't explain that, so at least we could know, okay, this isn't punitive.

I'm looking for an explanation.

Yeah, we were too.

And then the second piece of it is that because he was cash poor on being able to pay that,

he was hoping to pay it at Bourne Drive, this actually made it worse.

Because instead of being able to do two separate transactions where Shannon owed him money

and he owed Shannon money that negated what Shannon owed him in full,

and all of a sudden he owed the full amount of the marital home residence, which was 54,000.

And I think the other curious thing is, if there is a mistake on the investment property,

which we don't know because nothing says that,

if there is a mistake that it had to go from 6040 down to 5545,

why only the investment properties, why not the marital home as well?

That doesn't make any sense to me because before the decree had across the board said,

Ben gets 60% of all the real estate except the Barrington property, which was set aside.

And Shannon gets 40%.

So now all of a sudden we have different property divisions for different pieces of property.

And that doesn't make any sense to me either if there was somehow a mistake in there.

So we can either reverse or we could reverse and remand and ask for an explanation

that the parties could comprehend.

Yes.

And that the court could comprehend.

Yes.

We obviously prefer the first, a full reverse.

But I think secondarily, yes, you could reverse and remand, get an explanation.

And then depending on what that is, we may be back up here.

We may settle.

You're always welcome.

Right.

We don't know.

And that was frustrating because we specifically asked in our motion to reconsider.

We don't understand this.

Is it punitive?

Is it truly was there something that you noticed that needed to be corrected?

Because we don't know.

So I would agree.

There's no evidence that it would be punitive though.

Is there?

I'm still speculating.

I'm speculating too.

I agree.

But it felt punitive at least.

I mean it felt all of a sudden my clients got $25,000 less money than he had in his pocket the day before the hearing.

And I think the other troubling piece of this too is the suesponte nature of changing a property division without any notice.

And we went to that hearing expecting to discuss the transactions and how they were going to be done.

And you did.

And we did.

And then I got that order and it was blindside.

And so there was no discussion during the hearing of well maybe the property division isn't correct.

There was a mistake.

There was something.

And so the nature of having.

Was the availability of cash flow to satisfy the marital asset discussed at the hearing?

Yes.

The availability of the cash flow.

And that was one of our reasons why we were arguing you shouldn't do anything.

You shouldn't insert this provision which we've withdrawn that piece of the appeal.

But we have we're asking you not to insert a provision into the decree or reconsider actually at that point it already happened.

Not to reconsider or the insert the provision because my client's Ben's intention is pay in full at the time born drive sales because he will have the cash then he had tried to qualify for a refinance with cash out.

He did not.

He only qualified to remove her name from the mortgage which would still be a benefit.

She wouldn't be an obligor on the on the mortgage because she shows up on her credit report.

So his intention was refinance get that piece of it done and then I'll have cash in full to pay when born drive sells.

So without having to dip into his 401k or IRA or which we mentioned to the court.

I mean there's there's taxes and penalties that go along with that.

That's a significant further ding to his to what he has to the discussion of taxes applicable to the investment properties somehow affecting the numbers that were going to be swapped back and forth.

Was that ever calculated out?

No.

You said that you have trouble with the Sue Sponte nature of this but isn't isn't your problem one step back further that just the court doesn't have the authority to modify the property settlement whether it's Sue Sponte or not absent fraud or

misrepresentation or mutual mistake.

Absolutely.

And that's that's what we listed first this the court doesn't have the authority because if it did I mean this was only two months.

But I mean what we're really talking about is the dangerous precedent that somebody like a court could do this three years down the line.

What's interesting is the numbers that the court moved to reflect the division of those four investment properties in total.

Yes.

Yes I agree.

Yeah it zeroed out Shannon's obligation to Ben.

And what what if mutual mistake is one of the reasons the court can go back and revisit but what happens if the court just makes a mistake and figures it out.

I don't think six months later or two years later does the court have the authority to go back and say geez I screwed up this is what it really ought to be.

I don't I don't think so I think they're foreclosed from doing that the I mean this court has held for example the names escaping me but the case where you couldn't change.

Well so yeah no I think the answer to that is no that the court can't do that and even if it tried to do that it would have to give us an explanation as to what the mistake was and I don't you know mutual

mistake let alone let alone notice an opportunity to be heard.

Right.

Yep.

Is there ambiguity and I think it's paragraph G which appears to apply to all the paragraphs above in 16 as opposed to each of the above investment properties being silent on the split of equity.

So the very last paragraph says all of these 60 40.

Right.

Is that not repeated in each paragraph like it is with the marital home does that create any sort of ambiguity.

Not for me.

I think that that it's clear that it was 60 40 across the board and and there were sufficient findings of fact.

And and the written these are there this is what I've relied on these are the factors that are most important.

Thank you.

Thank you council.

I'd like to please the court.

I'm attorney Geiser and I represent Shannon Badger the appellee.

I'd like to reserve my two minutes.

So before I have any questions so I may explain to the court that what happened in the October 31.

You didn't you didn't reserve two minutes before.

No.

No question.

I'm sorry.

I was awake.

I would like to explain to the court that the order issued on October 31 was not a modification of the final decree at all.

But a correction of the court's original intent and intention in the final decree.

If we're looking at the October 31 order we see that the court corrected paragraph 15 to state that Ben needed to pay Shannon the $54,000 in a certain timeframe.

However when we're looking at section 16 there was no payment timeframe or specific statement that that payment the payment for the investment properties occur.

And the reason is because when we're looking at the numbers from the final decree we see that this was always a 4555% division.

So when we're looking at the numbers and I'm going to throw these out to you honors the total equities in the investment properties was about $497,000.

55% of that is $273,000 and 45% of that is $223,000.

The appellant was awarded $279,000 and the appellate got $217,000.

Those numbers are approximately near what the 4555 division is.

So what the court did here and in its October 31 order used the word approximate was just change the percentages.

It didn't change the amount of equities.

It didn't change the values of the homes.

All it changed was those percentages to reflect that the original division in the final decree was a 4555 split.

Now it would follow that if they were going to correct their order on paragraph 15 and state that payment needed to be made in a certain timeframe,

she would have done the same for paragraph 16 because it was already found in the exparte motion that preceded these hearings that paragraphs 15 and 16 are separate and distinct paragraphs

and not to be considered as one big hole.

So what the court is doing here.

I'm going to assume that two minutes is up.

How does that argument square with the fact that it appears your client agreed that $18,000 was owed to her ex at the hearing.

Yes.

That was repeatedly touched on by the court and agreed to by the parties.

It's going to be 54 this way and 18 this way leaving a net of 35.

So how does this argument now square with what was argued to the court?

Yes, Your Honor.

And if we examine the transcript from that hearing, we note that attorney Brown did agree that the amount was $18,000.

However, she agreed on it based on the position if the court was going to go with rule in favor of the respondent or the appellant.

But no argument was made to the court about a different percentage at that hearing.

Yes, Your Honor.

There was no argument made that no, no, nothing would be owed by Mrs. Badger, Ms. Badger.

We were present at that hearing to defend against the respondent's motion.

So in defending against.

About timing, extension of time.

Right, about timing, yes.

But the other issues before the court were payment of equity for timing in the marital home, but as well as whether or not that equity needed to be offset by the division of the investment process.

Well, but then again, your client's argument was I need the 54 so I can refinance to pay the 18.

So part of your client's argument was that she was going to, she needed the 54 so that she could qualify to refinance in order to pay the 18.

I don't see that there was any defense to paying the 18.

That's why I'm, I'm troubled by this.

And I understand your honor, but the argument was made in so that in the event the court found in favor of the respondent, they had our position that the amount should be 18.

Not that we were necessarily agreeing with the appellant's argument that there needed to be payment.

We've since the beginning stated that these are separate and distinct paragraphs and not to be considered as one big division.

And again, if you're looking at the numbers, that division was always there.

So there wasn't a modification here.

And I believe that the respondent, the appellant had the necessary notice that this is something that might occurred because this court has found that when a court discovers a mistake, they have the inherent power to review and correct its own orders.

And the court notes in us in October 31st order that that's exactly what it was doing.

But that's while a matter is pending in front of the court, not the court doesn't have the ability to five years later say, oh, I made a mistake.

I'm going to go back and revisit it.

Well, this matter was still pending before the court due to the post-decision motions that have been filed following the issuance of the final decree.

And everybody was aware of what those motions entailed, having either filed one or having objected to one of those motions.

So you agree that if there's an avenue here for the court to go back and look at this, it's not mutual mistake or fraud or misrepresentation.

It's that the court made a mistake.

That's your position.

Yes, the court has the inherent power to correct its own mistakes when the proper circumstances exist for them to be aware of their mistakes and correct those mistakes.

And the proper circumstances existed in this matter.

The issues brought forth to the court makes it reasonably follow that the court would look at the amount of equity divided in the merit of residence and the investment properties.

It required the court to determine if an offset needed to be paid for those investment properties.

And then looking at that, realize I've made a mistake on the percentages, and I just need to correct those percentages.

It seems to me that to the extent there's any uncertainty here in your briefing, you use phrases like it is fair and reasonable to assume.

Speaking about what the trial court was doing, or it can be inferred.

And if we're not comfortable with assuming or inferring, what's the harm?

If you're right, if we send it back to the trial court, it's very easy for the trial court to clarify what it was doing.

And why isn't that the better thing to do here?

And then we'll have at least a record so that we can have something on appeal if it comes back again.

But maybe the parties will accept it because it's like, oh, okay, that's what the trial court was actually doing.

I am inclined to agree with you. I believe that if we had a better explanation, both parties might feel as if they were in a better position.

However, the court here was exercising its inherent power.

And when a court is exercising its inherent power, we don't believe that it needs to explain itself.

It doesn't need to give specific findings.

I do.

It's unreviewable otherwise, right? I mean, how do we know what's going on?

I would agree. I think that there's a lot of ambiguity in the order that was issued on October 31.

But our point is that it wasn't a modification in and of itself.

It was the use of inherent power.

And the court has the right to use its inherent power when the proper circumstances exist.

And the proper circumstances existed here.

And the propellant had notice of this. He's the one who opened the door to this matter.

He's the one who filed the post-ecision motions regarding the payment of equity and the investment properties.

And it was reasonably foreseeable that in going back to the court and presenting both arguments that the court would realize its mistake and need to exercise its inherent power to clear up the matter.

It didn't issue an order stating that money needed to pay for the investment properties.

But it clearly issued an order stating that money needed to be paid for the marital residence.

So it follows that if that was the original intention of the court, then it would have been relayed in the October 31 order.

And it wasn't because what the court was doing here was issuing a correction to reflect its original intention.

The division was always there. The numbers show that this was always a 45-55 split.

And there was no need for money to pass between either party.

And the court was just issuing an order clarifying its original intention.

So what happens if it goes back and the court says, oh, yeah, you know, it really was 55-45?

Does Mr. Badger then have the ability to file an appeal of that final decree?

Because now it's 55-45 and maybe that's not acceptable to him.

I think that would be, I think the appeal process period would have already followed from that.

And again, the court would just be giving specific reasons as to why it felt the need to clarify its original intent

and exercise its inherent power to correct its own orders.

So no, I don't think that Mr. Badger should have the opportunity to appeal this matter again.

So Your Honours, we're asking that you affirm the court's ruling this morning on the original order from October 31.

Thank you.

Thank you, Councilor.

Do you need your two minutes?

I have one clarity point.

When you were asking about the 25,000, it's because Born Drive.

So there's 18,000 from the investment about, but then the other amount that I'm calculating in to say 25,000

is because in 2020 they're going to divide Born Drive and changing it from a 60-40 to a 55-45 makes it about 25,000.

Your read of the October 31 order applies to Born Drive also.

Yes, I think it applies to the investment properties.

So yes, thanks.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Court adjourned.
