This is case 2019-0120, Balzati Global Group, LLC et al. versus Shepard's Hill proponents, LLC et al.

Before we get started, I want to make sure I have the information right. Mr. Johnson, you've reserved two minutes for rebuttal.

And Mr. Sullivan, you have indicated that you'll be taking three minutes.

And Mr. Boussier, seven.

And Mr. Ailesworth, ten.

That's correct.

All right. Thank you, gentlemen. Please proceed.

Thank you, Your Honor.

May it please the court, my name is Matt Johnson, and I represent the appellants in this matter, Balzati Global Group, LLC, and Cesar Balzati, Sr.

As I noted, as the court noted, I reserve two minutes for rebuttal.

We are here today solely on a motion to dismiss based on statute of limitations grounds.

The court made no substantive findings on any of the underlying claims.

One of the reasons that I'll get into more fully in my argument, the trial court erred both legally and factually,

and this court should remand the case to the trial court for further proceedings.

First and foremost, the trial court used an incorrect accrual date for purposes of the statute of limitations.

The appellant's cause of action did not, under this unique set of circumstances, accrue for statute of limitations purposes until this court published its opinion on April 16, 2015,

affirming the trial court's decision by Judge Colburn that a facially valid and timely filed condominium amendment recorded on February 22, 2013 was—

How does that square with Draper?

How can we already decide the decision?

Great question, Your Honor.

I do not believe Draper addresses this question.

In my review of the case law, this court has never universally addressed this issue.

The Draper case was a malpractice case.

This court has never actually definitively established whether the statute of limitations would run for purposes at the trial court decision or at the final appeal decision.

And I would submit that the court could decide from a policy perspective a broader decision,

but I would submit the court doesn't have to get there in this case given the unique set of circumstances because

this is a complicated set of circumstances.

This is a promissory note tied to a bankruptcy plan relative to the development of a condominium association.

The only mechanism for funding the plan and then subsequently paying the promissory note,

which is pursuant to the plan, a junior subordinated creditor—they're getting paid at the back end of this process—is the development rights.

And whether they lost the development rights is a pure legal question, as Judge Colburn's decision was on summary judgment,

and even this court in its decision affirming it said, you know, affirmed Judge Colburn's decision—legal decision.

So a pure legal question.

So that answers one question I have.

There is no obligation to pay under this promissory note but for the development rights or other than via the development rights.

It's a great question.

Frankly, I think as a practical matter, there's no obligation because there's no mechanism because the development—it's a developer—it's an entity set up to develop the condominium association.

It's not like it's a publicly traded company that has assets other than that.

The only way it's making any money is developing these units and then selling the units and, as the bankruptcy plan set forth,

you know, use it as these units are sold, portions of those proceeds are then used to pay the bankruptcy plan.

Then why not after 10 years? Isn't the game over?

Great question, Your Honor.

It would be, except for the fact that the 24th Amendment that was filed, on its face, converts all the land remaining so that the developer would continue to be able to develop.

It can't trump the statute, can it?

Well, the statute only requires that the land be converted within 10 years.

The amendment converted it within 10 years.

Now, the trial court and this court ultimately said you can't do it the way you did it.

But the 24th Amendment on its face says, and paragraph A of it says, there shall be no more convertible land.

So they took care of all of the convertible land at that point in time.

And so, by reading that, and again, this is recorded in the registry, this purport, that document purports to satisfy the statute.

But there's no evidence that your client read that amendment, is there?

Correct. That's correct, Your Honor.

So how did you rely on it, if you didn't read it?

I don't think you have to rely on it.

The title search shows it.

There is evidence that he got a title search run in June of 2015, showed that 24th Amendment.

In other words, there's nothing in the record, in contrast to that, there's nothing in the record to suggest that the development rights had been lost,

or that the convertible land had expired, because there was that 24th Amendment filed, shows up in a title report, within the 10 years.

So on its face, it's valid.

Had the 24th Amendment been late, or not filed at all, I think it's a different question.

But because of that 24th Amendment, I believe that can't be the trigger for the statute of limitations, because it's valid on its face.

Why isn't the trial court's funding regarding the August 14 meeting fatal to your client's position?

I think the trial court erred in its credibility determinations on that.

How can we get behind that?

I think you can get behind that under the totality of the circumstance of this case.

I understand the burden I have on that point, Your Honor.

But the circumstances around that, Mr. Thiebaud testified to this meeting.

He couldn't even testify.

He was even vague on the month.

There was no corroborating details.

They filed a motion to dismiss in this case and asserted the statute of limitations of 2010 and 2011.

They never once raised this meeting in 2014.

The first time this alleged meeting testimony ever happened was at this evidentiary hearing.

Only after my client testified to a different date.

And was there a corroboration for your client's date?

And that's one of the errors I believe the trial court made, because the trial court excluded evidence in the spring and summer 2015 time frame,

which corroborated my client's testimony of why it was March and April of 2015 that he had the meeting,

because he was asking Mr. Thiebaud for some financing for the roofing company.

He then heard first about the existence of the lawsuit.

He ran a title search.

This is a real estate project.

So he had a title search run.

That's, I believe, the trial court erred in dismissing someone due diligence.

It's a condominium project.

He had a title search run.

There showed nothing of issue.

And the basis for excluding that evidence was relevance?

I believe so, Your Honor.

I, you know, I objected to it.

I thought it should come in as being admissible.

The court didn't seem to, because it was, the trial court's conclusion appeared to be that it was excluded

because it was after the alleged testimony by my client that he, in March or April.

But it corroborated my client's testimony, because part of it did two things.

One, it showed some of the due diligence he did after the meeting.

Second, it provided proof of why it was that he could recall when that meeting happened because of the steps

he then took right after that, in that same time frame.

And again, the court excluded that.

And then on the flip side, the court, but the court allowed in a work product timeline over my objection,

which again, was a clerical error only that it was there.

And that was highly prejudicial with my client, because as this court knows,

the trial court's decision, very, very much a credibility determination.

And at this point, I don't think you can unring that bell.

You have evidence that was excluded that supports my client's credibility,

but then you have evidence admitted improperly, in my opinion, that hurt my client's credibility.

And then ultimately, the trial court's decision hinges on, yeah, hinges two-way.

That when the alleged meeting happened is a credibility determination,

but then the earlier decision, the court also said,

the statute ran as of the February 22, 2013 time frame.

So, I mean, I think you have two issues.

Those are alternative findings, either of which could support the trial courts,

affirming the trial court.

Is that right?

That is correct.

But that is why I believe the trial court got it wrong

when they did not use the date of this court's order in April of 2015

as the trigger date for the statute of limitations,

because I would submit that is the only time when actually a final determination has been made

that that otherwise timely condo association amendment is invalid.

And it's only then that the breach occurs,

because at that point, there is no way that that note will be made.

And so under those sets of circumstances, I believe that's appropriate.

I think it's also appropriate, because Justice Donovan touched on the Draper decision,

the Pink and Wintz-Watson insurance case is also similar.

But those are different in that those all involve the same litigants.

So it's a serial litigation involving the same parties.

Mr. Bolzotti is not a party to any of the underlying actions,

so sits in a different position than someone who is already involved in the first litigation

and then is involved in the second point.

What is your client's position as to the state of the record as to when he learned of Judge Colburn's decision?

He learned of the lawsuit in late March or early April of 2015.

First time.

Yes.

That's his position.

Yes.

And that was what he testified.

That is what he pled.

He filed affidavits with the trial court that were clear on that point,

and he testified further that he learned of the actual Supreme Court decision in the fall of 2016 as well.

So that is the evidence for purposes of the discovery rule.

But again, if the Supreme Court decision date of April 16, 2015 is a proper trigger date,

then you don't even have to engage in a discovery rule analysis because you don't get there

because the cause of action did not accrue until those development rights were finally terminated.

A couple other points just on the credibility piece that I think that are important.

Mr. Thiebaud, again, he had no corroborating details for this alleged summer meeting.

He couldn't provide any backup to it.

He testified that his testimony was that he had an acrimonious relationship with my client, Mr. Balzotti,

yet he allegedly told him about the lawsuit in 2014,

but didn't tell his other partner about the lawsuit until 2016.

So again, I just raised the question and believe the trial court had an unsustainable exercise.

Presumably all the arguments you're making to us now about why we shouldn't go with the trial courts

determination of credibility were made to the trial court.

Yes.

Yeah.

And particularly on a motion of reconsideration, those issues were raised before the trial court.

That is correct, Your Honor.

Another point, shifting gears a little bit since there are several moving parts in this case.

I believe the trial court also aired when it concluded that they did not find that the statute of limitations

for the claims against the association would be different.

The condo minimum association was formed as a requirement of a bankruptcy plan,

and there is a bankruptcy court order is recorded in the registry.

It remains on record today, and you could call it a mortgage or lien or encumbrance,

but it is on record and burdens the land to some extent.

The 2014 Judge Colburn decision, nor this court decision in 2015,

neither of them mentioned the bankruptcy plan or spoke of that issue at all.

Is that a 20-year statute of limitations?

Electing against the association?

Well, so the association, and so the bankruptcy plan, to give you an example,

the bankruptcy plan for the more senior creditors had a negative pledge agreement

which required sort of payments and releases to be filed as that happened.

And I would note, and it's in the record at Appendix 3 at page 208 to 209,

the last of those partial releases that I could find, Elise, was on March 6, 2017.

That's two years after this court's final decision on...

Does that act like a payment that might extend the statute of limitations on a note or a debt?

It might. It might, Your Honor.

But it also is indicative of the fact, vis-a-vis the association,

that the plan is still being adhered to in some fashion.

I mean, the Supreme Court issued this order, and if the plan didn't apply,

and why are partial releases being executed two years after the court's order?

And so, to some extent, it's unclear what the association is going to do.

Is the association going to honor the terms of the bankruptcy plan as its development?

Is there a deal with the new developer as they seek to sell the development rights

going to be to pay pursuant to the plan that's on record?

The plan hasn't been discharged or voided from the Registry of Deeds in any sort of fashion.

But relative to the statute of limitations, and it's in the appendix,

Mr. Balzati did not learn of the association's efforts to sell these development rights

to January of 2017.

So, for that reason, that potentially is a different triggering date relative to...

So, the development rights revived, in a way?

Arguably.

The other point I had made before the trial court is that the bankruptcy plan was...

Part of it had a package of agreed-upon development rights with the town of Hudson,

so that there was a negotiated, like, what you can do with this property,

which would be beneficial to the property, and those were with the plan.

And again, the record is not complete on that point,

because it was at a motion to dismiss on the statute of limitations stage.

But whether it's, in fact, the association is benefiting from any of those rights

that adhered in the bankruptcy plan, to which I would say you can't have...

You can't take the benefits of the bankruptcy plan without the burdens associated with the bankruptcy plan.

But again, discovery has not been completed on this one.

This is at a motion to dismiss for a statute of limitations argument.

I would note, as well, in the association, the association spent some time in their brief

attacking the substantive basis of the claim.

There's nothing before this court on that issue.

The trial court's decision is solely on the statute of limitations.

The trial court did not make any findings one way or the other,

either factually or legally, relative to the claims my client has asserted against the association.

Another point, I think the trial court erred in not looking at and adopting a judicial estoppel argument

presented to it in 2010-2011.

These same Shepherds Hill parties were in involuntary bankruptcy proceedings brought by Mr. Balzotti.

As part of that litigation, they claimed that the note was not yet due for the terms of the plan.

And the reason they made this argument was because that made Mr. Balzotti's claims contingent.

And if they're contingent, then they can't form the basis for bringing an involuntary petition.

Judge Deasy, then the bankruptcy judge in New Hampshire, adopted that,

or had to adopt that finding in dismissing the involuntary petition.

Did he explicitly adopt that finding?

It didn't seem to me that he did specifically address that.

I believe, if you look at the transcript, he had to adopt that finding

because he dismissed the involuntary proceedings, and he dismissed them because these claims were contingent.

And they were contingent because of the argument that nothing was yet due under the note

for the terms of the bankruptcy plan because the development had not proceeded far enough down the road

where, pursuant to the plan, Mr. Balzotti or Don Balzotti, then owner of the note,

would have been entitled to any payments.

And so I think by necessity, Judge Deasy made that finding or adopted a finding.

Otherwise, there wouldn't have been a basis to dismiss the involuntary petitions.

And again, that goes to the point of where the funding mechanism is these development rights,

and they're only lost when this court finally in April 2015 said,

I agree with the legal conclusion that this facially valid document is not valid.

Finally, last point, just the trial court's order on the evidentiary hearing very much focused on

when my client knew or should have known of Justice Colburn's order,

and that was the focus of the hearing.

I objected, as you would see in the transcript, repeatedly because at the hearing,

the scope went far, far broader than that.

We had already had a hearing on the bankruptcy implications,

and this hearing, I believed it to be solely on the timing of when my client knew about Justice Colburn's hearing.

That hearing got into bankruptcy proceedings, lots of information well beyond the scope of that.

And again, I think tainted the entire subject of the hearing

because as the court has seen with trial court's order,

it ended up being credibility confrontation,

and my client was forced to ask questions on the scope of which he did not have fair notice

that that would be fair game for the hearing,

and so frankly was put in an adverse situation

and then ultimately punished by the trial court in Judge Wake's credibility determinations.

Wasn't the order setting up that hearing broader, really?

I mean, it identified that specific sub-issue, but it was a broader issue about when your client knew

or should have known about the loss of development rights.

It wasn't just about Judge Colburn's order.

Isn't that the way it reads?

I believe it was more focused on when Justice Colburn's order,

and relative to that, even were that to be the broader interpretation of it,

that allowing them to get into bankruptcy-related activities

and the bankruptcy petitions and those things would go well beyond the scope of that

because those issues were not relevant to any determination of when the development rights were lost

because by that point in time, the defendant's argument was at the earliest,

the rights were lost in 2013 by virtue of that 24th Amendment,

so that would be my position.

You're ready.

I'm sorry, go ahead.

I'm sorry, the hearing on the bankruptcy issues had already been held at that point.

Yes, Your Honor.

I see my time is up.

You still have two minutes if you need it.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Mr. Boussier?

Thank you, Your Honor.

May it please the court?

My name is Emil Boussier, and I'm here on behalf of Mr. Thiebaud,

the FLE in this action, and I want to just initially briefly address a pretty important point in this case,

and that is it first starts off with a reference to this court's Bean decision

at 160 New Hampshire 708 in discussing when the discovery rule is going to apply

to toll the statute of limitations,

and it says the plaintiff need not be certain of the causal connection

between the act or omission and the injury.

The possibility that it existed will suffice to obviate the protections of the discovery rule.

So you don't have to be absolutely certain that you might be harmed.

It's just you have to realize that you could be harmed on account of the act or omission

that you're complaining about, the act or omission being the loss of the development rights.

They want to point to this court's decision in 2016 affirming Judge Cochran's decision

as the final date when they became aware that they were harmed.

Well, they're saying that's when they knew that they were harmed,

but they admit in their reply brief at page 7 that they realized that prior to this court's decision,

there was a possibility that they had been harmed on account of the fact

that the development rights had not been fully exercised or legally extended by February of 2013.

So according to the Bean case,

they are not entitled to the protections afforded by the discovery rule

because they knew that there was a possibility of harm.

And of course they knew that there was a possibility of harm.

I mean, they knew from back in 2003 when the amendment,

when the condominium declaration, the first amendment was reported,

that there was a totality of 10 years that was pursuant to the law

and pursuant to the condominium declaration as well as the first amendment

saying you have 10 years to build out this project and convert all the convertible land.

They knew that at the time.

When that 10 years expired, they suffered harm.

That was harm that they knew-

Arguably, the entire world is on notice that there's only 10 years of development rights.

Well, people are presumed-

I'm sorry, Your Honor.

And condominium developments.

I mean, that's part of the deal.

That's always part of the deal.

And that's only if you actually have a declaration of a condominium

that permits you to extend to that 10-year period.

And you have to do it by filing an amendment to extend that additional 5 years,

which gives you the totality of 10 years.

And the statute specifically says you can't go beyond that.

So there's nothing that can be done to extend that date beyond the 10-year period.

So he had to have known that he was harmed, or at least he's presumed, as Judge Waysen found,

he's presumed to know the law and recognize that once that 10-year period expired,

there were no longer any development rights available to the proponents.

You're aware of no extension beyond the 10-year period?

I am not aware of any extension that the developer can unilaterally file in order to extend beyond 10 years.

I think that there is a potential that the then-existing condominium association pursues to different provisions of RSA 3.

In negotiations, perhaps, with the land sales full disclosure agency, there could be extensions beyond 10 years.

There could be, but it would also take the agreement of the association in order to be able to do that.

And that simply was not done.

So, you know, as soon as that date passed, he knew that the harm had occurred.

And when he was told in August of 2014 that the case had already been lost in the trial court,

where they were trying to uphold that subsequent amendment that was the paper conversion

of the right to continue building, he knew at that time that the trial court had found that the convertible rights

had been extinguished by the operation of law as of February 25th, 2013.

So, of course, he knew at that point that it wasn't just a possibility that there was harm.

There was already a trial court that said you don't have any more development rights.

The only possibility that he wouldn't be harmed would be if, on appeal, the development company was successful

in convincing this court into reversing Judge Colburn's decision.

So there was a real right-in-your-face acknowledgement by them that they were being harmed as soon as he learned.

Well, that position, though, is that meeting either didn't happen or it didn't happen as related in 2014.

And because of the exclusion of some evidence that should have been admitted

and the admission of some evidence that shouldn't have been,

that credibility finding and that determination and finding a fact by the trial judge

is fatally flawed and we should not defer to it.

What's your response to that?

If you look at, well, there's a lot of different fingers to what Your Honor just said.

But I think what needs to be recognized, first and foremost,

is that when there's a discussion about a procedural flaw with respect to the scope of the hearing.

And he didn't like the scope of the hearing.

This Mr. Balzotti didn't like it on account of the fact that it exposed him to being unbelievable.

That's because we had to get back into that bankruptcy finding.

And when you look at the actual notice of the hearing that they're complaining about

didn't put them on sufficient notice that there was going to be more than just a discussion

about Judge Coburn's decision, this is a quote from the hearing notice scheduling the hearing.

It says,

Here, the injury or damage is Balzotti's inability to collect upon the note

through the sale of the new condominium units.

The act or admission complained of is a loss of the development rights.

In light of the foregoing, the court ordered an evidentiary hearing to determine when Balzotti knew

or should have known about the loss of the development rights.

That opens it up to everything.

The court then went on to say that this inquiry necessarily concludes when Balzotti knew

or should have known about Judge Coburn's order.

And you'll see that even in the motion for reconsideration where they raised the issue

that the scope of the hearing was expanded too far.

Judge Wigeland on her decision on the motion for reconsideration

simply cited exactly how the order came out ordering that evidentiary hearing.

How does that incorporate anything having to do with the bankruptcy?

How does that notice incorporate any testimony about what happened in the bankruptcy?

Because one of the issues was Balzotti's state of mind

in terms of understanding what information he could be reasonably relying on to obtain from Mr. Thiebaud

and what information in reasonable diligence he could be out searching for information on his own

doing a simplistic task like going to look at the registry of deeds to see what's on file

where he would have discovered the amendment showing that there was only 10 years to develop all the convertible land.

His testimony at the time was that I was relying upon Ernest Thiebaud.

And we said that's unreasonable.

You could not possibly have been relying on Ernest Thiebaud

because you've been a serial litigator against Ernest Thiebaud starting back in 2006.

Then in 2010, you had your wife file an involuntary bankruptcy against Mr. Thiebaud and others

that obviously was going to cause him a substantial amount of harm

because as soon as you file these involuntary bankruptcies,

all the registries pick up on you, financial institutions start calling you saying,

why is someone calling you into bankruptcy? Are you bankrupt?

And of course he wasn't bankrupt at the time,

but that was Mr. Balzotti's way of trying to gain some leverage on Mr. Thiebaud

to try to get him to pay money that otherwise wasn't due.

And he acknowledged at that point the relationship between Mr. Thiebaud and Mr. Balzotti

was so strained, and we wanted to show that it was so strained,

to show that it wasn't reasonable for Mr. Balzotti to say that he was relying on Mr. Thiebaud

for any information.

And it was that earlier involuntary bankruptcy that was the subject of this hearing,

not the later actual bankruptcy that resulted in the plan.

The bankruptcy that resulted in the plan started back in 2000.

There was involuntary bankruptcy, a totally, completely different animal

that was started by Mr. Balzotti.

He forced his wife to file this involuntary bankruptcy against Mr. Thiebaud.

And so both were addressed at this particular hearing we're talking about.

Well, there wasn't really a lot of discussion about the earlier bankruptcy

because the earlier bankruptcy was just the progeny of this development

being brought out of the bankruptcy and then started over again.

Your red light is on.

It is. Thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you.

Mr. Sullivan.

May it please the court?

My name is John Sullivan.

I represent two of the appellees in this matter,

Shepard Hill Proponents and Shepard Hill Development.

Twenty years ago, Mr. Boussier's late father, a great man,

asked me if I could take a short two-hour cruise,

a small engagement with him to help him with some bankruptcy questions

because that's where my practice is principally in the bankruptcy court,

if I could help him on this case.

Twenty years later, this is the fifth courthouse I have been involved with litigation initiated

by Mr. Balzotti, and in each instance, the litigation has been spectacularly unsuccessful

for Mr. Balzotti.

So I had great trepidation when we were heading to Rockingham Superior Court on this case.

Because you were due to lose?

No, because you had 20 years of history and noise and bankruptcy issues and condominium issues.

Because I feared for the poor judge who would have this case.

And Judge Wigling showed pure genius in my mind in how she handled the case,

the time she gave counsel to brief the issues, the time she gave us to examine witnesses,

and how she broke down the decision of the case.

Which she took this thing down to its right elements.

There are three points that matter.

What was the harm?

What was the omission?

And when did the plaintiffs have an understanding of the possibility of that causal connection?

That's what 5084 says.

That's what Draper says.

That's what Pickowitz says.

Counsel is introducing these sub-rules to Draper, saying,

Oh, Draper doesn't apply if you're a certain type of litigant.

I challenge you to find that language in Draper or Pickowitz.

All of this court's jurisprudence on the statute of limitation is just entirely consistent

that you're looking at this causal connection between the harm and the omission.

And it doesn't have to be perfect knowledge, as Attorney Boosier said.

You know, mere possibility.

They didn't need the final ruling.

Mr. Balzotti didn't need the final ruling from this court in order to know that he was in harm's way here.

Once the development rights had been lost and Judge Colburn had entered order,

there was plenty of notice and plenty of opportunity for him to have enough knowledge of the causal connection

to trigger the statute of limitations.

And so that's consistent with how Judge Wigling approached it.

And I think it made the case manageable because we didn't end up having to go down all these other avenues.

One thing I'd like to say, just quickly, Draper is the good law.

I agree with Judge Bassett.

I don't know how you changed the fact-finding here of Judge Wigling about the August 14th hearing

and about her perceptions of Mr. Balzotti's credibility.

Well, isn't the way we could change that because of the admission of arguably admissible evidence

and the exclusion of admissible evidence, wouldn't that fatally undermine that determination of credibility?

My red light's on.

May I answer?

Please.

Please.

Mr. I don't believe so.

Mr. Balzotti was free to testify and did testify about all the things he did as due diligence.

The court didn't allow in a title search and didn't allow in an opinion from a Boston law firm.

The Boston lawyer was not there to testify about his opinion.

He had not been qualified as an expert.

So those pieces of evidence, one was irrelevant, and what's the title opinion doing?

And one is hearsay.

He was able to fully testify that he was out doing what he thought was enough to be reasonable.

So knocking those two pieces of documentation out doesn't become a reversible error.

So he still testified to running the title?

He just didn't let the title search in?

Right.

He testified about how he was trying to get the project refinanced,

and he was dealing with lawyers and mortgage companies,

and so the judge didn't let in the documents that backed up those conversations,

but no one challenged whether those conversations ever happened.

So I don't see how that becomes a reversible error.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you.

Mr. Ellsworth.

Good morning.

May it please the court.

My name is Tom Ellsworth.

I'm here on behalf of the Shepherds Hill Condominium Association,

which, as you obviously can see, was dragged into this litigation.

Unbeknownst to my clients, there was a bankruptcy debt that was out there

that allegedly still belonged to the developer,

and eventually in the second amended complaint that was filed by the plaintiff,

allegations were made and claims were made directly against the association.

The first point I'd like to make is that Judge Wagling got it dead right

when she determined that the statute of limitations that extinguished Balsati's claim

passed to the developer equally applied to the association.

And that is when the court looks at the amended complaint

and the claims that were filed against my client.

One was for declaratory judgment on the issue as to whether my client

was somehow attached to the bankruptcy plan.

The second one was for constructive trust,

the idea being that once the development rights extinguished as the developer,

they were now held in constructive trust by my clients

for the benefit of the plaintiff, appellant.

And the third claim was for unjust enrichment,

that somehow my client, when those development rights expired in 2013,

that somehow my clients were unjustly enriched.

All three of those claims are triggered by one event,

and that is the extinguishment of the development rights

on February 25 of 2013 by operation of statute.

So when Balsati claims that somehow a different statute of limitations

applies to my clients, that is not borne out in the complaint.

That is not what the claims say, or not what the claims arise from.

It's very clear that the triggering event was the extinguishment by statute

of the development rights for the declarant.

So the partial releases that are ongoing,

how do they factor into this, to your argument?

I'm glad you asked that question, Your Honor,

because I have two points to make about, two points to respond on that issue.

That is not an operation of the bankruptcy plan.

That my clients, or that, not my clients,

but the sellers of units are giving partial releases,

part of the condominium statute, chapter 356B.

But who are they getting releases from?

Well, I don't know, I don't understand what counsel's talking about

when he said there are releases in 2017.

That's not clear to me.

But I can tell the court.

Was that part of the record below?

It was not, Your Honor.

It was not part of the record below.

But what I can tell the court is that under section 356B.8,

the condominium statute, that it is a requirement

that releases be given to unit owners

when they purchase a unit from the developer.

Part of the statute.

It's not a product of the development plan.

And, equally important,

the same is true for the creation of the association.

That is not a product of a bankruptcy plan.

The association was created because it is a requirement

by the condominium statute 356B.

Every single condominium in the state of New Hampshire,

every association is a product of that statute.

It is a requirement.

It has nothing to do with the bankruptcy plan below.

The creditor, the alleged creditor,

outside of this case,

alleges in the complaint

that the fact that the bankruptcy plan

was recorded with the registry of deeds

is some kind of an encumbrance

or a lien or a mortgage on the condominium.

That's simply not the case.

So the condominium association operates fully independently

of the bankruptcy plan.

That's correct, Your Honor.

They have no obligations or requirements

or are completely unaffected.

That's absolutely correct, Your Honor.

There's nothing in the bankruptcy plan

that implicates the condominium association.

And the allegation by the plaintiff's appellant

that somehow the association by mere fact

of its successorship, to use the plaintiff's terms,

of development rights

implicates my clients in the bankruptcy plan.

That's just pure rhetoric.

There's nothing in the law to support that.

There's been no theory advanced either in the complaint

or in any of the papers below

by the plaintiff's appellant

that somehow, by operation of statute, remember,

not by any kind of a...

Well, 356B does allow for successor developers,

but we aren't talking about that here.

That's correct, Your Honor.

That's absolutely correct.

In other words,

my clients' control over the development rights

is by operation of the statute.

It has nothing to do with an asset purchase.

It has nothing to do with successorship

of the declarant developer of the condominium.

And there is a case.

It is from Massachusetts, and we cited it,

but it stands equally in New Hampshire

because the same thing in Massachusetts.

The association is a creature of statute.

And what the Aldrich case concludes

from the SJC in Massachusetts,

and the SJC explicitly states,

is that because the association

is a creature of the statute,

it is not the successor to the developer.

It does not stand in the shoes of the developer.

And there is no theory advanced in this case

that would change that analysis.

It would require an amendment of the statute.

It certainly would, Your Honor.

It absolutely would require an amendment of the statute.

And the New Hampshire Condominium Act,

like all condominium acts

that I'm familiar with in the United States,

and those are primarily in Massachusetts,

New Hampshire, Florida, Colorado, California,

they are designed to protect the unit owners

and the association from something like this

so that unwary unit owners don't buy a condominium

and suddenly find themselves as a defendant

in a claim by a creditor of the developer,

a claim for over $5 million.

My clients have been subject to in this lawsuit,

and if you can imagine the devastating effect

this litigation and the prior litigation

has had on the 270 owners of the units

that exist in this condominium.

My clients are deserving of the protection

of the court below in this court.

Or the flip side,

your clients aren't receiving a windfall

in any way, shape, or form

by stepping into the development rights, if you will.

Thank you for that question, Your Honor.

And I think that's an important one

because, of course, that's one of the allegations

of Balsati.

There's no windfall.

The prices that my clients have paid for their units,

if you add them all up,

amount to many tens of millions of dollars

that they have paid for this condominium.

The suggestion that there is some windfall

is absolutely basis,

and it's certainly not a legal ground

under which my clients could have any liability

to the developer's creditor.

But that idea that somehow

my clients got a freebie out of this

is really offensive to my clients

due to the amount of money

that they have paid for their units

and the amount of time and energy

and the cost of these lawsuits.

Well, they paid for an entire condominium,

all the units that were anticipated at the time.

That's correct, Your Honor.

All the units that were developed

have been sold to the third parties,

including those who make up the association.

They bought this condominium.

And it's important to keep in mind, too,

it's a common mistake to think

that the association owns the condominium land

or that the association owns the condominium.

That's not the case.

A lawsuit against the association

is really a lawsuit against the unit owners.

And the reason is that under the statute,

New Hampshire Condominium Act,

it is the unit owners,

not the association,

that owns the land

and that controls the rights to the development.

And if those...

The association is merely a governing device.

That's correct, Your Honor.

It is merely a governing device for convenience

because it makes a lot more sense

to have a single body

be the representative on issues

having to do with commonities.

And once the developer disappears,

then there's a property tax burden

on that convertible land, if you will.

That's correct, Your Honor.

Although I think that was taken care of

under a statutory revision.

But yes, all of the responsibilities

for the governance of the condominium

and the exercise,

if there is to be an exercise,

of the development rights

all fall onto the association,

but only through the unit owners.

And so, ultimately, I guess

I would just like to make the point

that this statute of limitations

clearly applies.

Judge Bagley got it right.

The idea that somehow

these development rights

expired in 2013

and then an indefinite period of time

could have gone by

and then the creditor comes in

on an old bankruptcy claim

and claims that my clients

are on the hook for that,

you won't see the association

mentioned in the bankruptcy plan.

And in fact, contrary to the assertion

by the plaintiff,

there's nothing in that bankruptcy plan

that was recorded

at the Registry of Deeds

that suggests that it is a lien

or encumbrance on the association

or the association land.

It does not say that.

What it says is that there are creditors

who are going to be paid off

by the developer

as units are sold.

So it doesn't attach any title.

Correct, Your Honor.

There's nothing to suggest

that it attaches to any title.

And what the plaintiff's allegation is

is by mere fact of a bankruptcy plan

saying that the creditor

is going to be paid by sale of units

means that that carries over to my clients.

There's nothing in the law to support that.

My red line is on.

We urge the court to affirm

the decision below.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Mr. Johnson.

At one point,

there was an assertion

that the partial release documentation

was not in the record.

I just wanted to note

that it is in the record.

It's Appendix 3.

At page 161,

that is the document

where part of the bankruptcy plan

which talks about creating

an escrow agent

and the person in this case

was Edmund Ford

who would then issue

the partial releases.

And the partial release

I was referring to

is Appendix 3,

page 208-09.

And that is a partial release

executed by Mr. Ford

that specifically references

the bankruptcy plan.

And so unless there's further questions

from the appellant

is all set.

Thank you very much.

Case submitted.

Court stands in recess.
