Good morning.

Thank you, sir.

This case 2019-077, appeal of Donna M. Heald et al.

Record should reflect that Justice Bassett is disqualified

from this case.

And then I'm very lonely down here.

So recorded.

And I'm going to reserve two minutes for a bottle of coffee.

Certainly.

So may it be the court, my name is Marcia Brown

and I'm representing the appellant in this matter.

And the appellants have put forth a number of reasons

why this court should find the underlying SEC

order unjust and unreasonable.

And I'm going to focus on just a few issues today.

Important to administrative lawyers

is the right to know and also impermissible rulemaking issues.

I would also like to point out for my clients,

this is an important case to them

because it involves removing financial barriers

to being made whole, not creating

a situation of regulatory takings, holding fair hearings,

and not requiring different evidence

as to from property owners and from an applicant

on the issue of private property.

Well, your clients can still go to superior court.

They have a remedy, right?

They have a remedy, but if you look at, go back to Purdy,

if there's a regulatory taking scheme that happens,

usually there's a compensatory component.

Here, they have to expend in order to overcome.

Let me back up.

There's already a finding from the site evaluation committee

of there being a detrimental impact on fair market value,

and that has not been appealed.

So the fact that there was that finding triggers that, OK,

and well, they've got this detrimental impact,

there's going to, what's the remedy for that?

And they have fashioned this dispute resolution process or?

That is non-binding, correct?

It is non-binding.

Not mandatory.

Not mandatory.

You can either go to a superior court

or to the dispute resolution process.

But that involves a barrier.

And I didn't put it in the record earlier.

I just mentioned costs.

But I found out what those costs are.

It's $1,700 to do the right appraisal,

because you've got temporary takings,

you've got permanent value, and you've

got the temporary value ding.

And that's more extensive than a $800 appraisal.

So there are financial barriers.

But those would be a recoverable cost

in the superior court.

They could, but why should they be up?

I mean, why should a landowner, when faced with a project,

was forced upon them, have to expend

in order to protect their weight that should have been

addressed by the agency in the first place that caused?

So then should we read requirement

in for the applicant to value that diminution

and compensate it?

And in the Northern Pass, they were

suggesting having some kind of a guaranteed value.

I didn't drill down.

But that was voluntary.

That wasn't part of the statute.

No, but it was a way that they were dealing with the impact

of private property.

Once it created a diminution of value, OK,

now you've got a potential regulatory takings.

How consistent with PERTI is the agency to address that?

And if I can just move on the issue of the right to know

just so I make sure that I cover that.

Can you educate me, because I cannot read all 428 pages

of the order in this case.

How does the Right to Know Act issue arise?

Does somebody filed one or petitioned for the right to know?

Or has somebody sent a letter demanding information

pursuant to the right to know?

Those triggers have not happened.

It happened through a, when the dispute resolution itself

was formed, it said that it's going

to be a confidential process.

So that issue was brought to the site

evaluation committee's attention.

And in a order on rehearing, that's where it addressed it

and said, no, this is legitimately

going to be a private process.

It's not going to be a right to know covered process.

So you think that, in your position,

is that joins the issue here before us today?

It joins the issue.

And I realize it's the right to issue.

And we did respond in general that we've

got immediate direct harm in general.

But as to the right to know law, the way that it's set up,

if it's private, 541A protections don't apply.

It would be nice to know before they get to that fourth

step whether the 541 protections apply.

So I would submit that to wait for a request

to trigger review, it's not an efficient use of the course time.

How does the process work?

How does the private review process work?

Who runs it?

Who decides?

Where does it happen?

Thank you.

And that gets to, in the brief I had set forth,

that there's a tremendous amount of oversight

from the site evaluation committee administrator

and the dispute resolution.

And if I can back up even further the lens,

there's a four step process before you

get to this private dispute resolution process.

So how it works and how it is subject to the right to know

law is there's a tremendous amount of oversight

from the site evaluation committee to that dispute

resolution administrator.

There are quarterly reports that have to be filed.

Expense and compensation are approved by the site evaluation

committee administrator.

And all parties, all the parties

are bound by the confidentiality provision.

No one can waive it?

Correct.

So if they had pursued the remedy through the court,

they would have all the protections.

They would have the right to know.

They would have appeal.

But this oddity of this dispute resolution

and being private, if it's supposed to be a choice.

So even the parties participating can't

waive it and disclose the information?

My understanding is the confidentiality provision

on page three or seven.

And that's where we had suggested the fix for this

because it's so integrated with conducting the public's

business that section five, keeping sensitive information

confidential, would apply.

And we could simply just have that added to this document

that it would be confidential.

So you could just have a narrower confidentiality

provision for advocating?

Sort of a narrower?

Yes, yes.

More well-defined confidentiality provision.

Right.

The dispute resolution, step four,

does not have to be beyond the reach of 91A right to know

in order to protect confidentiality.

91A five already does that.

But correct me if I'm wrong.

Did the subcommittee find that there are a number of steps

before you get to the dispute resolution process

that every source engages with owners who have or not satisfied

with the mitigation efforts and there's a negotiation that

takes place even before you get to the ERP?

That is correct.

But if you're asking am I conceding that the right to know

does not apply to that, I would say no because costs

of this project flow through to rates

and where they decide the rates is a public process.

So why should these processes that

are coming up with that number ahead of them going into rates,

why should that be not subject to right to know?

There's an inconsistency.

There's an anomaly.

And if that number comes into the public process, rate setting,

there's no ability to reach back and explain

where the number came from.

Well, but that argument, anything that every source does

would be subject to the right to know.

Because everything that they expect goes into the rate.

Correct.

Correct.

That's the point.

I mean, they are a regulated agency, I mean, entity.

And if I can also go add the point of with respect

to private property and the determination

on public interest and impact of utility projects

on private property, that is a public process

through the PUC under 371.1.

Now, if you look at the 162 umbrella as a one-stop shop,

and this gets to the argument that every source had raised

about private property being a common lot issue,

it would make sense with an umbrella agency

to want to resolve these private property issues

within this one-stop shop.

And indeed, its agency, PUC, can do that already under 371.

Now, why this dispute resolution mitigation of costs

didn't get wrapped into the permit requirements of 371.1

through the PUC and then have that determination brought up

to the site evaluation committee?

I don't know why that process didn't happen.

But again, it affirms that these are subject

to the right to know.

If I can slip over to the private property

and the notion that this is beyond the reach of the courts,

I set forth in the brief for the administrative rules

and how the site evaluation committee boxed itself

in the 2015 rulemaking declaring that we're not going

to use the orderly development section,

we're not going to use the aesthetic section

to implement the public interest section of the statute.

It said it was going to use 301.16

and within that is the private property element.

Is that the orderly development section?

Pardon me?

Is that the orderly development factor?

301.16 is public interest?

Public interest.

Thank you.

So the committee, or the subcommittee itself,

the site evaluation committee itself,

set up in rulemaking that it was going

to address private property.

So it meant something.

It meant from the rulemaking aspect

that boxed itself in and the site evaluation committee

excluded orderly development aesthetics.

Now in the procedure itself, it said

what it was going to consider as evidence

of private property in the dispute resolution phase.

Now this is where it's to, what's good for the gander

should be good for the goose.

If the evidence required of the landowners is appraisals,

then why isn't that same evidence

if that criteria of private property is in 301.16b,

why isn't that being required?

So it brings in the fairness argument.

Is it meaning a specific impact to a specific property

or is it sort of generalizing?

Is the impact to private property in general?

Is there a distinction?

I would say that they defined the scope in what they

were willing to use as a condition

through the dispute resolution process

and they defined it as an individual property

right, which would make sense because you've already

have orderly development.

And now what else would private property be?

And other agencies skirt into this common law section

as well.

And I gave the example of the Board of Tax and Land Appeals.

And I also just gave the Public Utilities Commission.

Agencies can deal with common law rights

so long as it's within their regulatory function.

And here I would say that it is within the regulatory function.

But they didn't specifically invoke

sort of an eminent domain process.

No, they didn't.

And I've been out of the site evaluation committee process

for a while and I think it would have been helpful to have

set up to have the PUC just run through its overburdening

easement mechanism so that it would have been dealt with

and that it would have had a administratively efficient

disposition of these cost-effective for participants

and would have resolved the issue so that the prudence

of those costs were already blessed in that agency

so that then if it's a rate-regulated applicant

like Eversource could then have then gone to the PUC

and just put it into rates with that prior prudence

blessing.

As opposed to having your clients go to court

and then here's a cost item that's hanging out here

and has to get rolled in later.

Correct.

Correct.

I think I have one minute from the timer.

But you have two more after that.

I have two more after that.

Now, I just want to revisit the overburdening issue.

Your red light is on now.

Why don't you do that with me too?

Thank you.

Mr. Glan.

Good afternoon and may it please the court.

I'm Glan.

I represent Eversource and this matter.

Let me start here.

There was no taking in this case at all.

This is a regulatory process in which an agency has

been granted authority by the state of New Hampshire

to be a one-stop shopping center for regional issues.

To go back to your point, Justice Hans Marconi,

this was what are decided in these cases

is impact regionally and generally, not individually.

And that's the fundamental underlying error

in all of the appellant's claim.

As the name suggests, this is a reliability project.

And it required in order to keep the lights on

in the Seacoast area.

But then just help me out here.

Why the dispute resolution process?

If there isn't a focus on individual harm,

if you will, how does that get rolled in?

Because it is a mitigation technique applied by the SEC,

which actually offers a benefit greater than these plaintiffs

ever would have.

Because look at it this way.

All of these plaintiffs purchased their property

after Eversource owned this easement

and had a power line in it.

And none of them have a right to a diminution

of the value of their property simply

by virtue of the view of a power line in that line.

And this is offered in a way as a mitigation measure.

It's a mitigation measure.

To the impact in general.

Right.

And for that very reason, the SEC

doesn't have the authority to make a decision with regard

to the damage to any specific property

and therefore couldn't order the plaintiffs

to participate in this process.

What they could do and could do was to say, Eversource,

if you want this certificate, you

need to make this process available.

They have no particular interest in the outcome of that process

other than offering it and then setting up this private process.

So there are really three issues in this case.

And they've all been addressed by this court

in other SEC proceedings.

First, did the SEC rule, 301.16,

properly interpret the statute here?

So when we talk about what private property means,

we have to view it in the context of this statute, which never

mentions impact on private property

except in the purpose section of the statute.

So section 4e under which this rule was adopted

doesn't say anything about impacts on private property.

It simply says that you must take it into account

determining whether the project serves the public interest.

And as this court has found in the past,

the adoption of a rule by an agency

is prima facie evidence of the legitimacy of that rule

under the statute.

And because the statute addresses regional concerns,

there would be no reason to interpret the rule

any differently.

So when you look at the rule itself,

and then the second issue is was the SEC's determination

here that they were not required

to look at impacts to individual properties,

a proper interpretation of their own rule.

And if you look at the rule itself,

all the sections of the rule, private property

says nothing about this.

But all of them deal with very general considerations

like the welfare of the population, the growth

of industry, the overall growth of the state,

the environment of the state, the natural resources

of the state.

So you're looking regionally.

The public interest consideration

was added to the statute in light of Northern Pass.

And what they wanted, the way the agency has always

interpreted this, is after you've

looked at all the other considerations, orderly

development of the region, unreasonable adverse impact,

you then step back and take a global approach.

And they say you have to have new evidence at that point.

There's nothing in this case that the SEC did not

err by saying, look, under the orderly development rule,

you have to take into account the effective project

on real estate values in the affected communities.

And there's ample evidence in this record,

and I'll come to that in a second,

that of what that impact was.

So does impact property belong under the orderly development,

or does it belong under, as council argues,

the public interest, wrong or both?

Well, both.

Because in determining whether the project was

consistent with the public interest,

you already have evidence in the record

that shows what the impact of the project

was or what the effect of the project is

on real estate values in all of the communities that

are regionally affected by the project.

There's simply no reason, at that point,

to say, well, we have to put blinders on,

and we can't consider any of that evidence

when we look at private property.

And arguably, there's similar evidence

in the aesthetics review.

Agreed.

And there is no place in any of the rules

where the SEC looks at the individual impact

on an individual piece of property,

whether it's aesthetics, whether it's historic site.

So where does that property owner go for relief?

Let's assume a big project analyzed generally

has a specific impact to one property owner in particular.

Well, the way that's most likely to happen

is when the project is being constructed,

there is some damage to their property.

And they have a right to go to the Superior Court to do that.

And in this case, they have the additional right,

if they choose to do so, to go

to the dispute resolution process.

I want to address two areas that the plaintiff or the

repellents make in their brief.

The rule has been consistently applied

in the Merrimack Valley case, in the Antrim case,

and in the way that evidence was required

in the Northern Pass case.

Advocacy, Northern Pass didn't get to that point,

but Merrimack Valley and Antrim did.

And in both cases, they applied the rule

the same way that they applied it here.

The plaintiffs have said those cases don't apply

because the applications were filed after the date

or before the date the rule was adopted.

She ignores RSA 162 age 10 comma seven,

which specifically provides that if an application

is pending at the time the rule is adopted,

it applies and that the applicant must go back

and submit additional evidence,

which happened in this case and in all the others.

So finally, there's ample evidence in a record here

to measure impacts on private property generally

as opposed to specifically.

And in fact, Dr. Chalmers, who did the analysis here,

specifically looked at these properties,

that is properties that were within 100 feet of the line

and what the general impact on them would be.

The other error I wanted to address

was that without any citation,

Ms. Brown contends that the SEC said

would no longer use orderly development evidence

with respect to the public interest.

That's not the case and in fact,

it would be absurd to make that argument

because there was never a case,

there were cases where the SEC specifically applied

orderly development evidence in the private dockets.

So without some indication of where

that supposedly occurred, I suppose the argument is

well, in the adoption of the rule,

the rule refers back to section IV-E

and not to the orderly development section.

Fine, except it doesn't say anything about

what evidence might be submitted

to support that termination.

So in all respects, the SEC properly interpreted

the statute, its own rule, and the evidence in the record

to make the determination that this project

was in the public interest and this court,

as you are aware, has deferred to the agency's

determination regarding its rules

where they were reasonable and if this is a case

of whether there's sufficient evidence in the record,

obviously you look, you defer to the agency's view

of that evidence.

So I'm gonna talk briefly about the UA since it came up.

The dispute resolution, I'm gonna divide this

into two parts, the process itself

and then the decision.

The process is not a public body.

It's purely voluntary, as Justice Six pointed out.

It's run by private funds.

It's run by private parties.

The SEC has no particular interest

in the outcome of that proceeding

and the public has no particular interest

in the outcome of that proceeding.

Appellants do not address the question

of whether this is a public body

within a definition of RSA 91A.

We would submit that it is not

and the process part of this is essentially no different

from this court's mediation process

or the mediation process in the Superior Court.

Is there any repercussion

where one of the parties to the process

disclosed what went on?

Well, it's this.

I don't see any reason why Eversource

and one of the parties couldn't agree

that it doesn't have to be confidential.

I think that either of those two parties

could seek to enforce the rule

if one or the other parties breached it.

To sort of enhance the ability

to have that discussion off the record, if you will.

Right.

And in so many respects,

there's a second part of this.

The decision is then actually filed with the SEC.

So the question becomes then

when the decision is filed,

is this government document

within the meaning of the rights and the law?

I suggest that court, that issue isn't right yet.

None of these parties have actually participated

in the dispute resolution process.

No decisions have been issued.

It's possible that none of them will.

Either they settle the matter

through the first part of the process

and the dispute resolution process

actually refers only to that last part

of mediation or arbitration.

So is it your position that the issue is not right?

It is.

But assuming for the moment

that the court addressed that issue,

the privacy, there is a privacy interest here,

particularly with respect to businesses

who choose to participate in this process

because those, the issue would have to be

what are the business losses that you've suffered.

So you'd have to get into all the financial aspect

of that business.

So there's reasons why people

would wanna keep this confidential.

And then secondly, the public interest

in your three-part analysis under the right to know law

of whether something is public or opposed to private

is really addresses, what is the government up to?

Not simply because we've got a document in our possession

that is, that came out of this process

and it's in the possession of the government

that it's necessarily subject to the right to know law.

The issue that we're really talking about here

is some derivative use,

not used for the public to know what the SEC is doing.

We wanna take these and use them in future proceedings

to know how much has been awarded

or we wanna know long-term whether such a process

has any validity at all.

And maybe it comes up in a setting that in some way,

if there were some sort of resolution

that resulted in money being changing hands.

But the SEC doesn't care about that.

The SEC makes the process available

to people who choose to use it

and that's the only real interest they have in the procedure.

Yeah.

Thank you for no other questions.

I yield the remainder of my time.

Thank you.

Ms. Brown?

Thank you with respect to the comment

that the site evaluation committee,

that I did not cite that the SEC has stated

how it would not be using orderly development.

It's clear right in the rulemaking table

and I would direct the court attention to that

because that was the expression

of how the site evaluation committee

was going to implement its rules.

With respect to the issue of takings,

there is private property that's being taken for public use.

The site evaluation committee cited jammers

that there was a diminished market value

of one to 17% and the SEC found

that the project will have some effect

on the values of additional properties.

That's why it's set up.

The dispute resolution process

to deal with that diminution of value.

So there is a regulatory takings there

and that's not something that finding

was not something that the appellant had appealed.

Now, with respect to, is that my, anyway.

That's just a warning light.

Okay, all right.

The definition of private property would say

we would submit is something that the site evaluation committee

did in the Seacos Reliability Project

in the dispute resolution part.

So even though the rules don't define

what private property is going to look like,

the SEC has already done that.

Now, with respect to the prior cases,

I did not see any amendment to the application

for Antrim Wind or for Merinac Valley to see

they had taken that pre-rule application

and updated it to reflect the new rules.

I did not see that.

So with that, I think that blemishes

the presidential value.

Also, do true wrongs make a right?

It's a very clear expression in the rulemaking table

how the site evaluation committee

was going to use evidence

and it was going to use the O116

to implement public interest.

So for all of these reasons

and the reasons given in the brief,

we would request that this court find

that these SEC's decision is unjust and unreasonable

and remand it back for reopening of the record

on this isolated issue.

Thank you.

Thank you, councilor.

Case submitted.

Courts adjourned.

All right.
