This is case 2019-0236, Alexander J. Walker, Jr. versus Aaron Day.

Mr. Johnson?

Good morning, Your Honor.

Good morning.

May it please the court.

My name is Matt Johnson, and I represent Alex Walker, the appellant in this matter.

With me is Devin Bulger from my office who is instrumental in drafting the briefs.

I reserve two minutes for rebuttal.

Your Honor, the trial court erred as a matter of law when it dismissed Mr. Walker's complaint

against Aaron Day for two primary reasons.

First, the court mistakenly relied upon a federal test for claim preclusion that is inconsistent with longstanding New Hampshire law.

And second, the trial court misapplied the motion to dismiss standard when evaluating Mr. Walker's complaint

and Mr. Day's affirmative defense of claim preclusion.

For these two reasons, I would ask the court reverse the trial court's decision

and remand the case to the trial court for further proceedings.

If we agree with you on the law, then does it still need to be remanded?

I think if you agree with me on the law that the trial court used the wrong test,

it can just be reversed and the motion to dismiss could be denied, Your Honor.

And then the case would be remanded to move forward without further briefing on the motion to dismiss.

Yes, Your Honor.

So there's two points to this.

There's the legal argument, and that is that the trial court relied upon the wrong test for claim preclusion.

The trial court looked at federal law and specifically decision airframe systems

v. Raytheon as the test for analyzing claim preclusion.

Airframe articulates a different test.

In airframe, the first circuit focused on what they considered to be a close relationship test

and whether that was sufficient to invoke claim preclusion.

Federal courts have recognized that this test is different and broader than the test under state law.

For example, in the Hermes Automation Technology v. Hyundai case,

the federal court even recognized that our test was broader than that

that Massachusetts used for a privity analysis.

Well, we accepted the airframe analysis.

Will we be essentially overruling Aronson?

I believe if you accepted the airframe analysis, you would have to overrule Aronson,

and I think you would also have to overrule Dagolfi City of Portsmouth as well, Your Honor,

because I think they're directly in conflict.

And I think based on the federal court precedent and the federal court application of the close relationship test,

federal court close relationship test leads to results inconsistent with New Hampshire existing precedent.

For example, there are federal court cases finding cases barred by privity under their analysis

when an employee is sued in their representative capacity and then in their individual capacity.

In Dagle, this court has found that that privity would not bar such a suit,

so that would exactly be inconsistent with New Hampshire law.

And so New Hampshire tracks the Massachusetts test in terms of recognizing privity.

Also, I think it's important to note that this federal close relationship test

is almost all of the cases, there's a subtext of the underlying plane of losing in the first case

and then going on and trying to get recovery from a separate different defendant

from the same avenue they approached before.

And that's not the facts in this case.

Mr. Walker prevailed in all circumstances against Mr. Gill in the first case,

so it's just not factually analogous to the predicate that in most instances in the federal court

is behind this close relationship test.

Why does that make a difference?

How does the analysis change whether the plaintiff has prevailed or not?

The federal court case is using the close relationship test to talk about this concern

about giving a second bite at the apple.

So the court is influenced by the fact that the plaintiff did not prevail in the underlying action.

It strikes me this is a different apple.

Yes, Your Honor. It's a completely different apple.

So what tactical advantage did Mr. Walker gain by waiting to sue Mr. Day, if any?

I don't believe he engaged the tactical advantage.

Frankly, if he engaged in any of the tactical advantage, maybe Mr. Day's,

because as we've noted in our briefs, we do not argue that we can somehow

get a different measure of damages against Mr. Day in the case.

The defamation award provided to Mr. Walker in the underlying case,

I think, sets the ceiling for damages in that case.

The substance and the rationale with Mr. Gill was Mr. Walker desperately

was trying to get a permanent injunction to stop the defamation accident against him.

You can't get a preliminary injunction in a defamation case,

because that's a prior restraint on speech.

You can't get a permanent injunction.

And frankly, that was the approach and the exercise

and the goal of the client at the time to first and foremost

make this horrendous conduct stop.

If Mr. Walker's case were to go forward, don't we have the potential

for inconsistent results?

Isn't that a problem?

I don't believe that's a problem in your honor for a couple reasons.

First, there's the underlying, this is just a conspiracy case.

Now, I recognize you have to have an underlying tort for that.

That underlying tort would be defamation per se.

In the appendix, your honor, are the decisions from Judge Delker

both on the summary judgment motion and also the liability case,

as well as the public record of the type of conducts,

the type of statements attributed to Mr. Walker.

So does that issue get to be relegated?

I believe there's almost no way you could not find defamation per se

under the factual predicate already laid out in the underlying case.

So I don't think that raises a concern relative to the other circumstances.

But Mr. Day would not be saddled with that finding, would he?

Wouldn't he be entitled to his own day in court?

Absolutely, your honor.

But so my point would be this, is that I think the underlying predicate

of defamation per se will be established.

However, Mr. Day has his day in court on a conspiracy case.

There was no conspiracy claim in the underlying case.

If Mr. Day prevails in the finding that he was not a co-conspirator,

then he prevails and that is in no way inconsistent

with the prior decision in the guilt case,

because this is a conspiracy claim trying to alleging

that Mr. Day conspired with Mr. Gill.

So that's why I'm comfortable that there would not be inconsistent

verdicts where this case to be sent back to the trial court

and Mr. Day to have his day in court.

And frankly, he has his day in court because he can contest these allegations.

He can contest the damages.

He can put on a vigorous defense.

And it really goes to this issue of the functional relationship.

The other thing this court has talked about for privity is

that you have to have a functional analysis

and really look at the litigation interest of the parties.

And those litigation interests are very much diverse here

for a couple of reasons.

First, in our pleadings, there's no allegations or facts

by which to, for the trial court to analyze

whether any functional relationship,

any virtual representation took place.

And that's the holding at Dagle.

There has to be a virtual representation

or some manifestation of consent

that the second party is relying on the first party

or consents to the representation in the first case.

There are no facts in our complaint on a motion to dismiss.

Our complaint does not talk about it.

There's nothing related to the litigation.

And frankly, even the exhibits in the appendix

support that view moving forward beyond the motion

to dismiss stage because those exhibits

and the orders show Mr. Gill missed orders

didn't participate in discovery, argued with the court,

you know, was found in default,

found in contempt, ultimately abandoned the case.

And that's in stark contrast to the circumstances here.

Mr. Day has had experience counsel throughout

who has aggressively and persuasively advocated

for Mr. Day not to be responsible for these actions.

So the two sets of circumstances could not be farther apart

when you look at and get into the context

of virtual representation.

And so on the functional analysis, that's the issue.

And with respect beyond the test, the court also turned

the motion to dismiss standard on its head

because the court essentially assumed all the facts

and decided that therefore there must be privity.

Well, again, as I've noted for the court already,

that functional analysis requires a showing of a community

or a mutuality of litigation interest

and there simply put no facts in the complaint

to talk about that issue.

So that is not an issue, right?

In other words, it doesn't matter if there's an employee

or a relationship or some other privity,

recognized privity, if the underlying tort is not the same.

It's a new cause of action.

It is a new cause of action, but it's also the analysis

really, according to Daigle, gets to what happened

in that first case and was there evidence or facts

to support a finding of virtual representation.

That's the functional analysis and that's what

guides the court.

And frankly, at the motion to dismiss stage,

there's no evidence of that.

It's not to argue, we don't stand here saying

that they can't present that defense.

It's an affirmative defense.

They have the burden of proof on it.

Beyond the motion to dismiss stage,

if they can marshal evidence and present facts

to show that there was a virtual relationship sufficient

to meet the Daigle standard for a functional analysis,

that's a different issue.

But that's a summary judgment issue.

That's not a motion to dismiss issue.

And I think the court in Aronson was instructive

and it's important because in Aronson,

this court looked at a situation with an attorney-client

relationship and an allegation of a co-conspirator conduct

and the court said that is not enough for privity.

That does not create privity under this analysis

and why that matters is because if assuming the facts

most favorable to the non-moving party,

even if you assume a conspiracy,

you can't get to privity because that does violence

to the finding and the decision in the Aronson case

on that point because the court has already found

merely being co-conspirators does not equal privity

for purposes of claim preclusion under New Hampshire law.

Simply put, there's no facts in the complaint

that supports such a finding at this stage

given the functional analysis.

And there's really no argument by the plaintiff

of a pre-existing legal relationship.

The argument by the defendant Mr. Day in this case

is that he should be benefitting from this

federal close relationship test.

I would submit that that's not the test in New Hampshire,

has not been in the test in New Hampshire.

The court would have to affirm the trial court's

decision.

The court would have to effectively overrule both

Daigle and Aronson to reach the result they reach.

So just to clarify your position,

if we think the court aired

and that we shouldn't be using airframe

but we should be using,

or the court should be using Aronson,

then should it go back for further hearing?

I believe it should go back for further hearing

because the trial court engaged no functional analysis

as required by Daigle and Aronson,

and they did use the wrong test.

So I do think it would be,

it is appropriate that it has to go back.

So they should have the opportunity to put forward

evidence on the affirmative defense.

Well, that raises a question.

This came to the court on a motion to dismiss standard.

I think at the motion to dismiss,

you don't get to present more evidence.

You could present additional legal briefing

of why the appropriate test is applicable,

but that would really be a summary judgment issue

if they wanted,

they don't lose the affirmative defense

at the motion to dismiss.

But they should have the opportunity

to pursue discovery on that

or develop evidence on that.

Absolutely.

They absolutely can do that.

If the court has no further questions,

I reserve two minutes.

You still have your two minutes if you need it.

Thank you.

Mr. Kline.

May it please the court.

My name is Jonathan Kline.

I'm with the firm Boyle Shaughnessy Law.

With me today is my partner, Pete Bossy,

who was helpful in putting together the presentation today.

My office and myself represent the defendant,

Mr. Aaron Day.

And Mr. Day is asking this court to affirm

the lower court's order dismissing

Mr. Walker's complaint for civil conspiracy

to commit defamation per se

based on resjudicata principles.

Is it true that there was no conspiracy

count against Mr. Gill?

That is correct.

In the underlying action,

there was no claim for civil conspiracy.

Aside from highly skilled lawyering,

how could the trial judge possibly import

a first circuit analysis that's contrary

to a long line of New Hampshire law?

Well, the trial court, in this case,

should identify that this particular

factual circumstances in front of the court

at that time was unique and unusual

in the sense that what we had was a separate

and a parallel lawsuit against alleged

co-conspirators.

In the one case, you had the underlying tort

tried just against one co-conspirator

and in the parallel case against Mr. Day

solely a claim for civil conspiracy

based on the previously adjudicated

defamation per se.

So at the time the trial court was presented

with this, it actually had two ongoing lawsuits.

The first had not reached a judgment on damages,

which was what precluded the court

from dismissing it outright at that point.

And the court was tasked with whether or not

it could even consolidate the two cases

and recognize that the first case was too far

in advance and it would be very prejudicial

for Mr. Day to then join the case at that time.

And under 507, doesn't the plaintiff

have something to say about whether a case

would be consolidated?

Yes, I think the 507 statutory framework

is, I think, designed to foster getting

as many responsible parties into the lawsuit

as possible.

The DeBenedetto analysis allows defendants

to identify non-parties to a lawsuit

and typical case-trushing orders

allow plaintiffs 30 days to amend their complaint

from there.

So hypothetically, Mr. Gill, who was pro se,

could have theoretically identified Mr. Day

and the plaintiff would have had the opportunity

to amend his complaint to add Mr. Day

as a defendant in that action.

Right, but if there's going to be a claim

over between the two co-defendants,

then the plaintiff does have the option

to allow jointer or not of that particular claim.

That's correct.

Typically, the plaintiff controls

who they sue and when they sue.

So why is this any different?

Well, usually the cases that we see

with at least civil conspiracy claims,

all the defendants who are part of the conspiracy,

known defendants, are brought in the same action.

The sequential follow-along lawsuits

are typically ones for contribution

or for defendants to seek those who might

actually be responsible for the majority

of the underlying damages.

The plaintiff gets to choose who they want to sue,

the deep-pocketed defendant,

and the statutory framework is designed

to afford defendants an opportunity

to protect themselves from that scenario.

In this situation, Your Honor,

we are relying primarily on two points

to support the trial court's decision below.

First and foremost, the civil conspiracy action,

as I pointed out, presents an issue

of first impression to the unique set

of factual circumstances that justified

the court to implement defensive,

non-mutual claim preclusion

based on a close relationship.

That's namely the plaintiff's lawsuit against Mr. Day

was properly dismissed because the circumstances

involved parallel lawsuit against co-conspirators

for previously adjudicated tortures conduct.

It has to be pointed out that there is no such thing

as a civil conspiracy in and of itself.

The underlying tort is what gives rise to a civil conspiracy.

So in that sense, the claim against Mr. Day

necessarily depends upon the actions of Mr. Gill,

which in the complaint in the first action

were entirely committed by Mr. Gill.

There is no independent claim against Mr. Day

for actually committing any defamation.

But Mr. Day would get to relitigate that issue,

that fundamental underlying tort.

That's correct, Your Honor.

The practical implication of this is

if the case that Mr. Walker is presenting

against Mr. Day is afforded to go forward,

it is inevitable that that issue

will have to be relitigated again.

And Mr. Gill will be the key witness in that case.

He's the only one alleged to have committed

the tortures conduct.

So he will be a necessary party once again.

And the framework that the trial court adopted

when precluding a successful plaintiff

in the first instance weighs the situation

of when a plaintiff is aware

of a prior alleged co-conspirator

but chooses only to sue one of them

in the first instance,

can they present good reasons

as to why they didn't in the first instance,

such that they should be allowed

to pursue a sequential lawsuit?

In New Hampshire, you don't have to do that.

That's correct.

But under the first circuit analysis,

under these unique circumstances,

the court found it was appropriate.

In other words, there is no dispute in this case

or the plaintiffs have not raised one

that they did not know about Mr. Day

before they sued Mr. Gill

that Mr. Day's conduct was known to them

or that they,

believe in the brief they say

that they relied on an area of case law

that allowed them to sue.

But Mr. Day hasn't been harmed by that, has he?

He has not necessarily been harmed by it,

but there is the chance

of inconsistent judgments,

as you pointed out, the re-litigation of this issue.

Even if it's unlikely

there's still the potential

that if Mr. Day is capable

of defending against a claim

for civil conspiracy to commit

the previously adjuted defamation per se,

then that might be because Mr. Day

is actually going to litigate a defense.

That's correct.

It didn't happen with Mr. Gill.

Mr. Gill, for all intents and purposes,

abandoned his lawsuit halfway through,

failed to respond to summary judgment issues.

There were findings in Judge Delker's

summary judgment order

where he found that

there was no privilege involved,

such as a public figure.

Those are all defenses

that Mr. Day would be entitled

to raise again below, and very well

could put forth affirmative evidence that

the pro se litigant could not do in the first instance.

So it all harkens back

to why didn't the plaintiffs

sue Mr. Day in the first lawsuit?

Have they presented any justifiable reasons

as to why they waited?

All of these circumstances

could have been avoided,

had there been one lawsuit brought at the outright,

with the necessary party of Gill,

the underlying tort fees.

It can happen that

in the course of discovery another defendant

is uncovered,

way too late in the process

for that defendant to be added.

So then, would the rule you're espousing

prevent that?

Subsequent litigation?

I think that that situation would have to be

analyzed on its own facts and circumstances,

just like any residue to count a determination

must be.

So theoretically it may or it may not.

In this circumstance...

And you have ultimately the statute of limitations

of the number of lawsuits that go forward.

Correct your honor.

Overall though, I think it comes down

to a determination of what happened in this case.

The court in this case did not

adopt a broad sweeping rule

that joint tort visas who commit

an underlying wrong together

cannot be sued sequentially.

That is not what it said.

It's based on these facts and these circumstances

where alleged co-conspirators are sued separately

and the only basis for liability

against the second defendant

is submitted by the first.

Then these are circumstances where

during a sequential lawsuit

must yield to considerations of judicial economy.

This does a remarkable benefit

upon Mr. Day, don't you think?

In one sense,

he stands to benefit by not having

to be subject to

a lawsuit, but in the same

sense, the choice

begins and ends with the plaintiff

to vote who they want to sue and when to sue.

It seems to me Mr. Day wants to have his

first case as a shield,

but he doesn't accept

any of the economic

consequences

of that first case

and the damage award.

I think that the federal court precedent

that adopts this close relationship

standard that precludes

subsequent litigation acknowledges

that, but at the same time

I think they say that there is

no justifiable reason

why a second lawsuit should

go forward when

the facts and information

about all those responsible were known

to them, particularly

in a conspiracy relationship.

In another sense,

your honor, this court distinguished

the underlying tort which made it

unique from other cases, different

from an employee-employer relationship.

The co-conspiracy relationship

is the trial court described it.

There really is no

closer relationship that can be

imagined in the sense that two co-conspirators

are holding hands to complete a mutual

objective. That sort of relationship

really doesn't exist in the

employer-employer relationship. There is no

mutual intent to harm somebody

in an employer-employer relationship.

Additionally, the employee-employer

relationship will exist

independent of the underlying

commission of the tort. The

underlying commission of the tort is a

prerequisite in order for there to be

a cognizable claim for civil conspiracy.

Do you agree that if we, in essence,

adopt the airframe standard

that it would amount to

overruling Aronson?

I do not, your honor.

Primarily, I think you have to look at

the procedural posture of each case.

Aronson,

from my reading of the case, did

not involve a claim for civil conspiracy.

That case involved a claim

for

malicious defense. It was

a new cause of action that the Supreme Court

analyzed and adopted. Additionally, it

was offensive

issue preclusion.

That the prevailing plaintiff in the first

action sought to preclude the defendant

in the second action from re-litigating.

A lot of these analyses

with Restu Ducata are assessed through the

guys of, did the first party have a

full and fair opportunity to litigate their

case? In this sense, they were looking at

the defendant. Did he have a full and fair

opportunity to litigate his case? And they

said no, he didn't.

The court was not

required to accept allegations of

conspiracy is true as the Supreme Court

did in this case. They looked at the facts

and circumstances alleged in the complaint and

said, assuming the plaintiff can prove these

allegations, the end result will be

that it is precluded by Restu Ducata.

Briefly

turning back to

some of the allegations that were alleged

in the complaint, which

the court did accept is true,

the allegations included

that Mr. Day helped

adopted Gill's theories

that he tied himself to Gill, that

there was a unity with Gill, all

facts that the plaintiff ultimately

excuse me, that the court accepted as true,

which formed the basis for its

ruling that there was a significantly close

enough relationship.

I also want to just briefly touch upon

at least two cases, the Fireman's

Fund case, which is a federal district court

case, first circuit case

excuse me, where the court was

applying New Hampshire law and found that

alleged agents of wrongdoers

in the underlying action satisfied the

privity requirement. So there is some

even to setting aside

the court's standard of close relationship,

there is some case law to support the

assessment that alleged

agents, in this case alleged co-conspirators,

could satisfy the privity requirement

with regard to

the Aronson case

excuse me, the Dagle case,

City of Portsmouth case

in that lawsuit, the plaintiff sued

the employer first

and the court rejected employment

by privity because of the inherent

conflicts of interest between an

employer who doesn't necessarily

represent the interests of their employee.

The employee was not sued in that lawsuit

in the first instance. The plaintiff did

not know the identity of the plaintiff until

he had already filed the lawsuit. He subsequently

identified the wrongdoer and sought to

add him to the complaint to which

the employee wrongdoer

objected and ultimately the court did not

allow the cases to come together.

But in that sense the court identified

that when you're suing the employer

and not the employee, there's

an incentive for the employer to say that

the conduct of the employee

fell outside the scope of the

employment relationship. That's not president

in this case. Mr. Gill was

defending against the alleged defamation.

In a sense, both Mr. Day

and Mr. Gill have the same interest in defeating

a claim for defamation, especially where it's

only committed by Mr. Gill himself.

I will concede

that had the cause of action

been brought against both Mr. Day

and Mr. Gill, there would be a potential conflict

such as the employer-employer relationship

where Mr. Day may allege that he was

not part of a conspiracy and therefore would

not be liable for the underlying defamation.

From Mr. Day's perspective

if we think that the

trial court applied the wrong legal

standard and they should have applied

errands rather than airframe

then can we decide the case

on the record that we have

or does it need to go back?

I think that the court

can decide...

Can you say a question?

If we decide that the court applied the wrong legal

standard, does it have to go back

for development of the

record or evidentiary

development or

can we just decide the case on

the pleadings?

I think that if the court disagrees

with the superior court ruling and

remands it,

Mr. Day would have the opportunity

to try to demonstrate the functional

relationship standard and if he did

prove it,

the lawsuit brought by Mr. Walker would

be precluded. That would be through

summary judgment process though, correct?

Yes,

I would submit that's more of a

summary judgment argument

but for the turning back

to the city of Portsmouth analysis

I think that the

interests in defending

the defamation per se are

more closely aligned than they were

in the daggle opinion. So I don't believe

that the court's decision denying

privity based solely on an employment

relationship is analogous

to this situation based

on the procedural posture and the

parties involved.

Lastly Your Honor, just briefly

there are valid alternative

means for upholding the trial

court's decision based on the substantive

legal relationship which Supreme

Court has cited to in the past favorably

from the Taylor v. Strugel United States

Supreme Court opinion.

There are federal district courts interpreting

what the

substantive legal relationship means

in the context of Taylor

which have said that

alleged co-conspirators satisfied that

standard. So as an alternative

basis that the court does not agree with

the theory adopted by the trial

court based on these unique factual

circumstances it could still

But if we did so again that would be broader than the New

Hampshire standard that we currently have.

I don't believe so Your Honor.

I think that relying

at least on the federal district court decision

interpreting TAGLE I believe it was

the Powell case wouldn't

it would apply just to these unique factual

circumstances alleged co-conspirators.

Thank you. Your light is on. Thank you Your Honor.

You need your two minutes Mr. Johnson.

I probably don't need all of them

but I will do my best.

A couple quick rebuttal points.

One point is that

there's an allegation that the claims

against Mr. Day are solely and completely

derivative.

They are primarily derivative but not exclusively

derivative. I would turn the court's attention

to our appendix pages 13 to 17

where we set out some of the factual

allegations and there's a number of those

paragraphs where there are specific

allegations relative to conduct

of Mr. Day such as Mr.

Day being the one telling Mr.

Gill about Mr. Walker's connection with

drug dealers so there is also

independent direct evidence

supporting conduct that would be

defamation relative to

Mr. Day and so he's not

solely derivative. I wanted to make sure that

that point was clear. The other point

was that the

appellee talks a lot about the

unique factual circumstances

of this case. Well unique factual

circumstances of a case means

that the trial court should not

the trial court erred by deciding

it's not a motion to dismiss. That

as Justice Hicks noted this is to

the extent they have a defense on these

issues it's a summary judgment issue.

It is not not that. And then

the trial court also aired on the

civil conspiracy in the language about

holding hands together as civil

conspiracers. That may have been true

when they were committing the tort

but the focus under Dagel is

the litigation interest

that the court tends to apply in this

case and whether you had a mutuality

of interest when you committed a tort

once you are both defendants in the

case as court knows full well

the multiplicity of decision making

that two defendants make for their

own enlightened self-interest when

facing a court case together. So the

focus really has to be on the

litigation of interest and frankly

as you heard from the appellee

what they are asking this court to

do is overturn New Hampshire precedent

that has never adopted. Unless

the court has any questions I am all set.

Thank you council.
