Before we begin, I have a couple of announcements. One is I want to officially welcome Judge Ken Brown to this proceeding here today and thank him for being available. Two, we are going to hear the first case and then take a break to allow consideration for Justice Brown and we'll discuss the case briefly.

Then we'll come back for the next two cases and then we'll take a break as a courtesy to our friends from the media who are here covering the first three cases.

And then we'll come back and hear the last case. Justice Bassett, as you may know, is not on that last case. In any event, welcome all and please proceed, Claire.

This is case 2019-0693. Carolyn Casey et al. v. New Hampshire Secretary of State et al.

Good morning and may it please the court. My name is Henry Clementowich and I represent Caroline Casey and Maggie Flaherty and I'm also here arguing on behalf of the New Hampshire Democratic Party today.

I have reserved two minutes for rebuttal. I thought that it would, in terms of an outline, make sense to begin with the federal court's third certified question because I think it's the easiest to address and depending on how this court rules may resolve the dispute between the parties.

Go right ahead.

After that, I would go to the first question and if there's time, the fifth, and I'm happy to take questions at any time.

So the third certified question from the federal court asks whether someone can be domiciled for voting purposes in the state of New Hampshire without being a resident for motor vehicle purposes under RSA 259.88,

which is the specific definition of resident that governs the motor vehicle code and the answer is that a person may be so domiciled without establishing that residency for two reasons.

The first reason is that because RSA 259.88 begins with the definition of resident in 21.6, general definition of residency in the state,

then exempts from that definition people who have established residency in another state for any other purpose.

If one isn't a resident of the state under 21.6, one isn't a resident under 259.88.

So the first reason that domicile for voting purposes and residents for motor vehicle purposes are not equivalent is because domicile for voting purposes and the general definition of residence.

Keeping in mind that what we're here today is statuatory construction, not the constitutional construction of the word domicile, correct?

That's right, Justice Hicks.

The question before this panel is whether the statutes in New Hampshire require broadly people who register to vote in New Hampshire to get driver's licenses or register their motor vehicles here.

And the constitutional questions are still with the federal court.

Does it matter that the motor vehicle statute was designed with reciprocity in mind with other states?

So I think it's important to consider the statutory scheme as a whole.

So I would say yes.

I would say the general rule in New Hampshire is you need to have a driver's license to drive unless you're not a resident of the state and you have a driver's license from another state.

That's the reciprocity, I think, which is built into the statute.

And it's up to our legislature to define what makes someone a resident in New Hampshire for motor vehicle purposes.

And the legislature has chosen to also exclude from that requirement people who claim residence in another state for any purpose.

For the purpose of a library card?

The statute says for any purpose.

And any is defined by Merriam-Webster as any amount, basically, indiscriminately.

I'm most concerned about coverage under parents' underinsured motorist policy than anything else.

Yeah, so I think what the statute contemplates is that one must claim residence in another state.

And the use of the word claim is, I think, also important because claim doesn't require you actually be a resident.

And I think that a reason that the legislature might have chosen to use the word claim is because it makes it easier to administer for folks at the DMV who don't need to,

when presented with the driver's application, know the law of residence in all other 49 states.

And it's sufficient for someone to come in and say, I don't claim residence in another state, or I do, for this purpose or that purpose.

And so I think this large exception is really what seals the deal in this case.

And the way I think about it is the legislature has said residents for motor vehicle purposes equals residents generally minus people who claim residence in another state.

And so unless that last part is zero, the first two parts can't be the same.

Does our case law establish that people can have multiple residences?

So it does.

So I think there's a couple answers to that.

In the opinion of the justices' case from 2018, three justices of this court, while discussing the differences between domicile and residence,

held that a person can have multiple residences.

But in any event...

That was under the assumption that the parties did not dispute that they were the same,

that the term domicile and resident were equivalent.

And that's changed, hasn't it?

So the assumptions that the parties have made that underlie the briefing, Justice Donovan, have changed, I think.

And my answer to that is that wisdom come to lately is better than wisdom come to never.

And the opinion of the justices' case was not a litigated case.

And so the justices were not acting as a court.

It doesn't have the same level of finding precedential value.

And my recollection is that the time between when memoranda of law were solicited when they were due was about two weeks,

and they were all at the same time, and there was no development of a factual record.

And so it doesn't really lend itself to the type of detailed and thorough responsive analysis that comes out of an adversarial proceeding.

But if I may return to Justice Bassett's question, there's nothing in the Constitution that prohibits the legislature from defining residents however they wish.

That's a public policy that's created by the legislature.

And the legislature, I think, pretty clearly contemplated when they established the definition of 259-88

that one could have multiple residences for different purposes.

I can be a domicile in New Hampshire for the purpose of registering my motor vehicle

and have a residence in Florida for the purpose of estate taxes?

So I think the answer would be you can have domicile for voting purposes in New Hampshire

if New Hampshire is your primary home for domestic, social, and civil purposes relevant to participating in democratic self-government.

And everyone who is domiciled for voting purposes in New Hampshire is entitled to vote.

And then a subset of those people would be residents generally under 21-6,

and a further subset of those people could be residents under the motor vehicle definition in 259-88.

And I think for the vast majority of people in New Hampshire...

Or a subset could be non-residents under the motor vehicle code.

So that's going to the court's fifth question.

That's right.

The motor vehicle code does define non-resident generally to be someone with a residence in another state,

but then has a large exception, I think,

which is people who maintain an abode or place of business for six months out of the year

are deemed residents as to all vehicles principally used in connection with that abode.

So our first point on question five is that that statute is clearly silent as to driver licensing.

Are out-of-state students who attend university in New Hampshire required to file dividend and interest tax returns?

So I think the answer to that is no,

because I think that I haven't done a thorough analysis of when that obligation springs from,

but I think it springs from the general definition of residence in 21-6.

And that's the first question that the court has certified,

which is, is everyone who's domiciled for voting purposes a resident generally under 21-6?

But returning to Justice Hans Marconi's question,

only cars are registered and drivers are licensed.

And the legislature, if they had wanted to,

could have excluded the prepositional phrase

as to all vehicles principally used in connection with such abode,

if they wanted to make the non-resident exception apply not just to car registrations,

but also to driver's licensing.

And then the final point that I'll make on question five

is that there seems to be an irreconcilable conflict

between RSA 259-67, which is the definition of non-resident,

and RSA 259-88, which is the definition of resident.

And that one says people shall be deemed a resident,

and one says people shall not be deemed a resident,

and 259-88 comes later.

And so I think that's the only way that this court can reconcile those two statutes.

In his certification order, Judge LaPlante references the doctrine

of constitutional avoidance.

Is that relevant to our analysis today?

I don't think that it is.

I don't, so let me start by saying the questions that are themselves certified

to this court are really ones of statutory interpretation,

as Justice Hicks said earlier.

I don't think that there's a real constitutional claim in this case.

There was allusions to a Part 1, Article 11 claim made

in the defendant's responsive brief that I think are not persuasive to this court.

And the reason for that is because, number one, it hasn't been briefed,

and because of the posture, it was raised in a reply,

and that's not typically how we do things.

But number two, and more importantly,

the Fisher v. Governor case, which is at 145, New Hampshire 28,

and that's a 2000 case talking about the history of Part 1, Article 11,

really talks about the ability of the legislature to define the qualifications for voting.

And I think that a fair reading of that case would suggest that there's room

for the legislature to define domicile as it chooses,

as long as it's not inconsistent with the constitutional mandate.

And then finally, as I understood...

Could the legislature define domicile as allowing a person to have more than one?

So I think the legislature could define...

I don't think the legislature could permit a person to have multiple domiciles for voting purposes.

I think it's a basic rule that one can only vote in one election.

But I don't think that there's anything prohibiting the legislature from allowing people to have domicile for voting purposes in one state,

but perhaps not for other purposes.

Or domicile in another state for taxes, and domicile in another state for in-state tuition,

and domicile in another state for various purposes.

And so I think the answer to that is the legislature could define it that way, consistent with the Constitution.

And if you look at the history of domicile statute, there was a time when the statute said

that domicile for voting purposes is not presumptive proof of residency in the state.

And that statute, which was since repealed, is entitled to the same presumption of constitutionality as all statutes.

So I don't...it's a high bar to argue that that's unconstitutional.

And I don't think that that bar has been made, especially where the legislature has this ability to define domicile.

So...

Does any other state allow students to vote without being subject to the motor vehicle registration and licensing requirements?

There are other states that do.

For example, Vermont...

Vermont does not.

It's my understanding.

Massachusetts does not.

Maine does not.

Massachusetts does not.

My recollection is that Vermont has an exemption from the motor vehicle requirement for students

and for similar short-term people who are in the state.

But there are more states that don't explicitly link this to as the way that HB 1264 does.

But I would just take a step back and say, whether other states do this or not isn't properly before this court.

What this court has is just construing the words that the legislature has chosen to enact.

And if the legislature wants to amend RSA 259 to remove that exception for people who claim residence in another state,

they're entitled to do so, but respectfully, you're on...

So it goes both ways.

Vermont can allow someone to sort of excuse them from registering if they've established domicile in Vermont.

And this case sort of flips that, if you will, by relying on the exclusion for registration from establishing domicile here.

I think what this case is about is whether, as a matter of New Hampshire law,

the requirement that one register a motor vehicle or get a driver's license is a statutory dictate.

I don't think that what's before this court is whether it's constitutionally required.

In regard to RSA 25988, is it your position that if we decide, agree with you on that, that that's the end of our inquiry?

I think that's probably right, largely.

The caveat to that is the federal court has requested you answer five questions.

Out of respect for federalism, I don't want to tell you that you have to or don't have to.

We don't.

Okay.

I would think the bulk of the analysis could be on question three or question one.

And I think if you roll for us on question one, it similarly is the end of the analysis.

And if I could turn to question one, this question is about whether one can have domicile for voting purposes

without being a resident of the state generally under RSA 21.6.

And so the Guare case from 2015 said that the basic difference between domicile and residence

is an intent to remain indefinitely.

And that's what HB 1264 removed.

But in that case, the state conceded.

They agreed that there were differences in that case, right?

That's right.

They did.

But what the court did say is that that was the only difference between residence and domicile.

And like with most matters of statutory interpretation, I think a good place to start is the text of the statutes.

And so our argument is that domicile for voting purposes under 654.1 requires a different degree

and a lesser degree of connection to the state than does residency generally because RSA 654.1 requires

that New Hampshire and the town award be one civil home, I'm sorry, a principal place for domestic,

social, and civil purposes relevant to participating in democratic self-government, whereas residency requires a

physical presence that is your principal place of physical presence to the exclusion of all others.

Well, the state argues those are functionally equivalent.

Why isn't that right?

They do.

And I think it's because the legislature, when it uses different words, is presumed to have meant different things.

And 654.1 really limits connections that one must have in the state to participating in democratic self-government.

So I think of that as, you know, writing letters to the editor, voting, phone banking for a candidate,

joining the local Rotary Club, those kind of things that are essential to civic engagement.

But people, and it's not just college students, one could imagine, snowbirds who moved to Florida

for seven months out of the year in the winter, although our winters are seemingly getting shorter,

who have made New Hampshire their home for participating in democratic self-government,

but maintain another residence for a variety of reasons.

But what would stop that individual from joining the Rotary also in Florida?

Nothing would stop...

And engaging in phone banks and local elections, and thus establishing domicile in two states for voting purposes.

I think that it is a rule that is well understood, that we're not challenging, that one can only vote in one election.

But if states were to define it such that they were permitting such contacts to allow for voting,

who would say that states couldn't do that?

So RSA 654-1, Justice Hans Marconi, says that an inhabitant's domicile for voting purposes

is that one place where a person, more than any other place, sorry, more than any other place,

has established a physical presence and manifests this intent.

So there is an element of exclusivity in our domicile for voting purposes statute.

And one means one?

One means one.

And more than any other place means that this has to be your primary sick home.

But one can imagine that one keeps a home for filial purposes,

or one hasn't switched over their mail, or is on health insurance or car insurance of their parents,

or a variety of things that connect one to a place outside of the sphere of democratic self-government

could, for some people, tip the balance.

And I want to say that I think for the vast majority of people in New Hampshire,

those with domicile and voting for voting purposes will also be residents,

because I think that most people's home is less of a complicated thing than that.

Presumably, if to the extent there's confusion or ambiguity here,

654-1 could say just refer to 21-6.

That is a choice that the legislature would be free to make, but it hasn't done so.

That's right.

And I think the legislature, and I see that my light is on, if I may finish.

Complete your thought.

If the legislature wanted to explicitly make domicile and residents the same,

they could have simply said, as they did in the New Hampshire Aeronautics Act,

domicile for voting purposes just means resident under 21-6.

Thank you very much.

Thank you, Councilor.

You still have two minutes.

Mr. Galdieri.

Thank you, Your Honor.

May it please the Court.

My name is Anthony Galdieri, and I represent the defendants of New Hampshire Secretary of State

and the New Hampshire Attorney General.

This case presents five certified questions.

The first two questions are analytically related,

and they concern whether RSA 654-1 and RSA 21-6 and 6A contain the same basic concept of domicile.

They do, and the answer to that question is yes.

The third and fourth questions are also analytically related,

and they concern whether the terms residence and residency, as they appear in RSA 259-88,

261-45, and 263-35 are defined by reference to RSA 21-6A.

They are, that is the legislative directive that comes out of RSA 21-1.

As a result, the answer to the third certified question is no,

and the answer to the fourth certified question is yes.

Can a person have multiple residences?

Under the common usage of the term residence, yes.

Under the definition of 21-6, no, they cannot.

They can only have one residence, and that residence is their domicile.

In 259-88, it talks about someone claiming residency in another state.

Should we disregard the term claim?

No, to claim residency in another state typically means you're claiming domicile somewhere to get a benefit,

and if you look within the motor vehicle code to the definition of domicile that is in the motor vehicle code,

it defines domicile as taking up residence in a city or town in the state,

including by doing something like sending your kids to public school, registering to vote,

and then it says provided, however, that if you do one of those things in another state, you're not domiciled here.

It has the same setup and formulary as the definition of resident in 259-88,

and to the extent 259-88 may be ambiguous,

once you look at the legislative history as to why they define 259-88 in accordance with 21-6,

is to eliminate any confusion, is to have one definition of resident that's consistent with 21-6,

and they put the exception in to make it very clear to people that you can only have one,

because what is happening is people are claiming to be a resident here

and trying to register their motor vehicles when they're really not residents here,

when they're really not domiciled here,

and the motor vehicle code is concerned with regulating people who are domiciled here,

who drive on our roads more than any other roads for most of the year for the safety of our community,

and the plaintiff's argument is to nullify that,

is to allow essentially New Hampshire domiciliaries who live here 11 months out of the year

and for one month a year live in Florida

to claim residence in Florida to get a library card at the Palm Beach Library

and to say now I can register my vehicle in Florida.

Are out-of-state students who attend school here required to file dividends and interest taxes, tax returns?

That would depend, Your Honor, on how the terms residents are defined

within the dividends and interest taxation statutes.

You're suggesting that there can be multiple residents,

that an individual could have multiple residents depending upon the purpose.

Well, we're suggesting that the legislature in specific statutes

can choose to define the terms resident and residents differently

from how they're defined in 21, 6, and 7.

Presumably, Section 88 accommodates the fact that the legislature in New Hampshire

can't control the definition of residents in other 49 states.

That's correct.

To assign a meaning to what residents means in other states

is to create sort of a code provision that's nearly impossible to administer.

You want to define it by terms of who a resident is in New Hampshire.

A resident is somebody under 21, 6, because they're the ones who have a residence.

And you're telling them, if you claim residence somewhere else,

you're not a resident under this code.

You're a non-resident.

Even if you're just getting a library card in West Palm Beach?

Even if you're just getting a library card in West Palm Beach.

Isn't that illogical?

Well, when you're down there in West Palm Beach

and you're getting a library card, you're just saying, I live here.

It's the fact that I live at this address that's getting me this library card.

It's not that I'm domiciled here.

And that's the difference.

25988 is saying, if you're domiciled down there,

you don't get a license here and you don't register your...

What if I get a hunting license in West Palm Beach?

Am I a resident for those purposes in Florida

and still a resident here at home in Manchester?

If residents in Florida means the equivalent of domicile,

you have to declare or represent to a government in Florida

that you are domiciled there to get a hunting license,

then you've changed your domicile.

Isn't that illogical?

It's not illogical.

You can only have one domicile at a time.

You've shifted your legal domicile.

Aren't we assuming that in Florida you have to be a resident to get a hunting license?

That may not be a requirement.

Well, that may not be the case.

That's correct.

It may not be that you have to be a resident to get a hunting license there.

Is there any indication in the legislative history

that when the legislature enacted HB 1264

that they had in mind the issue related to RSA 259-88?

Not that specific issue.

The legislative history reflects is that the legislatures

had squarely in mind this court's decision in GWER,

which identified the only basic difference

between a domiciliary under 251-1 and 21-6

as the indefinite intention to remain requirement.

And the legislature went in and scrubbed that out.

And the belief was in scrubbing that out

that for all the general purposes

for which RSA 21-6 and 21-6A fill in the other RSAs,

that it will mean that persons who are domiciled under 654-1

and domiciled, therefore, under 21-6

will also be domiciled for other general statutory purposes.

And in reading 259-88 and the exception in 259-88

to be limited to a claim of domicile elsewhere

harmonizes the provision with the non-resident provision,

RSA 259-67.

When the code deems a non-resident a resident

is because an individual has manifested through their actions

certain conduct that makes them look like

a domiciliary of the state.

They're here for more than six months.

They're driving around in the state more than any other state

in a vehicle used in connection with that abode,

and the code is going to come in and deem them a resident.

And the way they get out of being a resident

is to say, I'm really not a resident.

I'm still domiciled back in Oklahoma.

That's where I send my absentee ballot.

That's where I send my kids to school.

But if they cannot say that because they've done something here

to establish domicile, like register to vote,

then they are a resident here.

The code considers them to be by their acts in the state,

and they have to get a license

and get a vehicle registered if they own that vehicle.

That's the problem I have with question five,

because that would be a yes answer to that particular question,

unless the vehicle is owned by a parent.

So they don't have to register a vehicle in New Hampshire

if their parents own the vehicle in another state.

That's correct.

They do not have to register a vehicle they do not own.

If they own that vehicle, then they would have to register.

The plaintiffs take issue with, well,

RSA 654.1 uses different words than RSA 21.6

and RSA 21.6.8,

but the concepts of domicile are the same,

and there are many different expressions

of what it means to be domiciled.

Then tell me why, if the legislature really intended that,

why didn't it pass legislation saying

that residence and domicile are equivalent?

Well, I think it took the cue

from this court's decision in GWER,

which said the only basic difference

between RSA 654.1 and 21.6.

You say there's no plainer way to say it

than what the legislature has done?

Well, so what the legislature has done,

and you see it in RSA 654.1 and 21.6,

is use the word domicile.

The constitutional requirement to vote here is domicile.

654.1 says you have a domicile for voting purposes

where you are domiciled,

and RSA 21.6.8 says your residence

is the place of your domicile.

Now, these statutes tell you, say,

well, your domicile is that principal place

of physical presence to the exclusion of all others,

that one place more than any other

where you have a physical presence

and manifest a single continuous intent

to engage in life for domestic, social,

and civil purposes relevant to state government.

Courts use different terminology.

It's that preeminent legal headquarters

that every person maintains

where their legal obligations affixed to them.

These are different formulations of the same concept,

and the only difference was the indefinite intention

to remain concept,

and we know that's a difference

because of the Neuberger versus Peterson case,

that that cannot be applied in the election context,

and that is why you saw it historically

within the definitions of resident and residence,

which imported the common law definition

of domicile into them,

and it was not in the voting statute, RSA 654.1,

and they eliminated the indefinite intention

to remain test, thereby equating the concepts.

So let's assume there's some ambiguity

between the statutes and the amendments.

Is there anything in legislative history

that suggests that the legislature

intended to create a special classification

for college students in New Hampshire

to allow them to vote without being a domicile

or a resident of the state?

No, Your Honor.

RSA 654.1, Roman 1A,

allows students to choose a domicile

in New Hampshire where they attend school,

so long as that claim of domicile...

Why does it single out students?

Well, I think it's reflective of the reality

that students may be in a position

where they get to choose a domicile,

and they should know that they have a choice

to make as to a domicile depending on...

I think virtually everyone is in a position to choose,

don't you?

Well, no, not necessarily.

I can't choose California as my domicile.

I don't have contacts with California.

But you could choose to go there.

I could choose to go there,

but just going there doesn't give me

the contact necessary to be a domiciliary there.

You could choose to stay longer.

I could choose to stay longer.

I could choose to...

Use the highways.

...to stay out there 11 months a year

and move my family out there,

but still work here.

And once I start to build enough contacts

and enough ties to California,

then I may be presented twice,

like a lot of students are,

as to where my domicile is,

and I can shift my domicile.

But I can only have one domicile,

and I can't simply choose

absent sufficient contacts

manifested through my actions

to call California my home

and begin voting there

and registering my vehicles there.

The plaintiffs argue that your position

renders the phrase

domicile for voting purposes

in 654.1 surplusage.

But why is that not the case?

Well, Your Honor,

all these statutes would be surpluses.

I mean, domicile...

One could just say,

because of the constitutional requirement,

it's domicile.

So to be eligible to vote here,

you have to be domiciled here.

And one could say,

to be a resident here,

you have to be domiciled here

and end there.

And to be a resident,

have a residence here,

is just a domicile.

But what these provisions try to do

is define further what that means.

And all that is doing is saying,

you have to be domiciled here.

And what that means,

in terms of voting,

is it has to be the center of...

This New Hampshire community

has to be the center of your life

for domestic, social, and civil purposes

related to participation

in democratic self-government.

You have to be domiciled here

to have a domicile for voting purposes.

It may be a subcategory,

as they've identified it,

but it's not divorced

from the broader concept

that you must declare domicile here

and that the voter registration

form specifies

you can only have a domicile here.

And it says social, civil, et cetera.

It doesn't just say

for political purposes.

So engaging in registrations, licensing,

is that a civil purpose?

Yes, that is part of your participation

in democratic self-government.

Democratic self-government,

as the plaintiffs would like to interpret it,

is limited to voting.

It's much broader than voting.

It's participation in civil society.

It's honoring your civil obligations

in exchange for the right to vote

in a particular community.

You agree to pay taxes.

You agree to be licensed there appropriately

and permitted there appropriately.

There are lesser definitions

of resident found throughout the RSAs.

There are hundreds of different definitions

of resident as opposed to there being

one definition of domicile.

For example, I think it's Gary B. residency

for the purposes of a sending school,

paying for the costs of sending a child

with needs to a special school.

That's a lesser definition of resident,

is it not?

Correct.

And the legislature is free to define

in specific statutes that residents

and resident mean different lesser things

for different purposes.

But the general legislative directive

is where the statute,

the more specific statute,

doesn't define the term.

The definition is 21-6.

It's 21-6 and 6-A.

And the question does arise

if the court believes that some of these statutes

are ambiguous because the canon

of constitutional avoidance may come into play.

Not here.

That's the Judge LaPlante problem, isn't it?

Well, would this court construe

an ambiguous statute to create

an unconstitutional result?

I'm not sure it would.

And that's the point...

Do you want me to answer that question?

What if you'd like, Your Honor?

That's the point where you're at.

This court would generally not construe a statute

to create an unconstitutional result.

So if it was ambiguous,

you might say I need a record

to decide that question.

I need to know, does it actually...

If this statute is ambiguous

and I don't have enough clues

from the structure, text, context

of the act or the legislative history,

do I need to understand whether or not

it may be an unconstitutional result

may flow from it?

We believe that the statutes are unambiguous.

We believe that there are legislative directives

that tell you how to interpret these statutes

and if they're interpreted that way,

they're in harmony with one another.

So you believe that they're not ambiguous?

That's correct.

But you give us a lot of legislative history.

Well, we didn't submit any legislative history.

They submit legislative history of the plaintiffs.

Well, you've given us history

of how these statutes came to be.

Well, we've given you sort of a historical backdrop

of how these statutes came to be.

I don't think we've relied on legislative history

other than to say,

if you believe that plaintiff's interpretation

is a plausible, reasonable interpretation

of these statutes,

our interpretation is likewise plausible.

We believe the legislature's actually directed it

and it's the correct interpretation

and the court needs to do that.

But if it were ambiguous,

that you would look to some of that legislative history.

So you say that constitutional avoidance,

that doctrine might come into play for us?

And if so, are you saying there needs to be fact-finding?

Well, there may need to be a record as to...

And who would make that record?

Would we send it back to Judge LaPlante to do that?

Well, that would be one place to do that.

Questions can be certified at different points in time

in the life of a federal case.

They can be certified at the end of a proceeding.

They can be certified on appeal.

Yes, it could.

If the court believed it needed a record,

I believe there are Supreme Courts

who have declined to answer certified questions

on the basis of requiring more of a record.

Your Honor, the last few points I would make

is that there was a question raised

as to whether the legislature could define domicile

in multiple ways.

The legislature cannot define domicile

as something less or different

than how the term is used

in the New Hampshire Constitution.

And the Constitutional Convention

indicated that it was using the word domicile

to convey a strength of connection

to the community

that is greater than the common definition

of residence or just being a resident.

And that is reflected throughout RSA 654.

RSA 654 not only uses the term domicile

for voting purposes,

it uses the freestanding term domicile.

It informs people of when they are present

in the state for temporary purposes

and are not domiciled here,

it requires persons to prove their domicile

through showing documentation

or otherwise executing a sworn statement

or affidavit as the context requires,

swearing that they're domiciled here,

and acknowledging on the voter registration form

that they can only have one domicile,

not just the domicile for voting purposes,

one domicile in New Hampshire

or in a particular state or city or town.

And once they declare that domicile here,

they've abandoned a domicile elsewhere.

And certain legal obligations

that attach to all domiciliaries

attach to them,

whether the consequence is intended or it's not.

The context of 654,

colon one,

that it sits in,

the constitutional and statutory context

requires an interpretation

that does not allow people

to have multiple domiciles

fragmentized throughout the United States

where they get to pick and choose

between what laws are the best for them.

But they can have multiple residences, correct?

Sure.

They can have multiple residences

as the common term is used.

They can live in multiple places,

homes in multiple states,

and say,

I live there for some period of time.

And many people can claim that

and do claim that

on a regular basis in our society

to allow persons who say,

I merely live on the lake in Minnesota

for three weeks a year,

but otherwise drive my vehicle

all over New Hampshire

11 months out of the year

and through the streets of its communities,

and I don't have to be licensed in New Hampshire,

and I don't have to have that vehicle

registered in New Hampshire

undermines what the Motor Vehicle Code

is trying to do,

which is to register the people

who are driving vehicles

on our roads and license them

and make sure they're passing

our health safety inspections and tests

for the safety of our community.

Your light is on.

That's all I have, Your Honor.

Thank you.

Thank you very much, Mr. Gagliari.

Counsel, you have two minutes.

I just have two brief points

that I'd like to make.

The first is in response to a question

that Justice Donovan had asked my opponent

about special solicitude being given

to college student voters.

And I think the questions

that are before this court

are not really about

has the legislature created

special two classes of voters.

It's about are there two classes of drivers

because RSA 25988

is in the Motor Vehicle Code.

And the legislature has said

there are two types of drivers.

There are those who have sufficient connections

to the state

to have to get a New Hampshire driver's license.

And there are those who haven't.

And I think that tying those requirements

to voters sort of muddles the issue

in that it makes what the legislature

was trying to do when it enacted 25988,

it reads more into it

than is appropriate

because if you look at the legislative history

when the legislature passed 25988,

they weren't talking about voters,

they were talking about drivers.

And the second point that I want to make

is that what this court is tasked to do

is interpret the statutes as they were passed

and not try to fix loopholes

that the proponents of 1264

may not have envisioned

because your honors are judicial officers.

You interpret the will of the legislature

as expressed in the statutes that have been passed.

You don't go beyond the text of that statute

except where a statute is ambiguous.

And the Constitution doesn't permit this court

to rewrite the laws just to interpret them.

And the legislature has chosen, wisely or unwisely,

to create this exception

to the definition of motor vehicle residence.

And it's only for this court to say,

what does that mean?

And not, was that a wise policy?

Did HB 1264 in any way impact RSA 25988?

It did not.

It did not amend that statute at all.

It only amended 216 and 2168.

And was there any discussion of 25988

during the consideration of this statute?

Not by the legislatures, to my knowledge.

The House Majority Committee report

is submitted by the defendants in their briefs.

And I don't believe it does mention 25988 at all.

So I don't think the legislature

was even considering 25988 when they passed 1264.

And I see my light is on.

Thank you very much.

Thank you, counsel.

So case submitted, for the benefit of those who've just arrived,

we will take a short break now,

and then we'll come back and hear the next two cases,

followed by a short break.

Of course, in recent.
