All right. Good morning. The matter before the court is state of New Hampshire versus

Shamus Murphy. Number 20190299. State of New Hampshire is represented by attorney Woodcock.

The defendant, Mr. Murphy, is represented by attorney Johnson. Attorney Johnson, whenever

you're ready, you may proceed. Very good. Thank you. May it please the court? Christopher Johnson

on behalf of Shamus Murphy. I've reserved one minute for rebuttal. My plan this morning is to begin

with the jury instruction issue and then secondly address the reasonable suspicion issue. I'm happy

to take the court's questions at any point. So beginning with the jury instruction issue,

this is not an issue about an affirmative defense or a theory of the case. It's a question about

the proper definition of an essential element, that variant of drive that is defined as actual

physical control. The definitional law with respect to that element is rooted in a Maryland case,

Atkinson, that this court has repeatedly cited in all of its cases in this area. And that case

embodies two definitional concepts. First, and this is emphasized in the Willard language,

there's a focus on the defendant's capacity to drive to move the car. But second, in Atkinson

and also in Holleran, there's a focus on the defendant's intention to move the car. Each of

those concepts, capacity and intention combined to create an element that is neither too broad

nor too narrow. Willard expresses the idea that there's a prophylactic purpose to DWI law

such that we want DWI law to cover people before the car is in motion on the road.

Holleran expresses also an important concern that the legislature has not intended, as the Maryland

court put it, to create a crime of being parked while intoxicated. That it's not a crime to

shelter in a car while drunk. Mr. Johnson, what's our standard review of the jury instruction

here? So I think it's de novo because this is a point of law about the legal definition of this

actual physical control element. And so the claim that we're making is that

the court had to give both instructions that is the Willard language and the Holleran language

or if it was inclined it could have given neither and just left the jury with actual

physical control. The model instructions do not provide a definition of actual physical

control, do they? That's right, that's right. And so the Willard language that the court gave

and to which the defense objected is not in the model instructions. The model instructions

have left this as just actual physical control. And so one of the claims of error is that,

you know, the court could have done that. Its error was in giving sort of half a definition,

this incomplete unbalanced definition that included the capacity concept but not the intention

concept. And both of those concepts are, you know, per Atkinson legitimately part of what the

legislature intended in defining a crime of driving while intoxicated that doesn't cover

sheltering while intoxicated. I would say that this is not a harmless, the error is not harmless

because there was certainly not overwhelming evidence that Mr. Murphy had an intention to

move the car. In fact, there's, in fact, Mr. Johnson, there's some evidence to the contrary.

The interior lights were on, were they not? That's right. I mean, he was legally, yes,

and he was legally parked late in the evening at the hotel at which he's staying. And there was

an explanation for why they're in the car. It's in order to smoke and to have an argument.

And so an explanation that didn't involve moving the car. So in that...

Is there any dispute that they were registered at the hotel?

No, there wasn't. And I think the officer, yeah, was not.

And was there any evidence before the trial court that previous criminal activity in that

parking lot had involved people who were registered at the hotel as opposed to others?

I think there was not, it was, no, that the prior information was not specific to whether it was

hotel patrons or guests. And I guess that gets me to the second issue, the reasonable suspicion

issue. And I'll move there unless there are other instructions about the jury,

other questions about the jury instruction. Anything else about the jury instruction,

colleagues? Okay, thank you. I'm gonna save my questions for Attorney Woodcock on that issue.

Okay, very good. So moving to reasonable suspicion, the target of the analysis of

reasonable suspicion is impairment. It's not alcohol use. And my claim here is that

in the totality of the observations the officer had made, do not amount to reasonable suspicion.

Yes, the officer observed bloodshot eyes. And yes, the officer observed an odor of alcohol.

But there was no mention by the officer of nervousness. There was no mention of slurred speech.

There was no mention of uncoordinated movement. And these were all things that in the interaction

the officer could have observed and surely would have also also, Mr. Johnson, there wasn't

any evidence of the prototypical strong odor of alcohol. That's right. Not at the suppression

hearing when it mattered. And what the officer testified is that the window was down. And so,

yes, he smelled alcohol immediately when he arrived at the driver's window, but the window was down.

It wasn't coming out of the car so strongly, you know, as one would think if the window were

closed. And he's face to face with Mr. Murphy at that point. But the odor of alcohol was

coming from the car as opposed to Mr. Murphy. Is that right? I think it was not specific.

So I, yes, I will say, though, that the officer was standing at the driver's window

when he smelled it. And so it was to that extent, and the driver's open window.

Is there any issue before us as to when Mr. Murphy was seen?

No, the trial court resolved that in the favor of the defense position in the trial court,

and the state hasn't challenged that on appeal, that he was seen before he'd made any

inconsistent statements or before he'd admitted to having been drinking. And so those statements

would be not part of the totality analysis. Yes, that's right. That's right. And again,

another factor is that Mr. Murphy was able to convert coherently. So my larger fundamental

point on this issue is that it isn't merely a question of does bloodshot eyes and odor of

alcohol equal reasonable suspicion. It's bloodshot eyes, odor of alcohol, but no nervousness,

but no slurred speech, but no uncoordinated movement, and the ability to converse coherently.

There's just too many plausible explanations, you know, unimpaired explanations for those

observations, especially given the absence of those other signs of impairment, that this

does not rise to reasonable suspicion. Was there an explanation for why the window was down?

Well, they were smoking in the car. Anybody articulated it, but that could be what it was.

Unless the court has other questions on either issue, I would yield the floor at the moment.

You still have one minute to rebut. Yes, thank you.

All right. Thank you. Thank you. This is Woodcock.

Thank you, Your Honor. Elizabeth Woodcock for the State of New Hampshire. I just want to clarify

one point before I start taking questions from the court on page four of the trial court's opinion,

which would be at page 42 of the defendant's brief. The court says that it concurs with the

defendant that he was first seized several minutes prior when Alden continued to pressure

the defendant to answer questions after the defendant had professed his innocence and expressed

frustration with the encounter in general. He was not expressing frustration with the

encounter in general when he said to the police officer, obviously, we've been drinking.

That was a few minutes into the stop. And at that point, combined with seeing his bloodshot eyes

and smelling the odor of alcohol, the police officer had evidence that he had been operating

a vehicle under the influence of alcohol. The car motor was running and the man had admitted

drinking. So it seems to me that if you look at the court's opinion, you're not going to be saying,

well, later on, he said he hadn't been drinking. Well, fair enough. Later on, he said he hadn't

been drinking. Later on, he made a number of statements. He got angry and said, I see where

this is going. And he pulled the car keys out and was very angry at the officer. And I think

it's at that point from the way I read the court's opinion that the court is saying that the defendant

was seized, not before. So you're saying he was seized after he made the statement, obviously,

we've been drinking? Correct, because that's not that's not professing his innocence. That's

admitting that he had been doing something that would lead the officer to conclude that he

might be guilty. That's not an exculpatory statement, Your Honor. Clearly not. Is might enough?

Attorney Johnson says we've never upheld a seizure based upon these narrow findings

under ten. Well, I think that Mr. Johnson reads the findings very narrowly. For example,

he excludes the fact that the court found that this was an area that was

an area where a lot of illegal activity took place. Why can that make any difference? Why can

that make any difference in a principled analysis? How can it make any difference in a principled

analysis? This court has found that it does. That if you're in an area that has a high

incidence of crime, it heightens the suspicion that the police officer has. So does that mean

every guest who parks at the hotel satisfy that threshold for the police?

Not by itself, Justice Bassett, but we're looking at a combination of circumstances here.

The police officer is in an area that is known to be an area that is used for drug

trafficking and other nefarious actions. That would apply Ms. Woodcock to the entire

city of West Lebanon. Would it not? Well, I don't frequent those places in West Lebanon,

and I've been to some very nice places in West Lebanon. So I'm not sure that that

would apply, but it would also be assuming facts not in evidence. The only

facts that we have here is that the police officer was sent to this particular area because

it was a problem area, and the court found that. Now the court didn't specifically cite that when

it starts going into its legal analysis, but it finds it as a matter of fact for the purposes

of its opinion. So I think that when you're looking at the combination of factors here,

the the trial court did not commit an error in finding that the officer acted reasonably when he

began to apply as the defendant to take the field sobriety tests. This is a totality of the

circumstances and the totality of the circumstances in this case is sufficient.

To create reasonable suspicion in your mind. Yes. All right. Could you address the

instruction questions? Yes. You know, I I'm not certain. It feels it feels to me a little bit

as if the defense's argument here is a little bit of a moving target, and it may just be that

I'm slow and am not following the the speed with which the target moves as I should. But

it seems to me that the court looked at what this court has actually issued. It looked at this

the jury instructions. It looked at the Halloran case. It looked at the Willard case, and it

made a determination that this court had actually adopted a definition in Willard of actual physical

control. That's the way that. Do you agree Ms. Woodcock that are reduced to NOVO?

No, I think that usually this court reviews jury instructions with take some as a whole

and gives deference to the way that the trial court has instructed the jury. I don't think

that this raises any particular novel issue of law. The court looked at what this court had

written in Willard, which really does. When you read the sentence, it looks as if it is providing

a definition of actual physical control, and that's what the court adopted. But once you

decide to give the Willard instruction, why wouldn't you give the Halloran instruction

as well? Well, I don't think that Halloran actually offers a definition. It talks about

there's a there's a difference between talking about something like stationary shelter without

actually adopting it as a different definition. Willard states, you know, the definition of

this is thus and such. And I think that that's a very different kind of statement for this court

to make than just to say, well, you know, there is this theory of stationary shelter. And

oh, maybe that's a theory that we want to talk about sometime. This court has never told

the trial courts. Yes, you should be instructing on stationary shelter. It has. Maybe it's about

time. Well, I think that it is kind of the the trial courts are taking their direction from

this court. And while you may want to say at some point here, maybe you would like to use this

jury instruction, it seems to me that if you're if the defendant is challenging an instruction

that's given by the trial court that is supported by the case law that this court has adopted,

that then turning around and saying to the trial court, oh, well, you made a mistake

because you didn't read our minds as to how we want you to instruct on stationary shelter,

a concept that we have never particularly adopted as a basis for a jury instruction.

Doesn't that come out of the Maryland case, though? Well, that's true. I mean,

but this court frequently cites cases from other jurisdictions, but doesn't adopt them

necessarily as a basis for a jury instruction. I just don't see how the trial court, given the

status of the law that it was presented with, would have assumed that I should be given this

instruction. And the instruction that they wanted talked not only about about stationary

shelter, but the potential of endangering the public by driving the car. And that's never been

a part of this court's theory. It's never been that I mean, at times, we've had cases where

the person is too drunk to drive the car. Well, he's not going to endanger the public because

he's behind the wheel of a car. Unless, of course, he decides at some point he wakes up

enough and decides to accelerate, and then he is a danger to the public. But this court has never

required the state to prove or a trial court to instruct the jury that they have to find that

there is some sort of imminent danger to the public and all of this. Isn't that a bit of a policy

determination? I mean, any stopped car could be considered

temporary shelter. So isn't there a bit of balancing as to how we want to address that

distinction, if you will? I'm not sure. I view it as being a policy question, although

it certainly could be a policy question, your honor. I think that I view it as a situation

in which the jury is instructed that if the person is in actual physical control of the car,

that they should make their determination. Then the defendant, as it is in so many cases,

is free to argue, and he did argue that the defendant had no intention of driving the car,

that this was an argument with his girlfriend, that the windows were open because they were smoking,

they'd left the hotel because they didn't want to disturb the other guests. Someone

asked if it was clear that they were registered at the hotel, and the answer to that is yes.

Nobody ever disputed that they were registered at the hotel, so all of those equities were

presented to the jury and the jury concluded. The defense attorney had to instruct the jury or try

to instruct the jury on what the law is about temporary shelter. Isn't that the judge's job?

Well, it would be the judge's job if this court had ever been clear on

what actually constituted temporary shelter and whether or not it was a legitimate defense,

but this court has not done that. I think that at some point, the trial courts have to be able

to rely on the decisions that this court has issued. Now, the argument was presented to the

jury. If there are a lot of situations in which I can think of a case that

might be less persuasive to a jury, but the defendant's actions to the jury seem to be

consistent with having actual physical control over the car. And who knows?

But the jury couldn't plug that into a legal framework. They could make the argument.

I'm just looking. One of the advantages of arguing for me being in my office is that I

can pull the case. And then, Allyn, we talk about the primary focus of the inquiry being,

and then it goes on about the language that we're talking about. So weren't we pretty clear that

the primary focus should be this second step in the legal analysis so that there should

be an instruction that has both Willard and Allyn? I think that if the court had said

the way that it did in the Willard case, the definition of this is thus and such.

I think that it would be a different matter. But in the Halloran case, the issue was the

sufficiency of the evidence. It was not a jury instruction. And the court is trying to figure

out exactly what is required when you're doing a sufficiency of the evidence analysis versus what

you were supposed to tell the jury. The sufficiency of the evidence is the court sitting down and saying,

okay. Ms. Woodcock, I have to apologize. You're at two minutes.

Oh, that's all right. I'm happy to sit down any time, Your Honor.

You're very accommodating. So finish your time. I interrupt your view.

Thank you. It seems to me that when you're looking at a sufficiency of the evidence case,

you're asking one question. When you're saying to a jury, this is how you should apply the law.

In this case, that's a separate question. And if the court has not been clear to the trial

courts, the trial courts can't be committing error for something that this court has never

conveyed to them. Well, Willard wasn't a case about jury instructions, was it?

Was the case about sufficiency of evidence as well?

It was. And that's why I think, Your Honor, when you, if you read that sentence in Willard,

it gives a definition. There's no way around that. It's different from Halloran.

And I'm sure that my time is up by now. And so I would ask if the court has no further

questions to yield the floor to Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Ms. Woodcock. Mr. Johnson?

Just very briefly on the time of seizure at two quick points, the trial court didn't mention

the admission to drinking in its reasonable suspicion analysis, which I think shows that

considered that as happening after the seizure. And a defense brief at 40 has the

trial court's findings of fact as to the sequence and uses the language soon thereafter,

drawing a line between the moment of seizure and then soon thereafter, there is the admission

to drinking. Unless the court has other questions, that was all I was going to add.

Well, let me, any other questions, colleagues? All right, I'm going to declare the case

submitted, but I want to take a special moment to thank both of you for agreeing to engage

in this exploratory effort. I think I congratulate you both on your presentations and I make one

request. If there's anything we can do to make this procedure more lawyer friendly,

please do not hesitate to contact Mr. Goudis and let him know. Thank you, your
