Good morning. Good morning. Good morning.

Thank you, Paul.

For the benefit of those present, we'll be taking three cases

and then taking a short recess and then

handling the remaining two.

This is case 2019-0227, Amanda Colburn versus Wayne

Sikali, Jr. at all.

Good morning, May I proceed?

Yes, please do.

Good morning.

My name's Andrew Winters.

I represent Defendant Nicholas Sakely,

and I am reserving one minute.

So if it may please the court, basically,

I think this is actually a pretty straightforward issue

of statutory interpretation or just really application.

The family division has exclusive authority

to rule on divorce petitions.

And that's RSA 490-D2.

And division of marital property is

a ruling on a divorce petition.

That's RSA 458-16A.

And the temporary order, which gives the family division

authority to allocate temporary rights,

pending a final hearing, is also in the statute, of course.

A property is considered marital property, regardless

of how it's titled.

That's also RSA 458-16A.

So therefore, the family division

has exclusive authority to rule on use of marital property,

at least vis-a-vis the spouses.

Of course, if there's third parties

that their rights are not impacting,

the family division has no authority over those parties'

rights.

But vis-a-vis the spouses, the family division

has exclusive authority.

And subject matter jurisdiction

is jurisdiction over the nature of the case

and the type of relief sought,

the extent to which the court can

rule on the conduct of persons

or the status of things, which is that that's.

How long does that jurisdiction continue?

So after there's a final order allocating property,

how long does the family court retain jurisdiction

over that property?

Once the final order is final, which

may be through an appeal to this court,

but once it's final, then the family division's jurisdiction,

at least as to the division of property, is terminated.

There could be follow-up issues

that the family division has to rule on.

But the division of property is final,

as opposed to other types of rulings,

like child support and parenting plans and so forth.

So you're saying that the eviction notice should have

been filed with the family court?

And even though it's the same judge in the district,

that judge can't rule on the eviction matter?

Correct.

I think it wouldn't be an eviction

filed in the family court.

I think what would be more appropriate

would have been a motion to amend the temporary order

based on new facts.

In other words, I don't think that you

should be able to evict your spouse during a divorce.

The fact that it is the same judge is, I think,

sort of awkward.

Isn't it convenient?

It was convenient.

But the fact that the judge ruled as she did,

I think, was surprising given her remarks at the hearing.

So I think that it makes this appeal awkward.

But obviously, the court needs to look

at this, regardless of who the actual judge was.

Because the precedent that would be set here

would be remarkable if, because family divisions do this

all the time every day, they're awarding property,

if the spouse could say, well, I

didn't like the ruling in this court

and go to another court.

And I'm using the court or say division to be more precise

and go, essentially, asking to reconsider the temporary order.

Because it so happened this was the same court and division.

But it wouldn't be at all uncommon for the property

in question to be located in a different county.

So if there were a temporary order that said, OK,

the wife can have this rental property and run the property

and it can be rented to Mr. Z, who's completely unrelated.

And then the wife has some issues that come up like here

where there's an issue about the water or something.

It would seem that your argument is broad enough

so that it shouldn't be able to even pursue that case

in landlord-tenant forum, as opposed

to going back to family court.

Oh, well, if I understand the question.

So in that scenario, Mr. Z is not the husband.

It's the third party.

But it's still a marital property and it's still

subject to a temporary order.

So why shouldn't it all go to the family court?

Well, the family division does not

have authority over non-parties, of course.

So the family division could not

evict or remove Mr. Z in your scenario, who

is not an actual party to the family case.

So I think that the rule should clearly

be only as to the spouses.

The family division has exclusive jurisdiction

as to the spouses and that removes that jurisdiction

from any other divisions, but not as to third party.

So what if the property were in Salem

and the wife wanted to initiate an eviction matter?

Would she have to go to a different county?

For third party, yes.

No, what if it's your client?

Then she goes back to Goffstown and files a motion

to amend the temporary order.

But the properties in Rockingham County in Salem,

why wouldn't it be in the Salem District Court?

I mean, the property could even be in Massachusetts

or in Australia.

I mean, once the family division has the authority

to divide property amongst spouses,

regardless of where that property is geographically,

as long as New Hampshire has jurisdiction over the divorce.

So allowing something like this

would just be basically allowing a form shopping

or a reconsideration of one division's order

in a different court.

It could come up in all kinds of different contexts

and just encourage litigation after a decision has been

reached.

If you don't like that decision,

it just so happened in this case,

the house was also in Goffstown.

But if you don't like that decision,

we'll just go to Salem or wherever.

So the circuit court was created a decade ago

so as to sort of break down the artificial walls

between these various divisions.

And it would seem to me that this is completely,

what you're arguing for is completely counter to that.

It's building a bright line and building a wall

that could interfere with the efficient functioning

of the courts.

I think that, I understand that,

and that's getting to the appellee's argument

that it's one district division,

it's one district court with multiple divisions.

But to take that in the extreme,

obviously each division has authority

over specific types of actions.

So clearly, obviously a criminal complaint

can't issue a parent,

the judge can't issue a parenting plan

or something like that.

And so essentially, although each,

it is one court, I think it's splitting hairs

what the appellee is arguing that therefore,

this is just a review within the same court.

Each division has exclusive types of authority

and the family division is given exclusive authority

over the divorce cases,

which is essentially what this is.

Why would the family division be well equipped

to deal with issues related to habitability?

Well, I mean, I don't think that the family division

is any worse off trying to make those decisions

than the landlord-tenant court.

I mean, obviously habitability is a pretty narrow issue,

but the family division has to deal with all kinds of issues.

For example, habitability could come up

at the final hearing.

When it comes to valuing this property,

that could be an issue

that the family division would have to take on.

So I don't know if the family division

is any better equipped for that,

but the family division would have to deal with that

regardless in many types of cases.

Your client was not the only tenant, correct?

His brother also lived there?

Correct.

Who was a non-party to the divorce?

Correct.

And your client's wife was granted temporary

possession and management authority,

but not ownership at that point in time, correct?

She was granted managerial authority,

but he was granted the right to reside there.

So her representation that in the landlord-tenant action

that she was the owner wasn't entirely resolved

at that point in time, correct?

Right, she's the owner by deed.

She's the...

But they're subject to his marital interests.

Subject to his marital interests.

I would contend that although she's the...

By deed, she's the owner.

By virtue of the divorce, they're equal owners

because it's a marital property that must be divided.

As it is an aside, he's the sole owner

of the marital home that she's residing.

So could he have evicted her?

No, because I think homestead rights prevent that.

She needed to file two actions.

One in the district division to evict the brother

and then one in the marital case to evict your client.

Exactly.

Does that make much sense to you?

Yes, yes, because the marital court

has the full picture because there's...

In this case, it could be...

Every case, in this case, there's children.

There's the fact that he's paying child support

and alimony, so it comes down to...

It's not a simple matter of an arm's length transaction

where you've got a renter paying a landlord

X amount per month.

Well, and if you had two different judges,

you might end up with one judge

countermanding the ruling of the other judge.

One, the family judge said Mr. X will live there

and not set any rental payment requirements.

And then another judge can say, no, you can't live there.

That would be, and that's the problem

that will inevitably arise if this eviction is upheld.

Because you've got, so to go back to what you were asking,

the family division is considering the full picture.

How are the kids gonna be supported?

What's the parenting plan?

How can each party afford such and such?

And all of that is tied together in one total ruling.

It's not just a matter of who has a property rights

in this, or residential rights in this particular house.

And I just note, if you look at the transcript,

the court's order itself, the court itself

mentioned multiple times that she didn't think

she had jurisdiction.

She said, here's the bottom line.

If there wasn't a third person living in the property,

we would not be having this conversation at all

because it would be the exclusive jurisdiction

to determine the marital properties

in the marital proceeding.

Then later she said, if the court adjudicates

possession of property in a landlord tenant

proceeding between spouses, when the subject is,

when the property is subject to a marital proceeding,

this is just gonna happen all the time.

So the court itself acknowledged this problem

and essentially suggested to the parties

that with regard to Nicholas's safety,

this wasn't an issue, it had to go back

to the marital court, yet in its ruling,

sustained the eviction against him.

So...

Am I wrong or am I missing something?

But doesn't it say that that order is without prejudice

to the marital proceeding?

It does say that, and it was...

What does that mean?

Exactly.

That's unclear exactly how to be interpreted.

There was...

I think I know.

Oh, because the sound of the record in this case

I'll admit, but there was further litigation

about that and that was never clear to me

what she meant by that.

So what exactly do you want us to do here

if you're, I think, asking us to reverse the decision

of the district court?

So we send it back, it seems like a triumph

of form over substance here.

It's gonna go back to what's gonna be different.

Well, I think that the order should be

that this is reversed, that the circuit division,

landlord, tenant court, does not have the authority

to do this when there's an open divorce

and therefore the proper ceremony should be

to go back to the marital court.

To the same judge.

Actually, it may have switched by now.

I mean, it might be the same judge in this particular case,

but of course you're sending precedent that will...

And if husband's evicted from jointly owned

or marital property, if you will,

does he go back then to the marital residence?

Where does he go?

Exactly.

Well, he'd have a problem.

I mean, I know that would...

I mean, maybe he goes back to the family court

as Justice Hick suggests without prejudice

to his rights there, but what's he gonna ask for?

He could ask, right, he could ask for...

He could ask that he gets the marital residence.

He could ask that he pay less alimony.

I mean, he'd have to ask for something,

but the problem is it takes, that's really unclear

and I think would present a very unfair problem to him.

Well, it seems to me that that remedy

is available to your client.

Always has been.

You could always go back to the family court

and ask for a re-division.

He could, and so could she.

And I think that that remedy is more appropriate

as to both of the parties.

So I'm not completely out of time,

but I think I'm close, so if there aren't...

You still have your one minute.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Mr. Shaughnessy.

Morning, may it please the court?

I'm Brian Shaughnessy.

I'm here on behalf of Amanda Coburn.

There's no jurisdictional issue here.

This is an eviction under RSA 540.

RSA 540 is a possessory action only.

What is the interesting issue here

that wasn't raised or preserved in any way

is really a procedural due process issue.

It's really is the opposing party on notice

that this issue that was somehow resolved

or tangentially involved in the marital court

is now before a different judge,

well, same judge, but in a different court.

What was the good cause for eviction?

They didn't really need good cause for eviction, Your Honor.

This was a unrestricted property under 540 colon 1A

because three single-family houses.

So under an unrestricted property,

all you need is a 30-day notice.

You don't need good cause.

However, anomaly of the statute says RSA 540 colon 5

says that a notice to quit

will state with specificity the reasons for eviction.

So in this particular case,

the reason for the eviction was the water problem

and the fact that it was non-potable

and it was harmful to the health of the inhabitants,

which obviously poses a risk to the landlord.

Was that litigated?

That issue?

It was.

And the inhabitants were the husband,

his brother, and children?

No, the argument in the record about the children,

he had joined custodial rights, of course,

so the children at times were residing in this home.

The interesting, I mean this,

the fact pattern here is quite interesting.

It's a law school exam because at one point in time,

both parties actually lived in this property, 11-hour ahead.

That was the marital home,

even though it was owned by the wife prior to the marriage.

And then they moved on down the road to the marital home,

which was awarded to...

So it's two male adults, they're the only inhabitant.

Correct, but Wayne, saculating.

And they couldn't deal with the water issue

while living there?

That could possibly be a case that they do it.

Why is this not a violation of marital restraining order?

Well, there's no restraining order, Your Honor,

what you have to...

You were supposed to harass, intimidate, threaten,

I mean, removing someone's place of residence.

Isn't that kind of interfering?

That could certainly be an issue

that Nicholas Sacalais could raise

in the family court proceeding,

motion for contempt,

which happens all the times in the marital proceedings,

but that's not an issue for the district court

or the district division in the possessor reaction.

What is the issue for the district court

or the district division is whether Nicholas

has a defense to the possessor reaction.

So let's assume for a minute there's a lease agreement

out there.

Well, even though it's an unrestricted property,

having a lease agreement that allows you possession

over the owner would provide a defense

to that possessor reaction.

Similarly, if Nicholas comes with a court order

from the family division saying,

hold it, I was awarded exclusive possession

of this marital asset,

that would be a defense to the possessor reaction.

Is it that way he was awarded?

No.

That's the problem with this case.

If you look at, right in,

I think the appendix are attached to the brief

is the marital order.

And some of these, they're standard paragraphs

and they fill in the blanks to a certain degree.

But if you look at paragraph 14,

which is marital home,

that was awarded to Amanda

and it says she has temporarily awarded

exclusive use and possession.

Those are important words

because when we get down to paragraph 15

other real property,

now this is the investment property only owned by Amanda.

It says the respondent shall temporarily be permitted

to reside at the residence.

That is different from being awarded

exclusive use and possession.

And then you go to the written part of the order,

the temporary order,

where the judge makes specific reference to that.

However, this situation does not appear

to be sustainable for long term,

particularly if his brother moves out

of the rental property.

Now here's the conundrum.

Right, brother didn't move out

and brother was paying the rent.

Correct, he's the tenant.

Right.

So how in the world could the Maril Division

award possession to Nicholas?

They couldn't because Wayne was entitled to possession.

Well, they could.

They could award possession subject to the lease

and he could collect the rents.

Exactly, but that's not what happened here

because in that case what the court would have had to do

is award him exclusive use and possession

subject to the tenancy of the tenants.

Just imagine it's a six family home

that neither of them want to live in.

That's what would have happened,

even though she owns it,

if she's being awarded the Marital Home,

in that Marital Order the court could have

but didn't say, all right,

but Nicholas gets to control the investment property.

And that's the importance of the retention

of the managerial rights.

So Nicholas was not awarded the exclusive use

and possession of 11 Arrowhead.

All he was permitted to do,

let's imagine for a minute,

that there is a lease out there with Wayne, that tenant.

And the lease agreement says,

you can't rent it to anybody else

without the written permission of the landlord.

Well, if Wayne let his brother, Nick, come here

he'd be subject to eviction.

So all this was doing-

That's my query, can the family court say

he's permitted to live in a residence

that's leased by someone else?

Not without the permission of Wayne,

but what they can do is restrict the ability

of Amanda to object to it.

And that's why I'm using the analogy

of a written lease agreement.

If a landlord has a lease agreement,

that says you can't let anybody else live there

without my permission,

and you let somebody else come in,

I can evict you from breach of lease.

But if the Marital Court has taken

one of those sticks out of the bundle

out of Amanda's ability to evict,

it's really providing permission

of the landlord for him to live there.

But that would be subject to the tenancy of Wayne.

So she just ends around it and evicts the tenant.

Which could be a violation of the marital order.

So what's the end game here, Mr. Sharps?

The end game, it's a possessory action.

With respect to the district court,

the district court judge proceeded appropriately.

And the end game is,

I'm not doing anything that impacts

the family division marital order.

And what should have happened,

if you look at the marital order,

what was going on is Nicholas was ordered to pay

all of the expenses to the marital home

in lieu of alimony.

And that was only predicated upon the convenience

that he'd be able to live rent free

upon the representation

that his brother was gonna allow him to live there.

So what Judge Gorman was doing

in the marital division was saying,

okay, we got this pie here.

He can live there free, hey, that's a great solution.

Now that has changed.

So what should happen is Nicholas,

By virtue of the eviction.

By virtue of the eviction,

he can no longer live there rent free

because Wayne's ability to live there

has been cut off by the landlord.

Certainly Judge Gorman could change her mind.

Certainly could.

And that could have been raised

in a motion free consideration.

It could have been merged in some way.

I don't think it's up to Judge Gorman

to suffocate me.

The instance could have sort of cut off her nose

to spite her face.

Absolutely.

And risked her alimony by doing this.

I'm don't represent her in that matter.

I'm just not a course that I probably would have done in

if I was on the other side of him.

Back at the marital court saying,

stop the alimony, I gotta go get a,

so what's the end game?

That's what his remedy is.

So what happens here

when if the courts have conflicting orders?

The only thing being resolved

in the summary process,

RSA 540 is who is entitled to possession.

Not what the financial consequences of that is.

It's not cutting off any lawsuit

that the person that was being evicted that,

hey, you owe me money for this.

I can sue you for that.

Same thing here.

Nicholas is not being cut off by anything

because he has the ability

and should go back to the marital court.

So if they're in conflict.

Modify.

He should go back to the marital court.

Or she should go back and modify it.

Because now if he gets to live there,

but she has to pay all the expenses

which is what this order says.

But Wayne is now cutting off the nose to swipe the face.

Wayne's not there paying rent.

Now her circumstances have changed too.

And it's not on the record,

but that's kind of what went off into the effort.

Theoretically the solution is

if orders are in conflict,

the two courts can go ahead

and if they're in conflict,

somebody can go to the marital court and say,

Wayne, we got to figure this out.

Correct.

And the way I had to analyze this case

because again, this is one court

and I would agree that the statute

that combined the circuit courts

was there for a reason.

It was to allow the singular judge

to deal with all these issues.

And that's why I say it's a procedural due process.

It's really about how these divisions.

That may be a bridge too far

given that certainly if some crime's committed

and the divorce judge becomes aware of it,

that judge would not be ruling

on something in the district division.

Maybe not.

I'm not following the analogy there.

Different procedures, different rights might be.

Right, that's why I say it's a procedural due process.

And probate court is the court of limited jurisdiction.

So it is probably a bridge too far to say

that they were all combined

so that they can all be dealt with

regardless of the forum.

Well, I think the goal of the circuit court

if I understand the history of it

was to have all the judges now

all trained, cross trained,

having probate district.

But within their own wheelhouse, they act.

They can't just sit in one court

and handle things in the other two courts.

That's why I'm saying it's more a procedural issue

rather than a subject matter jurisdiction issue,

which is the issue they raised in this case.

That's why I don't see it's a subject matter

jurisdiction.

So there is no subject matter jurisdictional issue.

That means the court has plenary jurisdiction

to handle this case.

Which I was assuming what was going on.

Let me.

So how do we solve the problem?

I think it was a discussion.

Let me just point out that the facts on the ground

have the potential for an ideal resolution

of a divorce situation.

You've got children, correct?

You've got two real estate, two properties

in which each spouse are eventually likely to live.

And that would solve a lot of visitation issues

and other matters.

So why isn't someone taking a global look at this case?

Your Honor, not on the record.

I think it's in this written order

that there was a domestic order that

was disposed of just prior to the temporary order coming in.

So there was that issue as well.

Living right next door to each other.

But you're right.

And that does allow for people to globally look at

and globally resolve things.

Quite frankly, they probably should

sell the investment property is what should happen.

Because the court made a finding.

I think that the finances just don't support it.

So him being able to live there rent free was a good solution.

And that's why he still has a remedy over at the family

division.

You say it's wrong to think about this

as a jurisdictional case.

But we have case law that talks about the jurisdiction

of the various divisions.

And the statutes talk about jurisdiction.

So how can that be wrong to think about it

as a jurisdictional matter?

And again, the way I looked at it

is this is RSA 590 F2, which basically

says the court shall be a court of record

with statewide jurisdiction.

Each circuit court location shall have the authority

to hear all cases within the subject matter

jurisdiction of the circuit court.

I thought the intent of that was

to provide for a blended effect, if you will.

Now, again, I kind of got sidetracked.

But the way I analyze this is let's go back 20 years ago.

We would be in the superior court in the marital matter.

But now we're in the district court,

clearly two separate statutes, two separate jurisdictions.

What should have happened there?

And I think the same thing should have happened.

But Judge Gorman sitting in the district court

should do is say, does this court order,

not to get behind why the court order was made,

but does this court order give Nicholas Sackley

a greater possessory interest in that property

or a defense to the possessory interest of the landlord

like a lease would?

Or like a retaliatory eviction?

Or like any other defense that may be available?

And that is within the subject matter jurisdiction

of the district court judge under RSA 540.

It's just dealing with who has the greater right of possession.

Not that anybody else has a right to possession.

You're gonna have a joint tenancy that owns the property,

but only one property, only one owner

coming forward with the eviction.

So that's not the focus of the 540.

It's of the two parties who has

the greater right to possession.

So again, go back to the superior court order.

If he was awarded exclusive use of possession

in a superior court marital matter,

he would come to district court

and defend the possessory action saying,

no, no, no, I have the right to possession

by virtue of this order.

And he would win that case.

That doesn't allow the district court judge

to go in and meddle with the marital thing.

These are two separate courts, that's clear.

And that's the way it worked in this case.

And that's what Judge Gorman did.

She said, I'm not prejudicing anybody's right

to raise this issue back in the family division,

which is where it should go.

Where Nicholas should go back and say,

now that I have to pay rent,

I want modification of the pseudo alimony order,

which has me paying all the expenses over here.

Now her on the other hand can go back and say,

listen, I have to pay all the expenses

for the investment property,

so my financial situation has changed.

And it's the family division

that would make those global orders.

So what do you ask for,

a stay of the order to go over to family divisions?

That's what I would have done,

but that's not the case before you.

No one move for that,

no one move for reconsideration,

nobody ask for alternate,

no one ask for a merger of the cases.

Or the case could settle.

What's that?

The case could settle.

Case could settle.

Unfortunately, I don't do a marital work, Your Honor,

and I'm not involved in those matters.

I don't need it.

Any further questions?

Thank you.

Mr. Winters, do you need your one minute?

Just want to point out one thing that,

you know, there was some discussion at length

about the intent of the marital temporary order

and what the reasoning was,

and I think that just illustrates my argument

that it's the landlord tenant court is not well equipped

to figure out what the family division was thinking about

when they wrote that temporary order,

and which just demonstrates why.

Even though it's the same judge?

It happened to be the same judge in this case,

but more often than not, it probably won't be.

So I think when you're, you know,

writing an opinion that's going to be applied,

you know, I would try to put aside the fact

that it happened to be the same judge in this case.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.
