0-5-5-3. Richard D. Errol Jr. et al. versus Henry M. Palmer et al.

Counsel, you proceed.

Thank you, Your Honor. May it please the Court.

My name is Jeffrey Christensen, and I represent the Palmers in this case.

This case revolves around the well that serves the Palmer's residents.

It is the only source of potable water for the Palmer's home, and it has been since forever,

since the home was first constructed before the Palmer's owned it.

Similarly, they're the only ones who use this well.

Nobody else uses this well as water.

For one reason or another, when the home was first constructed,

the well was constructed across the street in the woods of what is now the Arrell property.

At the time, both lots were in common ownership.

Both the Palmer property and the Arrell property were owned by Esther Edmonds.

When the Palmers purchased their property,

Esther Edmonds granted them what is described as a temporary easement

to continue to use the existing well until such time as grantees the Palmers

have another water source available.

The question before this Court is whether an easement like this

that has a defeasible condition that terminates the easement

necessarily imposes upon the easement holder a duty to terminate that easement as soon as they can.

Is there any case law out there that would hold that notion?

There is the case law and there's a lot cited in our brief

from both the Bruce and Eli trees and cases from other jurisdictions

that a determinable easement such as this doesn't necessarily have to end

just because it has a condition that would terminate it.

A good example is a right of way easement for a railroad

that terminates when the railroad ceases to operate.

That doesn't mean the railroad company has to stop running the railroad

or find an alternative route.

Now the Arrells will probably talk about the Superior Court case in New Hampshire

of Dolls or Realty and that is a perfect example of everything that is missing in this case.

Dolls or Realty talked about a temporary easement for a road

that was to last until another road could be constructed

and that's about where the similarities end.

In that case, the deed had language specifically discussing

the expeditious construction of the road which is not here.

Correct.

There was extrinsic evidence, deeds and plans that all talked about

the prompt construction of the road.

Also no extrinsic evidence here.

All the extrinsic evidence in this case supports the Palmer's position

and I'll get into that later.

And finally there was evidence that the continued use of the temporary road

was interfering with the use of the Soviet estate.

That's not here and it's been acknowledged by the Arrells

that there is no burden on them by the continued use of the easement.

They don't use the well.

The well does not impact the Arrells water supply.

There's not even aesthetic impact.

The well is tucked in the woods.

In discovery the only interference that the Arrells could identify

was that it prevented them from exercising sole dominion

over the entirety of the property.

But that is a tautological element of any easement.

If that's enough to terminate this easement,

then any easement anywhere can be terminated.

Mr. Christensen, you frame the issue here

as whether there's a duty to terminate this temporary easement

as soon as it can be terminated.

But to me that overstates the situation here

because it has been 17 years,

so it wouldn't be as soon as it can be terminated.

But what the trial court found essentially was 17 years have gone by

and so it's not as soon as it can be terminated

but it's certainly a reasonable time to get moving in that direction.

The question for an easement is

what was intended when the grantor granted the easement?

What was intended by the parties to the easement

based on the circumstances that existed at the time?

There is nothing indicating any specific time period in this easement.

So any duty must have been implied

and intended at the time the easement was granted.

The court found that the 17 years had been enough

by applying the rule of reason.

It dismissed the extrinsic evidence,

found that the easement was ambiguous

and applied the rule of reason.

The rule of reason however prevents a easement

from being unreasonably used

and is determined by weighing the costs and benefits,

the advantages and disadvantages to each party.

And as I mentioned before,

there are no disadvantages to the URLs.

They have no interference with their easement.

At the hearing on the motions for discovery,

the motions for summary judgment,

the URLs acknowledge that they are not burdened

by the easement at all.

As a matter of law and of logical necessity,

the rule of reason cannot weigh in their favor.

There is essentially a zero on that arm of the scale.

On the other side, the polymers,

this is the sole water supply for their home.

Terminating the easement would impose undeniable costs upon them,

costs of determining a feasible location for a new well,

assuming there is one.

There's no evidence of that.

Cost of drilling that new well to who knows whatever depth,

cost of installing a new pump,

costs of whatever water treatment was necessary

to make the water potable and drinkable,

and costs of reconfiguring their plumbing

to reconnect to the new well instead of the old one.

Isn't your position, in essence,

to read out the word temporary here

because isn't it essentially what you're saying?

It could be here forever.

If my clients never take any action,

it could be there forever.

Not necessarily.

If the municipality, for example,

were introduced municipal water supply in the area,

then the polymers would have to transition to that.

But yes, otherwise it can last indefinitely.

If the easement were simply to say

a temporary easement for the use of the existing well

and said nothing further,

then that would be ambiguous

and they would be justified in looking

at extrinsic evidence of the rule of reason.

But in this case, that ambiguity is clarified

because the plain language of the deed says

and answers that question of how long this easement lasts.

It lasts until they have another water supply available.

It would have been easy for the grantor to include language,

imposing such a duty to find a new well

and develop a new well.

Other affirmative duties are included,

but the grantor chose not to do so in this case.

Or put a specific timeline on what the word temporary means.

Correct.

Temporary does not necessarily mean short-lived.

It simply means not permanent.

A thousand-year easement would be temporary.

In this case and as has been held in several other cases

in other jurisdictions,

the existence of a condition that terminates the easement

doesn't necessarily mean it has to be terminated.

Can I ask you a question just to clarify the record?

There's a lot of back and forth in the briefing

about an additional manufactured housing unit

and accessory dwelling.

Yes.

It was unclear to me whether that there was evidence

in the record of that.

I didn't seem that the trial court referred to it at all

as any basis for its decision.

The trial court did not.

Essentially the accessory residence is a red herring.

As I mentioned before,

the standard for determining the scope of an easement

is based on what was intended

at the time the easement was granted.

A subsequent use, a subsequent expansion of a use

doesn't impact what the original intent was.

Similarly, it is possible for and legally permissible

to expand the use of an easement

so long as it is a natural development

from the existing circumstances.

In this case, the addition of what is basically

an in-law apartment to a single-family residence

and as long as it doesn't overly burden the survey

and that is not before us though.

Am I correct?

It has been raised by the appellees.

The issue of whether there is an overburdening

of easement by the accessory dwelling is not.

Is not in this case.

Correct.

Because the easement granted talks about service

to a single-family residence.

Right.

Raises my other question.

Am I correct?

Is this the Palmer lot about 19 acres?

That's approximately correct.

And the real property is about 30.

I believe so.

So there could be further development

of the Palmer property theoretically.

Theoretically.

Which would either raise an overburdened argument

or signal the end of this particular easement.

If a new water supply were developed

as part of that expansion of Palmer property,

then yes, this easement would be terminated.

You couldn't, for example, build a well

for some new building

and then continue to use this well

for the original building.

But if there is a question in the future

on overburdening this easement,

then the remedy would be, assuming it is overburdened,

to enjoin that particular easement.

It wouldn't be to terminate the entire easement.

So even if you do assume that the accessory dwelling

was an overburdening of the easement,

that doesn't impose an affirmative duty

to terminate the entire easement.

Do the URLs have the right to say,

you know, we're willing to pay for it.

We just don't want you to get the water off of our property.

So you have to do it.

We'll pay for it.

But you have to find another source.

They could certainly make that offer.

They don't have the right to force that to happen.

Now, if they went out and somehow developed

another water supply that they were entitled to develop,

convinced the town to bring municipal water to the area,

for example, then that would allow for the termination

of the easement.

But for digging the well on the Palmer property itself,

assuming that such a thing is feasible,

that would obviously have to require the Palmer's consent.

So do I understand you correctly?

If the town were to run water main out by the property,

then you agree that the easement would terminate,

even if they didn't hook into it?

Just the availability of it would terminate the easement?

That becomes a new water supply that is available to the Palmer's.

And that would require them to terminate the easement

and hook into it.

The distinguishing factor here is it has to be a water supply

that didn't exist at the time of the easement's original grant.

If you assume that the mere possibility of digging a well

is enough to terminate the easement,

then the easement would have terminated immediately

upon being granted.

So it has to be a new water supply,

such as a new well municipal water supply,

something else that technology hasn't come up with yet,

something that is new to the property,

that would terminate the easement.

In this case, however, the easement is clear and unambiguous.

There is no affirmative duty in the language.

The grantor could have included one.

The affirmative duties that are included

indicate that the easement was intended to last quite a while.

Affirmative duties to repair and maintain

suggest that the easement was intended to last

long enough to need maintenance and repair.

Similarly, why would you bother incurring the cost to repair a well

that you're supposed to be replacing with a new well?

The extrinsic evidence, if you assume the deed is ambiguous,

always in favor of the Palmer's.

When the Palmer's first purchased the property?

But you don't believe the language is ambiguous,

so we wouldn't get to the extrinsic evidence

or the rule of reason or any of that.

No, the deed is clear and unambiguous,

but for the sake of discussion, even if you did,

and the trial court did rule that the easement was ambiguous,

all of the extrinsic evidence weighs in favor of the Palmer's.

The original grantor owned the survey and estate

for years while the Palmer's first purchased their residence.

Palmer's did nothing to develop a new water supply during that time.

Esther Edmonds never objected, never expressed impatience,

never did anything to indicate that she believed

the Palmer's should be developing a new well.

If you discount that as the trial court did,

then you can go to the rule of reason.

As a matter of law, any uncertainties have to be resolved

in favor of the grantees, the Palmer's,

and against the grantor or their successor, the Arell's,

and any interpretation that results in the forfeiture of the easement

is also disfavored under the law.

But the rule of reason, similarly, also has to weigh in favor of the Palmer's.

All of the costs of developing a new well that exist

and are undeniable have to be weighed against the absence

of any cost to the Arell's for continuing to use the well.

It's been acknowledged that they are not burdened by the easement.

The Arell's have brought up the pool and the deck that the Palmer's built

on their property as evidence that, in favor of the rule of reason

weighing in their favor, all of this evidence is speculative at best.

The fact that the Palmer's built a pool does not necessarily mean

that they can afford any well no matter what the cost.

And even if it did, there is a cost, even if they can afford it,

and that cost when weighed against zero costs still has to tip in their favor.

The rule of reason cannot weigh in favor of the Arell's

when they have no burden from the easement.

No interference with their use of the property.

And the use of a pool isn't, once again, that's not an overburden argument.

There's no, or at least I don't see in the record any issue

that this well affects any other wells or any other water source.

It doesn't.

And there was no overburden raised as part of the underlying case.

It wasn't pled.

This was brought up as evidence supporting the application

of the rule of reason in favor of the Arell's.

The Arell's did not introduce evidence as to whether a well would be feasible,

how much that well would cost.

Instead, they simply pointed out that the Palmer's built a pool

and therefore assumed or asked the court to assume

that any cost of a new well would be affordable and immaterial.

Even if it's affordable, it's not immaterial.

That cost has to be weighed against the absence of any cost to the Arell's.

And the rule of reason, the extrinsic evidence,

the plain language of the easement, all of which weigh in favor of the Palmer's.

I see the line on.

Yes, sir.

Thank you very much.

Thank you, council.

Move forward.

May it please the court?

Karen Forbes from Shaheen and Gordon.

And I'm here with Richard Arell and Natalie Allen Arell,

who are in attendance also.

Let me know if I'm not speaking loudly enough.

So the first, this issue surrounds the interpretation of a deed,

a deed that was drafted back in 2000.

It provides for temporary easement,

which is for purposes of serving the existing family,

single family residents located on the premises here

and conveyed until such time as granted

shall have another water source available.

My clients were purchasers two years later

of 26 acres on the other side of the road where the well is located.

There's no claim that they were aware of the easement at the time of purchase, right?

Well, there's none, but they were aware of it

and they were aware that the word temporary was in the easement

and they've lied upon the common meaning of the word temporary.

Aren't we guided by what the grantee intended at the time?

We are, but the issue is the plain language of the deed.

The deed says temporary and my clients understood what temporary meant

and there's no evidence.

No evidence that the grantors had any other belief

as to what the word temporary meant.

Temporary is defined in Webster's third new international picture

as lasting for a time only or existing or continuing for a limited time.

So when the Rales purchased the property,

they believed that they just had a temporary easement.

They waited 15 years before they approached their neighbors

and said to them, isn't it time that you got your own well?

Why?

Because they thought that that was reasonable.

They thought they were being more than reasonable.

They thought they were being good neighbors

and they just wanted it resolved when the well would go away.

That's all they wanted resolved.

Let me ask you, the condition that needs to be satisfied here

is until such time as grantees have another water source available,

in terms of facts on the ground,

what has changed in terms of the availability of another water source

between 2002 and now?

Well, I agree with the Superior Court when it said that the idea

of all of a sudden a water source becoming available

is ambiguous and is confusing and interpreted in more than one way.

When you read the deed as a whole,

which is what we're obligated to do,

you have to use the word temporary in that.

Just as a factual matter,

are there any on-the-ground facts that have changed

in terms of availability of a water source

between the time of this deed and the present?

The answer is no.

The answer is the facts have not changed.

The polymers have a 19-acre parcel of land.

My clients have a 26-acre parcel of land.

There are plenty of houses around there.

They all have wells.

There is no public water in Chichester in this area.

I don't even think in Chichester.

So this is one of those specters of an issue

that was raised at the Superior Court level.

Oh, what if they can't put a well in?

Well, it's 19 acres of land,

and that's not really an issue here.

So to answer you, those facts have changed.

Apparently it was an issue because the court said

if you have some problems with my order,

come back and seek relief.

The court said, here's a window.

If you have problems and if for some reason

it is extraordinarily costly, come back

and we'll talk about it.

That was a three-year window the court gave.

Now, same question for you.

Do you have any case law or treaty support

for that proposition?

For which proposition?

The proposition that this meager language in the deed

to construct a new well.

No, there is no case law that supports that.

Nothing specific.

All real estate cases are so fact specific

that it's almost impossible to find the exact same fact scenario.

The cases that are cited in the appellee's brief

don't really match up to the facts either.

This is an issue of deed interpretation

and what the parties mean at the time.

So there's two questions.

The first question is, can you ignore the word temporary?

Can the appellants ignore that word?

And the answer is no.

Not when you read the whole deed together.

Also, the appellant makes an issue out of the standard

in their brief on the rule of reason

and I beg to differ with them on it.

There are two situations where the court

will apply the rule of reason

and this is in Hertz versus Concord.

The first is to interpret and give reasonable meaning

to general or unclear terms in the deed language

granting an easement.

That's what this situation is.

Secondly, it's irrespective of the deed language.

We use the rule to determine

whether a particular use of an easement

would be unreasonably burdensome.

There are two separate situations.

We're looking right now to see whether or not

what the reasonable meaning of this deed is

by their limitations and can they do as they want.

The appellants have made the position

and taken the position that they have the right

to use the well until they're looked

in their sole discretion to establish

a different water source.

We say that the meaning of the deed

when you take it together means that they can't

because the word temporary is there.

You can't ignore it.

Secondly, this becomes one of the interesting things

because the parties concede that if public water

was available they would have to hook up to public water.

So they would have to bear the cost

even though the water source is down the road

they would have to connect to it.

They would have to pay the fees,

they would have to pay the hook up fees, everything else.

But that would be available.

I mean that would satisfy the term available.

Well, I agree with the Superior Court.

I find becoming available

and the judge uses the phrase become available

so that's essentially what the deed talks about.

That's ambiguous in and of itself

because what does that really mean?

How is water available in the ground now?

There's water, you know, if you put a well

you can almost certainly get water.

So the water source is there.

The water source would be there.

So where's the line drawn?

That's the problem with the deed line drawn.

Well, that's what Justice Bassett had when he wanted to know

whether things on the ground had changed.

When the easement was granted

it was presumably if there's well on your opponent's property,

the Palmer's property.

Now there was none too.

Right, I understand what their argument is

but to become, it's still available

if they drill it too.

If they drill it then all of a sudden...

So I have struggled with the language in the deed

for a year and a half

and it's ambiguous every single way I looked at it.

Every time I tried to pin it down.

If you agree that it's ambiguous

why doesn't the inaction of the grantor

for a number of years

indicate that the temporary was indeterminate?

The grantor was two years.

Okay, but they never did anything, correct?

And then she died...

I'm not sure... No, she died...

The grantor died within a year or something.

My client's deed is not...

it was a trust.

The deceased died, the successor trustee's deed

two years later to my client.

So somewhere in between those two years

the grantor died.

And I also think that it's reasonable

to say that a temporary easement

can go on for two years.

That's certainly different between two years

and we are at 19 years now.

But if you read it in conjunction

with temporary service to the single family home

couldn't that also contemplate

well what if the home goes away

then the easement's over, right?

Yes.

People abdicate, abandon the house.

It was there for a particular purpose.

Right.

Okay, so that could be

another definition of temporary.

Right.

Which also brings me to the other issue

about the manufactured housing unit

which is on the property.

You're right.

We did not plead burden.

We did not plead over burdening

simply because it wouldn't make the easement go away

and that's our goal.

But this is a situation where all of a sudden

you're going to have ongoing conflict with these people

because it is overburdened.

It clearly states in the deed

grantees serving the existing single family residents

not another single family resident

that's placed on the property.

They take the position that it's an accessory dwelling unit

and there's a lot of litigation out there about it

so isn't that another case for another day

about whether that's a burden or not?

That's not what we have in front of us right now.

Well, except that accessory use is a zoning word

and that doesn't have to do with the deed.

That's a zoning term.

That's how they're defining it.

It's an accessory use because the zoning allows

and I agree that's further litigation about this easement.

So there's a burden.

There's always going to be conflict over this easement

because there's nothing definite about it.

That's inherent in easements.

I mean, we certainly see a lot of those cases here.

You probably see a lot of them.

I see a lot of them too,

but I see a lot that aren't as ambiguous as this one.

And the issue here is whether or not

the word temporary has some meaning in it.

Whether or not it was just a gratuitous word

that was thrown in there

or whether or not everything is within the control

of the appellant and they can decide when they want

and they can make it be permanent if they want.

Then that means the word temporary doesn't have any meaning in this deed.

So you either read the deed as a whole

or you read it in just the part that the appellant wants you to read it in.

Just the last part of the phrase.

Time is relative though, isn't it?

Pardon?

Time is relative though, isn't it?

What's relative?

Sorry, I can't.

What's temporary to one person might not be to another?

Well, that's where the rule of reason comes in.

Your opponent says it doesn't matter.

So Ms. Ford, I hear you correctly.

Do you agree that extrinsic evidence is admissible in this?

Well, the problem in this case is again the grantor is dead

and there wasn't any extrinsic evidence.

The only extrinsic evidence that the appellant points to

is the fact that the grantor who died within that two-year window

didn't come to them within that two-year window

and say you need to put in a well.

That was the only extrinsic evidence that you heard from the appellant.

But who had the burden of frustration?

So what we say is you read the deed as a whole

and you have to use the word temporary in there.

The fact that temporary is in there

means that there is a time limit on it

and the rule of reason applies.

Couldn't it just mean there's a condition in there

and if the condition is satisfied it ends?

The real problem is it has to be interpreted

so that people understand it.

People who are sitting at tables at closings

and they know that the word temporary means there's a time limit.

If you follow the appellant's argument

and they talk about a determinable easement

and that you have to go to this J. W. Bruce

and J. W. E. Lee Jr. law of easements and licenses

that has no applicability at a closing table

when you're reading what the deed is that you're getting.

So either the word is meaning in it

when my client's buying it

and using common language

or you're going to follow something

where somebody's got to go off to illegal treaties

and find out what it means.

That's the problem with the appellant's argument.

We need to make it as simple as possible

for people with clarity.

I know that's what we all do, right?

Try to be clear.

And the people who are drafting the deeds

aren't as clear as we want

and therefore we're here.

And that's why you have all these cases.

Thank you.

Yep.

Thank you very much.

Did anyone save any time?

All right.

Thank you both for your fine presentations

under adverse circumstances.

The court is adjourned.

Please rise.
