This is case 2019, 0628, state of New Hampshire versus Roger Dana.

May it please the court. Stephanie Hausman on behalf of Roger Dana, I have reserved one minute of my time.

I plan to address the jury instruction issue, then the first hearsay issue, and lastly, harmless error.

This was a circumstantial case in which the state relied on Mr. Dana's statements that he was alone with MD,

but rejected his statements that her injuries were the result of a fall.

Now, the medical evidence was clear her injuries did not result from a fall.

But other than Mr. Dana's statement that he was with MD, the state had no other compelling evidence that Mr. Dana had hurt her.

In their closing, they discussed, they theorized, an elaborate and lengthy assault including many, many blows,

including bringing the child to different rooms and blood dropping and smearing all through the house.

They had no injuries to Mr. Dana consistent with the beating that they theorized.

They had no DNA or blood on Mr. Dana or any of the clothes that he was wearing or clothes that were elsewhere in the house that he might have changed out of.

And they had no admissions.

I thought there was blood on the Packers' jersey.

I'm sorry, can you say that again?

I thought there was blood found on the Packers' jersey, the Green Bay Packers.

It was not MD's blood.

So it was not relevant to this case.

It was admitted.

Pardon me?

It was admitted into evidence, though, correct?

It was admitted into evidence to show how many areas the state had swabbed and then the few areas that they had tested.

Yes.

It was the state's theory of the case that Mr. Dana's statements about a fall were the most compelling evidence of his guilt

because of the false exculpatory statement inference.

However, the defense had evidence that another person was there at the time, Walker, who did have injuries consistent with delivering a beating.

It was the defendant's theory of the case that Mr. Dana's intoxication caused him to not remember that another person had been in the apartment and hurt MD.

This was the central dispute in this case.

So was a recording that supposedly included Ms. Walker's voice put into evidence?

There was a recording from about 2.30 that afternoon in which everyone seemed to agree no voices could be identified on that recording.

But the witness was clear both in direct and in redirect that at that time he heard Ms. Walker, who apparently had a very distinctive voice and was often at the apartment.

Within this legal context, the false exculpatory evidence instruction was not necessary or mandatory because it neither dealt with the state's burden or a theory of defense.

But the state wanted an instruction that referred specifically to Mr. Dana in order to support its theory of the case.

Mr. Dana asked that the instruction refer to any person whose statements were admitted, so it would be understood by the jury to be relevant both to Mr. Dana's statements and to some other state's witnesses because that supported the defense theory of the case.

By denying Mr. Dana's request and by giving the instruction aimed solely at Mr. Dana's statements, the court communicated that the inference only applied to Mr. Dana.

Now there's nothing about the logic of the inference that makes it applicable only to criminal defendants. It is logical that any person who makes a false exculpatory statement does so because they are trying to hide evidence to the guilt.

So why was more needed in the grand scheme of things? Why was more needed?

Because the instruction wasn't necessary at all but was given only to apply to Mr. Dana's statements, the risk is that it conveys to the jury that the judge thinks that the inference is only supported by evidence related to Mr. Dana.

But there was a general instruction about witnesses.

There was a general instruction about witnesses but that didn't counteract the harm of giving a lopsided instruction.

And the harm of a lopsided instruction is that the jury might pick up that the judge is commenting on the evidence and putting a thumb on the scale for one of the parties.

This is the rare case mentioned in Evans where it was necessary to give an instruction that treated the parties equally.

Unlike in Evans, the evidence here was much stronger that Walker lied about being in the apartment.

A witness placed her there at the time MD was injured and she had injuries consistent with delivering a beating.

Whereas in Evans, the state's witness merely denied having harmed the victim.

Another distinction is the more thorough instructions given there that the judge was not putting a thumb on the side of one party or making rulings about the weight or persuasiveness of the evidence.

Here the judge made only one reference to that concept and it was buried amongst the instructions about objections and legally admissible evidence.

And that didn't therefore cure the harm of the lopsided instruction.

Turning to the hearsay issue, the one I want you to discuss is the one related to Trooper Zip's testimony that the four other people who may have harmed MD indicated who they were with on the day MD was injured

and that those alibi witnesses accounted for the whereabouts of the four alternate perpetrators.

According to the brief I read that didn't happen. The question was simply did you interview five people, four people as to their whereabouts and the answer was yes.

And then it stopped after that. Am I misreading something?

There are two questions and two answers that were objected to. The first question is did those four people tell you, did you talk to the people that they were with those four people?

Sure.

And by asking that question, it communicates hearsay, which is that either Zip or others from the state police talked to those witnesses and found out from them who they were with.

Only if you draw the inference you wish to draw. So what is the second time, please?

And then the second question is did you talk to them to account for the whereabouts of the four people? And the answer was yes.

This is a similar case to white, which the state doesn't contend with. So this court's case law that holds that testimony that conveys as the only rational inference, a hearsay statement, is itself hearsay.

And so the only rational inference from that series of two questions and answers were the two hearsay statements, both that the four alternate perpetrators had indicated who they were with on the day MD was injured

and that Zip or somebody else from the state police had talked to them to account for their whereabouts or verify.

It doesn't really go to the truth of where they were.

Pardon me?

It doesn't really go to the truth of where they were, just the fact that they said they were.

It doesn't go to the truth of that matter, but it conveys that Zip had cleared these witnesses, that he had accounted for their whereabouts by following up.

The state argues here that that was admissible because the defense opened the door to it.

However, it fails to make any argument about what misimpression was created by the defense cross-examination of Zip that was cured by this testimony.

So on cross-examination about those four witnesses, the defense counsel asked Zip had he participated in the searches of Alex Burke, Johnson, and Riff.

And then as to Walker, counsel asked only whether Zip had seized any other of her clothing besides her shirt, whether he had swabbed her bloody knuckles, and whether he had searched her home.

And that's not challenging the state's investigation?

None of those questions created a misimpression that the four individuals had not provided alibi witnesses or that Zip had failed to follow up on their alibis.

So the opening the door, the specific contradiction doctrine, which this court has been very careful to delineate but which the state doesn't talk about in any specifics,

indicates that the rule is the doctrine allows one party to cure a misimpression with evidence that specifically cures that misimpression.

And here the evidence, the testimony did not cure any misimpression about that was created during the cross-examination.

I thought you were going to rely on the hearsay from Ms. Walker's telephone call.

I'm happy to discuss that as well if the court has any questions.

I mean, from my point of view, I don't know if the defense argued this, but how is it possible that a witness's opinion as to what happened is admissible,

whether it's coming from hearsay or from the witness directly and Ms. Walker testified in this case, right?

Right.

We did make the point that Ms. Walker would not have been able to offer that testimony as a witness herself,

but because the objection below had been merely a hearsay objection, that's what we focused our argument on.

And our argument in that matter is that it was not an excited utterance because 24 hours had passed in the time between the exciting event

and when Ms. Walker made the statement.

Ms. Walker had talked to the police at length during that time period, had considered her own areas of culpability when talking to the police,

had felt afraid that maybe they would arrest her.

All of this thought process had gone on in that 24 hours.

Yes, she was upset when she talked to Ms. Johnson as any grandmother would be 24 hours after their grandchild had died.

Was Ms. Johnson a defense witness or a state's witness?

She was actually called by both parties.

She was called initially in the state's case in chief and then she was called in the defense case in chief.

So what do we do if we agree that it wasn't an excited utterance but it would not be admissible for other reasons that Justice Donovan referred to?

If it was not an excited utterance, then the court should have excluded it in response to the...

I think what Justice Fassett is asking, what if we find it was an excited utterance?

Can we address the other problem?

The court can't suesponte do a plain error analysis of that issue.

I just want to touch briefly on harmless error.

The harm of these errors went to the heart of this case.

By admitting Zip's hearsay testimony, the state was allowed to neutralize the best evidence supplying the jury with an alternate perpetrator.

Because Zip himself cleared the four others from suspicion.

And the false, exculpatory evidence instruction further discounted the defense theory.

These errors were devastating to the defense in this circumstantial case.

We ask this court to reverse.

Thank you.

Thank you.

You have one minute as you reserve.

Thank you.

Mr. Sager.

Good morning.

May it please the court, Weston Sager for the state of New Hampshire.

I'm happy to take your questions at any time.

This court should affirm the defendant's first degree murder conviction for three reasons.

First, the trial court did not erroneously admit hearsay evidence.

Second, the trial court did not air by limiting the false exculpatory statement jury instruction to the defendant's statements.

And third, even if the trial court aired, the error was harmless.

And that third point is actually what I want to start with.

I believe that defense counsel here has made some statements that, you know, this is a circumstantial case.

But that there was no real support for the defendant murdering M.D.

And I just want to just point out that there was an overwhelming amount of evidence that the defendant brutally assaulted M.D.

and sexually assaulted her.

First, in the weeks before this incident occurred, the defendant harbored really troubling thoughts about his life and about M.D.

in particular, that he was just going to snap and he might as well just do something if he was going to feel like he was in jail anyway.

The defendant, as he says, consistently throughout this, who was the only person at 109 York Street, the address for this, during the incident,

he never claimed that there was anyone else there.

The defendant was also indifferent to M.D. following the incident.

He never called 911. He did not go to the hospital.

And he said whatever and just walked back into his bedroom when I believe it was the M.D.'s mother was saying I'm going to the hospital.

The defendant said whatever and just walked back into the bedroom.

Those are any blood evidence that tied the defendant to the murder?

Well, there was substantial amounts of blood evidence in the apartment that belonged to both the defendant and M.D.

To answer your question, Justice Six, the defendant's blood was on the Green Bay Packers Jersey and M.D.'s blood was in various places throughout the apartment

in places that it should not have been.

In the shower, on baby wipes, on a pajama top that was jammed near the defendant's bed and seemingly hidden.

Again, it's all in the exhibits that I've provided to this court as well as in the state's brief.

Just going through, if the victim fell from the bunk bed once or twice, there's no way that the blood should have been in those particular locations.

And perhaps the most damning evidence that was presented by the state at trial was that there was M.D.'s blood on the floor next to her bunk bed,

but not on the toys that were also next to the bunk bed.

Meaning that what probably happened was that M.D. was bleeding on the floor there and the defendant then moved the toys over that bloodstain

to make it seem like her fall from the bunk bed would have appeared to be more severe that caused the extent of these injuries,

which again, as Defense Counsel Appley points out, were not consistent with the fall from a bunk bed.

I've fallen from a bunk bed.

I'm sure one or more of you have.

There is nothing remotely credible about that statement.

May I just through, please, the hearsay sequence that Attorney Houseman took us through in terms of the hearsay about the alibi witnesses, let's say, before?

Yeah, and just for clarification, the state disagrees that this is alibi witnesses that is being presented by the defense.

All that was asked, I can get you the exact language here.

It really, I'll just read if I can find it.

Okay, so this is what was said at the trial.

The prosecutor said, Defense Counsel asked you, so Mr. Zip is on the stand.

The prosecutor says, Defense Counsel asked you about Mr. Riff, and I say, and I put in brackets.

These are my terms.

Grandmother, Ms. Johnson, and grandfather.

Remember that.

Sergeant Zip says, yes.

The prosecutor, were the people they were with on November 27th interviewed?

Sergeant Zip, yes they were.

The prosecutor, to account for their whereabouts.

Sergeant Zip, yes.

And then there was an, that's it.

There's no hearsay statement in there.

And that's why the trial court said this is not hearsay.

What about this notion that inferences can rise to the level of hearsay at some point?

Well, I'm not entirely sure that I think there is some case law on that in New Hampshire,

but it's inapplicable here, Your Honor, because what happened here is that

that line of questioning did not account for what the defense says it means.

As the state explains in its brief, that exchange between Sergeant Zip and the prosecutor,

all that was being introduced for was so that the state could say, look,

Sergeant Zip did an adequate job doing his police investigation.

And that, what I just read to you, left open the possibility that one or more of those people was at 109 York Street during the incident,

and that, you know, that they could have been involved somehow,

or that their whereabouts could not be accounted for.

So there was no alibi inference from that very sort of succinct line of questioning

that the prosecutor asked Sergeant Zip at trial.

So, and even if there was this, you know, even if this was hearsay, as the defense says,

the defense opened the door to this during the cross-examination of Sergeant Zip.

The defense, as the state lays out in its brief, the state was asking Sergeant Zip

all of these questions to make it seem like he did not do an effective investigation.

What was the state's explanation for the neighbor hearing Ms. Walker's voice in the apartment?

So the state, and again, in the state's brief, this is discussed.

So what happened is that there were two recordings that Mr. Whitehouse made around the time of the incident.

One at 2.35 p.m. and one at around 3.30 p.m.

The 2.35 p.m. recording, which is around when the incident was occurring,

that just has no recording of the grandmother Ms. Walker on that particular recording.

But at the 3.30 recording, then Ms. Walker's voice appears,

but that's after she says that she's at the apartment at that time.

So that doesn't really move the needle one way or another.

If anything, it actually supports the state's case because we hear this, you know,

raucous noise coming from the defendant's apartment during the 1 to 3 p.m. period when this assault occurred.

So in what planet is Ms. Walker's opinion as to what happened, admissible evidence?

Well, Your Honor, I think that it's admissible here because of the reason why it's being introduced.

Because what we have here is to refute the implication that the defense is making

that the grandmother, Ms. Walker, was the killer.

Because that's what this line of questioning in large part for Ms. Johnson

when the state called Ms. Johnson to the stand.

They were asking her all these questions that made it seem like the biological grandmother of MD was the one who murdered MD.

But this is after Ms. Walker testified and she denied harming the child, right?

Correct.

So the state didn't ask Ms. Walker, what do you think happened when she was testifying?

Well, they didn't necessarily, they didn't need to at that point because she was just providing her, you know, sequence of events,

her recollection of that day.

But now on, you know, the states, the states making its case, it's now introducing this sort of, oh, it wasn't the defendant,

it was this other person or maybe it was Mr. Riff.

And so now it's about the state making sure that the jury understands that the actions of the grandmother in this particular instance,

if she's hysterical and calling and like calling Ms. Johnson, her frame of mind that she's like,

the defendant did it and she's crying and she's yelling,

that refutes sort of the implication that the defense is making that she's the true killer.

Because the true killer would not be saying that sort of thing in that way.

So that's why-

The true killer wouldn't put it on somebody else?

I don't think there would be a phone call the following day and just, and she was hysterical.

I mean, it was, she was crying, she was yelling.

I mean, it was an excited utterance.

I mean, it was her being just out of her mind.

If it's, even if it's an excited utterance, do you agree that it still needs to be admissible for other purposes?

I would think so, yes, Your Honor.

So it has to be a relevant statement, right, even if it's hearsay?

Of course, yes.

But it's also for impeachment.

I mean, that's what the state also sought to introduce this for is impeachment of Ms. Johnson

because she was misremembering the phone call, when that phone call occurred that she had with grandmother.

So it's in the state wanted to introduce this for a variety of different reasons.

So the trial court said this comes in on the excited utterance exception to the hearsay rule.

But it's, it wasn't just sought for that particular purpose.

But it came in for the truth of the matter asserted?

I guess it came in for the fact that there was, I mean, that she believed that there was,

that she, that the defendant had, in fact, you know, murdered M.D.

How is that relevant, what she believed?

Well, again, it just shows her frame of mind, Your Honor.

It shows what she thought and to refute the inference by the defense that, you know,

the grandmother was the true killer in this instance.

But that's not at all what occurred.

And again, even if this court finds that that was error by the court,

that this very, again, brief exchange between the prosecutor and Ms. Johnson about what grandmother said,

I mean, there is no world in which that would be considered material error

such that it would render the defendant's conviction improper by virtue of the harmless error doctrine.

I mean, I just want to revisit this again, if that's okay with, you know, the justices here,

is this is, this was not a close case and it never was.

So even if you were to take everything that the defendant is saying about, you know,

that there was error from Sergeant Zip, there was error about the hearsay coming in for Ms. Johnson,

and even if the false exculpatory jury instruction was somehow improper,

the evidence here is just overwhelming.

And the implication of, let's say it was error, just assuming for the sake of argument that it was error

to bring in, say, you know, Ms. Johnson's statements about grandmother's, you know, her belief,

it's cumulative, it didn't affect anything.

I mean, it was just, it was so clear.

And that's part of the reason why I provided this court with these exhibits in this particular matter.

So you can take a look at also what the jury saw in this particular case to get the whole picture.

Because I think once the court sees all of that stuff and really reviews

what the arguments we make in the state's brief, the exhibits in this particular matter,

this is just, it's so abundantly clear the defendant did this.

And...

And the grandmother's condition was otherwise explained.

Yeah.

Her injuries.

And one thing I, and yes, because she was, she was hitting a railing.

She also said that I think on the stand that she punched a wall when she was at the hospital.

So there was no indication.

And the defendant never put her there.

That was corroborated.

Sorry, what?

Her statements were corroborated by others.

Yes, certainly the hitting of the railing at the house.

I believe Officer Bardeen who responded to the scene testified that he saw her doing that.

And there was really no, she was never there.

I mean, the defendant never claimed she was there.

There was some discussion about did she come by the house with tobacco that day.

And the defendant said no.

He told MD's mother that at some point earlier that afternoon, I think around noon or noon 30.

So, and just one final thing I want to say about the excited utterance, you know,

just getting to what the defendant is saying here about the timeframe, the 24-hour period.

This court has never excluded that.

Just out of hand, like 24 hours, that's the limit.

And other jurisdictions, I've provided, you know, some case sites in the state's brief.

It seems that the trend is towards extending that period because,

and particularly in this matter where grandmother is holding an unresponsive and brutally beaten granddaughter.

I mean that, I can't even imagine the amount of trauma and how that would persist for a very long time.

And that day, although this wasn't fully developed on the record,

there was an indication too that was introduced by the defense that she might have been triggered

to again have this outburst because of what she may have saw in a news program.

So, again, all of this stuff, it just shows that this was a proper and sustainable exercise of discretion

by the trial court to admit the hearsay evidence.

And if there are any questions on the false exculpatory jury instruction,

I'm happy to answer those.

But I think Evans is controlling on that particular issue.

It's almost identical to this matter.

And Bruno II, which is an 80s case, that too also gives a nice explanation

as to why this particular jury instruction is proper.

So if there are no further questions, we ask that this court affirm.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Ms. Hausmann?

I just want to make a couple of quick points.

On day two of trial at 234, is testimony about Mr. – oh, I'm sorry.

Yeah, that's okay.

On day of trial, page 234, there's testimony about Mr. Dana's statements about two weeks prior,

in which he expresses frustration about his life, but he says nothing about MD.

So there's no statement about MD in that.

He's complaining about the mother.

The mother.

And his life in general, yes.

And there was compelling evidence that this was a murder.

It was uncontested that it was a murder, but it was a who-didn't.

And the question was, who had committed the murder?

And in that way, it was a circumstantial evidence case.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Case submitted.

Court is adjourned.

Congrats.

Thank you.
