Good morning again. Thank you, Paul. Before we begin today, I would like to give a special

welcome to a group of international students. They appear to be to my right, including students

from Ukraine, Moldova, Georgia, Macedonia, and Kyrgyzstan. I believe this is the first

time anyone from Kyrgyzstan has been in this courtroom. They're accompanied by their

chaperone, Leslie Nixon. I want to welcome you to the Supreme Court. It's going to be

my privilege to spend five minutes with you in the hallway afterward, hopefully answering

any questions you may have and accepting only well-intentioned criticism that you may have.

Having said that, would you call the case, please?

This is case 2019, 0134, Monadnock Regional School District versus Monadnock District

Education Association, NEA-NH. Good morning. May it please the court, Lauren Snow-Chadwick

for the Monadnock Education Association. Please ask questions at any time. I would like to

reserve two minutes for a battle. This is a case that involves the benefit of the

bargain. At the bargaining table for this agreement, now close to seven years ago,

the Association Bargain Health Insurance. Health insurance is a very important part

of the collective bargaining agreement negotiations because it's a very expensive cost item and

it matters to the parties how that will be distributed amongst them. The Association

took a risk at this table. They took a risk agreeing to a proposal from the district

that put the health insurance cost, that they would manage the health insurance cost

as opposed to doing a fixed amount of the contribution. At the end of the life of

the CBA, after managing this risk really well, the Association had a pool of funds

available to them. A surplus, you say. Excuse me?

A surplus, you say. And that surplus was somewhat dictated by what percentage of

contribution the Association decided its members would make.

That's correct. So the contribution amount, if they set it at a certain amount and

then, physically or responsibly, they did it at a lower amount so the funds

would go to the pool. So the Association is entitled to those funds. That was what

the benefit that they were bargaining at the table. It should not be forced to

forfeit that money. Article 9.1 of the parties collective bargaining agreement

is on ambiguous. The express language of that provision supports the parties intent

to give the Association broad discretion on the use of those funds. There is

nothing in that language to suggest there is a restriction on an annual basis or the

funds lapse. That language is not in there. Was it proposed to be in there?

Yes, Your Honor. The district proposed to have language in the contract that the

funds would lapse back to the district and that did not end up in the

contract. However, it did end up in the support staff contract and that is in

that contract but not in the teachers contract. Is that parole evidence that the

trial court accepted or did it refuse to consider that? The trial court did not

look to that fact. That was also in the arbitrator's decision that was before

the trial court and it did not look or consider that in the Association's

opinion. But isn't the result here compelled by RSA 32.7? Yes. So 32.7

is the important question there is to find the exception that the funds do not

lapse. But to get there, you need to find that there was a legal obligation,

which the arbitrator implicitly in their findings found there was a legal

obligation under the contract that the funds would not lapse. And then

also what is an important part of the analysis that we did not see at the

trial court level is that the town vote encumbered this collective bargaining

agreement at the March 2012 vote for the life of the CBA. It was that one

time vote. And that's what you need to see under that exception for the funds

to not lapse. So we reject your argument that the trial court was somehow

bound by the arbitration award. Can we still go in your favor? Yes. The

trial court, if it was properly before the trial court to look and

interpret the contract, we still believe that the trial court got it

wrong. However, because the contract is unambiguous, you certainly can

arrive to the conclusion that the parties intended just on the plain

language that the funds would not lapse and that there's a legal

obligation to allow the association. They have the discretion to say

that the retroactive payment should come back to the association. In

which case, if it's unambiguous, we wouldn't review the parole

evidence that we were talking about earlier. Yes, that's correct.

However, it still should be seen where in the record the

conduct of the parties there is a lot here to support even that

unambiguous, the fact that the language is unambiguous, but it

is important that if you look at the conduct, the district for

four years put the funds into pooled the funds. If that wasn't

the intent of the parties certainly would not be doing

that action. And also the association being physically

responsible, they would have said the contributions at 100% had

they not thought the funds were going to be pooled. And

that's why they decided at year one, health insurance is very

speculative. You do not know year one could be affordable,

year two could be very expensive. So they should be

awarded for the way that they handle those funds and get the

benefit of the bargain.

Isn't the difference really between the commitment to

spend money versus the commitment to provide health

insurance for the employees? So I think the trial court was

focused on the encumbrance was the amount necessary to provide

the health insurance benefit, not the ceiling, if you will, or

the overall amount of money appropriated toward that goal.

Yes, I agree. And I believe the order concentrated on so they

found the legal obligation was not there. And I think that

was an incorrect view of the interpretation of the

contract, because if you look at the plain language, there's

nothing to suggest that that could not happen. And also if

you look at the conduct of parties, it certainly was in

line with the language. Also, I think what's important to look

at is the March 2012 town vote, and the line of reasoning

that this court has held in Sanborn on how a contract

becomes encumbered. It is with multi-year agreements,

it's the one time vote that encumbers the funds. You do not

have to go back year after year and re-encumber those funds.

Rather, what you look to is the warrant article. The warrant

article in this case, there was in each year of the contract,

it was spelled out for the voters, the maximum amount. And

that was for year one, year two, year three, year four.

It was certainly clear the financial impact that was

before the town voters were in the remaking that vote.

Therefore, that encumbrance happened at that one time vote.

The association does not need to go back and do that again.

But in your year four, the association utilized some of the

pool funds to defray the cost of the premium coverage for the

employees as contemplated, but didn't use them all. So those

leftover funds, if you will, at the end of the contract, do

they stand in different shoes than those that were utilized per

the terms of the contract?

Just to clarify your question, do you, as to the members or?

Well, some of the pool funds, if you will, were reinvested or

used to defray the premium cost. Others weren't, were truly

leftover, if you will. So are those similarly encumbered

if they haven't been applied per the contract terms?

Yes, because those funds were applied towards the, in line with

the contract terms. The legal obligation that article 9.1 allows

the association to have the discretion of the funds. So, and

also, the 15-16 retroactive payment the district made, that

shows that that was the purpose behind that language. And

there's nothing to prevent it to happen with those funds

that are already encumbered for subsequent years or the year

three or two. That certainly is allowable and that there's no

restriction. So there really isn't a need for those to be

being encumbered. They still are within the collective bargaining

agreements sphere to allow that. The association deserves the

benefit of the bargain in this matter. It's been four years

managing its health insurance costs. And it's only appropriate

to afford them the right to get the benefit of the bargain.

They took a big risk and this risk paid off. The

district should not be able to stay silent for four years. And

the association proceeds under the contractual terms only to

change its mind at the end of the collective bargaining

agreement. And then ask them to forfeit this benefit. The

remedy you were asking is association. Respectively

request this court to reverse the decision on the two

summary judgment motions. Therefore granting summary

judgment for the association and denying summary judgment

for the district. There are no further questions. I'll

rely on my brief.

Thank you, council. Thank you.

Still morning. Good morning. My name is Jim O'Shaughnessy. I'm

here on behalf of the Maddox School District. We spent a

great morning listening to a discussion about transparency

in the public. I think this case, in my view, is very much

about transparency and what did or didn't happen at the end of

a four-year contract. We were faced with a situation where

we had almost $400,000 in unexpanded surplus and the

voters and the taxpayers had never authorized a district to

carry that money over from year to year. That was a mistake. The

district kept the funds over from year to year, but at the end of

four years, they are not lawfully in possession of that of

those funds. And therefore they pose a question to the court,

which is why we filed a declaratory judgment action. Can

we actually pay the money to the association without

violating municipal budget law under RSA 32? This case, in

my mind, is very simple. It's about the basic

mechanics of the municipal budget law. The law clearly states

appropriations cover expenditures for one year only.

So every multi-year contract, you need to go back to the town

meeting and ask for the warrant article for the legislative

body to approve that multi-year contract?

So, no. Multi-year contracts are approved by the voters and

the way the mechanics of that work is there's a warrant

article, and the warrant article says, here are the cost, the

estimated cost for the three years of the contract. That's

the first part of the warrant article. The second part of the

warrant article says, and further to raise and appropriate this

dollar amount to fund the first year of the contract. So the

first year of the contract is specifically funded. The remaining

part, if the voters approve it, is put in the operating

budget. But what's happening here is we're conflating the

term appropriate with encumber. So the money is

appropriated in future years in the operating budget, but

if it's unexpended at the end of the year, and often all

municipalities carry a huge unexpended fund balance going

into the end of the fiscal year, a lot of which is money set

aside for anticipated wages and benefits, if that money is

unexpended, that's unexpended fund balance. And if it's not

encumbered, put into a capital reserve fund, put into a trust

fund, or some other means of carrying it over, that money

automatically lapses. And it's used to offset the future

year's tax rate.

So this is a requirement that the town did not realize

after the first year of the contract, something like they

concluded four years after the multi-year contract was about

to terminate.

So we addressed that in the brief. It's sort of the last

argument we make because I think there are touches of the

whole sandborn line of cases that if you are actually going

to require that the legislative body funds

something into the future and bind them into the future,

you have to provide them. And I think the term is you

have to provide them with, in fact, knowledge when they

ratify, they have to have full knowledge of the terms.

So if it's their position that at the time the voters

approved the contract in 2012, the voters had full

knowledge of this pool fund being set aside and held in a

bank account, I would suggest to you that that's not set

out in the Warren article. And the voters in Menadinoch

certainly weren't put on notice that they would be not,

that the district would not allow the unexpended portion

of the balance from year to year to lapse back to

offset the tax.

What troubles me and without any saying there was any

particular intent to it, but it's almost like the

district was lying in the weeds and this balance

accumulates and then the association couldn't make

decisions, well-informed decisions about how much

their members were going to be paying and so they were

trying to be prudent and maybe making a different choice

than they would have if they knew that that money was

going to disappear.

Yeah, there's certainly a color of that sort of

feeling like we're benefiting from our own mistake and

we acknowledge that element, but the problem is we are

trustees for the taxpayers and the voters and the

district went to the court to say maybe we want to pay

this money to the association, but can we lawfully do

so under RSA 32, it's our position that this money

has or should have already lapsed so it's really

not our money.

Additionally, there are really in my view two ways

that this pool fund mechanism could have worked.

It could have worked if the pool had only a life

span of one year and the association should have

spent all of it prior to the end of that year and

if they didn't realize that it would have, you know,

lapsed back and they wouldn't have access to it,

the other option would have been that if it wasn't

going to lapse, that it needed to be put into a

capital reserve fund or a trust fund, a trust fund

which is a decision that only the legislative body

can make.

Those are really the only two ways I can see how

this mechanism would have worked, but neither happened.

So why, what were people thinking for this

provision of the CBA that specifically allowed for

an offset?

So I think the association thought, we're not going to

spend all of it and we're going to hang on to it

as a rainy day fund.

And the district thought, we don't want to fight you

about this so we'll put it aside for a rainy day fund.

But if in the CBA it says it will be applied

as an offset?

It also says it will be applied as an offset only

to cover 100% of insurance in any given year.

So there was a dispute about going into this.

The parties were in dispute about what the pool

funds were and how they were going to be used.

Instead of trying to resolve it during the term of the

contract, they literally just put the money in a bank

account.

And then at the end of the contract, they negotiated

with the association to use that money to fund the

successor agreement.

And in the Warren article for the successor agreement,

they asked the voters to raise and appropriate that

money, that unexpended money that had been put in

that pool to fund the new contract, and the

voters rejected that.

And that was in, you know, March was the vote to

reject it.

Later on that spring is when the association came

forward and said, well, we want 100% of our

insurance, we want all the money.

And the board said, we'll give you 100% of this

year's from the pool funds because that's what

the contract says.

That's where it ended.

So both parties were in dispute about how those

pool funds should be used.

But to me, there's an overlay here from a

municipal budget standpoint that just can't be

ignored.

Districts can't set aside rainy day funds, whether

it's in a collective bargaining agreement or not.

It's not one of the seven statutory exceptions

in RSA 32.7.

There's a provision, for example, in RSA 198.4B,

where the district has to get specific legislative

body authorization to even set aside 2.5% of its

annual budget.

And it can only expend that money in an

emergency when they get permission from the

DRA and the commissioner.

And the association has no control over that.

No.

And that goes back to the doctrine of, you know,

there was a riskier.

And the association took a risk in entering into

this collective bargaining agreement.

But the law says that when you contract with

the government, you contract at your own risk.

And in this situation, when the board set the

money aside in that pool, in a bank account,

it was an ultra-virus act.

It didn't have authority to do that.

That was not their money.

It's the position of the district.

So warning to the association is don't enter

into an agreement that is anything other than a

direct amount of money.

Or you screwed up.

You trusted us.

There are cases out there where, and this goes

back, there's a case where the school district

agreed to an evergreen clause in a contract

which said that after the contract expires,

raises will continue to accrue until there's a

successor agreement.

The board in the association agreed to that.

But where the board forgot to put that specific

language in a warrant article and the voters

didn't vote on it, the PLRB said, sorry, union, you lose.

It was a mistake, but unfortunately under

public policy, the taxpayers can't be harmed

by a mistake of the governing body.

And that's really the principle of this case.

The governing body was never on notice that

these funds would never lapse.

That's not spelled out anywhere in any of the

warrant articles.

There was never a warrant to create a capital

reserve fund or a trust fund and to allocate

and then put this money in those funds.

So the voters there, again, never had an

opportunity to do that.

That would have worked if it happened.

But even in that instance, if the voters said

we're not going to create a fund and we're not

going to put the balance in that fund,

it would be the same situation.

The union would lose because the voters

get the final say.

Is there any dispute as to the ambiguity

or lack of ambiguity in 32.7, Coleman 1?

With respect to that exemption, the statutory provision.

Do both parties agree it's not ambiguous?

I don't think it's ambiguous.

And I think what the court found was that the association

at no point during the four years of the contract

took any action to encumber the funds

nor did the board take any vote to encumber the funds.

And the way that encumbrance works is typically in June,

the end of the year, you say there's

an obligation.

And probably the way it worked in Monadnok

is when they asked for it at the last year of the contract,

they asked for 100% to be paid off.

The board said, OK.

But those contracts, because they were encumbered,

could be cut and paid off in July or even into August.

So an encumbrance just allows

you to grab a particular amount of money

because of a contractual obligation

and pay it and spend it in the next fiscal year.

Even if the collective bargaining agreement

and the Warren article somehow encumbered

as the association asserts these funds

for the entire length of the contract,

the law certainly says that the appropriations

are only for one year, and then they lapse.

And there's a limit on expending beyond your appropriations.

So even if they are encumbered from one year to the next,

they certainly couldn't have then automatically been

encumbered, including the first amount for each

of the three years.

So they cumulated to this $589,000 total.

There's no mechanism in the state budget law for that.

And there have been cases where school districts have erroneously

set aside money.

We talked, I put it in the appendix,

how Gostown and Dunbarton got in a lot of trouble

for setting aside millions of dollars

to pay for a rainy day fund for tuition agreements.

That was a mistake.

The auditors caught it, and that money was all

given back to the taxpayers.

That's really where we are here.

We believe that the pool funds were improperly withheld.

They automatically should have lapsed back to the taxpayers

to offset the tax rate.

The court understood, and I think the court's decision

was correct, and it should be affirmed.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you.

We reserved one minute.

I'm going to waive that, rebuttal.

Thank you very much.

Case submitted.
