This case, 2020-0538, appeal of Keith or Mater, 2000 revocable trust at all.

Good afternoon, Attorney Cooper.

Thank you, Your Honor. I just wanted to note that the court has made this change since last time I was here.

We're going to gradually achieve. I'm glad to see Dartmouth again as a majority on the court.

No slate intended to UNH and Bucknell at all.

But this isn't a minister. I just wanted to bring up one procedural issue because Justice Donovan actually in the last oral argument

questioned me about the issue relating to whether or not the attorney signature issue was properly preserved.

And that was again briefed. And this is a RSV Chapter 541 appeal.

This court in Walsh 156, New Hampshire 347 made it clear the way that you have to reserve an issue on appeal is in the motion for re-hearing.

If you don't put it in the motion for re-hearing, you can't argue it. But if you do, you can.

It was in both motions for hearings in both cases.

And as a matter of fact, it was the alternative relief requested in the very original motion filed with the Board of Tax and Land Appeals.

So as procedural matter, it is properly before you.

Short of that, if you have questions, I'd be glad to answer them. It's not my brief.

So with respect to your equal protection claim, what class should we consider when we're addressing the equal protection argument?

Are we comparing taxpayers to taxpayers or are we comparing attorneys and facts to attorneys-at-law?

No, you are comparing taxpayers to taxpayers in the sense that what happens is a taxpayer can't choose.

They can choose to have an attorney in fact go ahead and do it.

But they can't choose, in the simple part, to be able to have an attorney-at-law be able to sign it.

They have to go through, if they're not going to be able to sign it themselves, they have to go ahead and go this other route.

That's the only way. That's how I did it, put it this way.

And the rule, does it distinguish between a taxpayer that retains an attorney-at-fact from a taxpayer that retains an attorney-at-law?

That's correct. And there it is out there.

I looked at it and said, I can go ahead and have my best friend serve as my attorney-at-fact and they can sign it for me.

But I can't hire my lawyer to do so.

Where's the authority for that, the attorney-in-fact signature?

Is that just a practice of the BTLA?

No, that's right by statute.

I'll get you the reference, but it's in the...

I'll just get it here for you, but RSA 564...

564E2045C, okay?

An attorney-in-fact appointed as such has the absolute authority to bring the abatement.

So that's where that is.

I would note that the town suggests...

And I think it's actually probably not a pretty good...

When it comes to the issue with respect to whether or not a lawyer should or could be able to sign on behalf of this client,

I think the town actually framed the argument or the question quite well.

They suggest that the relevant inquiry is not whether the necessary information in the application was provided

and was certified under oath to be true and a similar affirmation about the good basis.

They say the real issue is was the statute intended to require that a particular person,

i.e. the taxpayer, make that certification.

And to even to the extent of abrogating the common law on the right of an attorney to do so,

is the statute that clear on its face that when the statute was saying specifically what they wanted

in the application form from the BTLA, they were being absolutely clear that nobody else,

even though they added that additional language in it of the person applying,

nobody else could sign this thing other than a taxpayer and no, a lawyer couldn't do it for you either.

And that's just there.

And I don't read it that way because, matter of fact, that little language of...

I think it is, what did I say that?

By the person in subparagraph G, a place for the applicant signature with a certification by the person applying.

Well, you can eliminate by the person applying and it has the same meaning.

So there's something intended that by the person applying could be somebody other than the taxpayer.

And the legitimate argument is that the common law of the State of New Hampshire going back to the early 1800s,

is we stand in the place.

We, members of the New Hampshire bar, our profession, stand in the place of our clients

in any kind of procedure like this in our word.

And it's interesting.

Our word can be binding upon our clients and force all sorts of things

by our signature and our certification to start it can't be binding.

That's just nonsensical to me.

But that's what, particularly when the reasoning of BTLA was to stop me from being able to

pound contingent fees or whatever it was to go out and beat the bushes to be able to get money.

Whatever there.

Your position is that a legislature or BTLA could establish such a regulation,

or the legislature could say that attorneys are not able to sign but they need to do so clearly

and they haven't done so.

And they have not done so.

They could.

Yes, of course they could.

They're the legislature.

Okay.

And I don't think I am not sure.

It may be someone would test it in front of you guys to me.

Sorry.

You is tested to say does it go beyond what your ability is to regulate the practice?

But certainly we do know that the legislature can change the common law

and the legislature can when they are clear, change it.

So in this case, if they had said the taxpayer must sign that

and no other person and no attorney can sign it, then it would have been clear.

But to take the language of the statute, which was a subparagraph G of what's supposed to be an application

and turn it into this rule to be able to enforce their interpretation that we want to limit the people

who can be able to bring these, not an appeal.

This is between December and March of each year when you're trying to figure out what the heck's going on with your taxes,

that the only person who can sign it is the taxpayer no matter where they live.

What about the converse of that argument where the legislature is repeatedly in tax statutes and elsewhere said,

for instance in, I guess, 77A6 taxpayer or by its authorized representative, taxpayer or its authorized representative.

And aren't you asking us to amend the statute by inserting?

I am not sure where you are on that, Your Honor.

I'm sorry.

I'm quoting from statute.

I'm actually quoting from the Wilson decision, which points to other tax-related statutes.

Well, I'm saying, yes, there are other tax-related statutes where the legislature has said that.

Absolutely.

But was it dealing with a litigation?

Was it dealing with something that we would commonly do for our clients?

Lawyers would commonly do for our clients.

And lawyers commonly signed applications for abatements for their clients forever.

And now all of a sudden they can't.

So the test is what an attorney commonly does?

To a certain extent, yes, Your Honor.

Because if it was part of what attorneys did under the practice of law in the state of New Hampshire

and what was the common law of this state, that if they want to overrule it, they ought to be clear about it.

They certainly were not clear that it was just the taxpayer.

In another statute, they said the taxpayer or somebody else.

But I'm sorry, I can't even, maybe I should have read his brief more carefully,

but I did not necessarily put it this way.

I hear what they're saying there, but I don't think it was in, unless you correct me, I'm wrong.

I don't think it was in the abatement application part.

Well, within the tax context, there are, it applies, I assume, broader because there are authorized representatives in the tax area

that can and do sign things on the taxpayer's accounts.

Person.

Right, and lawyers aren't going to sign a return necessarily for a client.

No, but the same part of that is that authorized person is somebody who has been so authorized.

They have been, they have gotten, they're an agent that has actually been a signed agent like an accountant.

And in this case, it has been brought up by an innuendo that somehow I didn't have the authority to sign for these people.

But part of the record that was filed with the original motion in this case,

are the documents signed by each and every taxpayer that reaffirmed my ability to sign these on their behalf.

But in signing it, you were attesting that the facts were true.

Correct, they were true.

And you were as an attorney converting yourself into essentially a witness in the case.

Well, that was their argument.

But I attest every single time to every pleading that the facts in it are true.

You're attesting under the rules of the court that you have a good faith basis to make the arguments.

But you know, we do have verified complaints which are signed by witnesses.

We do.

That is different than a...

Absolutely.

And if somebody had said it had to be a verified complaint signed by the taxpayer.

But this is...

But how are you not a witness in this case?

What is the basis for your attestation that the applications that you signed are true?

And isn't that in itself prohibited by the rules of professional conduct?

No.

Because they're actually all of the facts in the application are those that you could take judicial notice of.

Okay?

I mean, this is not...

I need to say it, but put it this way, they're all...

What is the tax law number?

Whether the person owns additional properties in it?

What is the assessment value?

They're all of public record.

They are all there.

But the application said based upon our personal knowledge of the real estate market.

So you are inserting yourself into the case saying you have personal knowledge of the real estate market.

Is this on the good faith basis?

This is the application that you submitted on February 27, 2017.

But yes, I had personal knowledge of it.

I had personal knowledge and my clients had personal knowledge

because in fact each of their properties was adjusted by one million dollars for no reason.

That's my point.

Your clients have personal knowledge, but you're inserting yourself into the case with your own personal knowledge.

I find it so...

I find it indistinguishable for me standing up in court and saying something from my personal knowledge

that is then binding upon my client because I'm acting as their lawyer

and me not being able to stand up before the court and say something from my knowledge

and my client's knowledge that is binding upon him as well.

And under the circumstances at the time, I think every pleading...

I'm not sure about others, but I believe a good faith basis...

Yes, if I am going to say black is black and a pleading,

I better know that it's black or have a reason to know so

or I'm violating the rules of professional conduct.

And if I signed that thing and did not do that,

I can't answer your question to say, is it exactly the same?

But I certainly think I have the right to do so.

I did.

And did I think that the legislature was intending...

Now, what the legislature said and what's in the form,

we've got to remember, are two different things.

What the legislature said was to be certified that the legislature was

whether the necessary application was provided and affirmed under oath would be true

and whether a similar affirmation about a good faith basis to proceed.

That's what it said.

It didn't have the language that you read from the application,

which is what the Board of Tax and Land Appeals put together themselves.

It's, you know, what is the legislature requiring

not what the Board of Tax and Land Appeals is requiring.

So you're saying that the legislature's requirement that there be a signature line

for the applicant is ambiguous?

No. No.

But the signature line is for the applicant.

It doesn't say that I can't sign for the applicant.

Okay. I think it's...

Well, and it's the same situation as an attorney, in fact,

signing and attesting, but without

the envelope of the rules of professional conduct that apply to attorneys.

Well, that's my argument.

Yeah, that's...

Mr. Corkwell, let me ask you.

We've been talking about the legal issue, the factual issue.

How can we get behind the BTLA's factual findings

regarding reasonable cause and willful neglect?

You, in your last opinion,

you emphasized to the BTLA

what you thought were significant facts,

which are the significant facts in my mind.

I understand what their powers are,

and I understand what your limitations are.

They chose to ignore those and do their own thing

and try to say that,

guess what, business people,

whether they're in Florida or Massachusetts and own homes,

they're the ones who have to investigate and make sure

that they know that they have to sign this application.

I understand that you are...

that taxpayers are obligated...

ignorance of the law is no excuse.

Making sure of ignorance of tax rule,

empty squat is something that is required

for every other state taxpayer to understand

that they have got to be able to come up

and sign that application and get it filed

or forever hold their peace,

which is not a simple exercise

of trying to appeal your taxes.

Well, wouldn't it be fair for the BTLA

to take that circumstance and say to that taxpayer,

are you going to start this process

before the deadline?

Is that reasonable? Is that prudent?

I understand.

I understand their position.

I understand that, in retrospect,

they want to say they waited all the way

to the beginning of February to contact me,

and they chose to wait until after that.

Well, guess what?

And although it is contrary to what it said,

you would have to know,

looking beyond the statute,

that there was a requirement,

at least in my mind,

that the taxpayer had to sign it.

I had to go take a look at the rules and so on,

is if my cursory look

to be able to make sure that I could be able

to file these on time,

I can get them in in three days.

I know it's not rocket science

to fall them out, I think to say.

And...

But the BTLA is entitled to hold the taxpayer

to the deadline?

Absolutely. Absolutely.

But I'm saying I was standing in the shoes

of the taxpayer.

Heck, one minute beyond this,

if they accept the appeal,

then whatever I do is binding on the taxpayer.

That's the one I can't get on.

Everything I do is binding on the taxpayer.

Okay?

Accept this.

Accept this.

Which is...

Thank you.

Good afternoon, your honours.

My name is Brandon O'Donnell

and I am the head of the Department of Justice

of the State of Maryland.

The focus of this case should be

on the taxpayers' actions

leading up to

the point where they filed.

On the actual evidence that they present

as to whether or not they complied with the rule

and because they didn't, whether or not

that failure to comply was due to willful

neglect

and not reasonable costs. Fair enough,

but it's a rule beyond the scope of the statute.

Your honour,

I do not believe it is.

And I think the starting point

of the BTLA's rulemaking authority

is not RSA 7616.

It's RSA 71B8

which authorizes the BTLA

to enact reasonable rules

to carry out its functions.

And here the board has two primary functions

that are relevant to this appeal.

One, they hear tax abatement appeals

from tax abatement actions

filed with the select board under RSA 7616A.

And the second piece

is they are required to

prescribe the form

on which abatement

applications are filed.

And all the legislation says

that it has to include a signature for the applicant, right?

That is, you know,

that is a mandatory requirement

for what the application has to have.

And what?

Under tax rule 2019

and

201.16

there is plenty

of reference about appearances by attorneys.

Every document

shall be signed by the party

or the party's attorney,

agent or municipal consultant.

So how do we square that

with

this somewhat later rule

that says no, can't be signed

by an attorney?

Yes, Your Honor. I think the distinction here

is that attorneys are required to sign

all of the other pleadings

when they're representing a client.

So

obligation to investigate

to determine at least they have

done reasonable investigation to determine

there's a good faith basis for what they

fight before the court.

And that's under their ethical rules.

The difference is here,

this is not merely a matter of form,

there's a substantive reason for the signature

and certification requirement.

And it's founded in the

Which is?

The taxpayer

is the one with personal knowledge of the property,

what it's worth.

Their own testimony as to what they believe

property is worth

is allowed to be introduced in evidence in a tax

abatement proceeding.

They also are the one who has to

make the decision as to whether or not to bring

a tax abatement appeal.

Right, but we aren't dealing with an abatement

application that was filed

without the client's authority.

And certainly

the attorney signing the form

prohibits the owner of the property

from testifying about value.

So I'm not seeing the substantive

component

any differently than I see

an attorney signing

some other petition or complaint

to start abatement of litigation.

Right, so I think there's

two pieces I'd like to address on that and sort of

finishing up on my fair point.

The taxpayer, by having to be

consulted, by having to review the facts

and the complaint and to certify that they believe

the person with personal knowledge that those are true

and to verify the good faith basis

that provides the base level

of information that the town has

to review an abatement and determine whether it's

grounded.

It goes hand in hand with the fact that under

the rules the taxpayers also

have to specify the reasons they

believe an abatement is warranted.

In other words, those facts supporting the reason.

There's no evidence that the town had any

difficulty making those decisions in this case.

They didn't because the application itself

was so bereft of supporting facts

and I think that goes hand in hand with the fact

that the clients were not consulted

and didn't have an opportunity to review

the abatement applications.

Is there any evidence that they weren't consulted?

The record

doesn't have any evidence

that they were consulted and it was

the taxpayers' burden of proof

to show that they

their failure to comply with the rule was not

due to...

I was going to say BTLA didn't get to the merits.

No, but...

They decided this on the lack of a signature.

Correct.

And when the BTLA originally raised

this issue,

they asked council for the taxpayers

to submit

a motion requesting where from the rule

and to show why their failure to comply

was due to

a reasonable cause and not willful neglect.

And so at that point the taxpayers' burden

to show

what steps they had taken.

If

taxpayers' council

had reached out to the attorneys

or the clients and maybe he couldn't have gotten their signatures

but he could have at least said

here are the facts I'm putting in the complaint.

Do you believe these are true? What other facts do you have?

Would you certify that these facts are true?

He could have at least

with the substantive piece of that rule if not the form.

Your position would be that's not enough

even if he'd done that.

It might have been enough

to reach the standard of

fair imprudence

and taking steps. If he had three days

and the best he could do was that compliance

rule, maybe the BTLA would have.

So there's not an absolute requirement for a signature

by a client

or by the owner.

The requirement is that you need to have

a signature and certification

and then unless

your failure to do so

was due to reasonable cause and not willful neglect.

Sorry.

You could demonstrate that your failure to comply

that exercising

ordinary business care wasn't reasonably

possible to comply.

Then I believe that's the piece

where you'd show here's how much I complied

that it would help show

that it wasn't recently possible but we're not

there because there weren't attempts made in this case.

Doesn't your argument

in effect allow the BTLA

to prescribe its own strict

manager restriction?

I don't see anywhere in the statute that that's permitted.

I don't

see this in terms of subject matter jurisdiction

and I think

the important piece to look stepping back

when this gets to the BTLA, this is not a case

that it was just filed. The BTLA is only

the appellate body.

The original body that reviews this is the town select board

and these rules

and the specificity that's laid out

in those application forms are there to ensure that

the town, the body

first look at this has enough information

to make a decision

to potentially grant an abatement for good cause

before the unnecessary

expense of dealing with the BTLA

or the Superior Court

and

filing this application, these applications

where there's really no evidence to support

and the taxpayers themselves

haven't certified us to their opinion of the value

their reasons for

why they believe it was disproportionately

assessed or why they had a good faith basis

and they put the town in a position of not being able to

which is it

is that the failure to be specific

as to why the abatement

is justified or is it the absence of the signature

that's fatal?

Your Honor, both are required

and I think in this case

the failure of the taxpayers council

to consult with his clients

regarding what was in those documents

may have contributed to the fact that

there were not supporting facts

there were not developed specific reasons

for why they believe abatement was necessary

and the BTLA tries to point this out in its order

when it talks about the only reason

taxpayer council cited

was that the assessments had gone

well the fact that assessments have gone up

is frankly irrelevant to whether or not

a property is disproportionately assessed

the first step perhaps

but had the taxpayer signed

that representation

my taxes went up

BTLA would have still had to have taken

evidence and gone through the motions

to win the merits

the

the

the select word first yes

and then the BTLA would have but if

the only evidence before the board said

the assessment was this in one year

and it was higher in the next year

that wouldn't have been a good faith basis

that would be a different appeal up here

right but in this record

you do also see statements from

taxpayers council that

when he was reviewing he saw that there was

a consistent increase across all of the assessments

well consistent increases

actually indicate proportionality

not a good faith basis

even if they're a million dollars

a million dollars in a given year

if everyone's property was valued

at 500% market value

they would be proportionally assessed

and would be reflected in the amount they pay

they wouldn't pay any different than if they were all assessed at 100%

and that's why

the general level of assessment and proportionality

is a critical component of all tax

of human appeals

but aren't there an awful lot of tax

applications filed

that are very bare bones

and then they get fleshed out

after the fact

there's no threshold

of proof you have to submit

with your application

you just have to get it together

you can supplement it

you can do a lot of things

before it gets considered

that may be the case your honor

but in the context of these applications

and these taxpayers

is entitled to at least some evidentiary weight

regarding their opinion of value

and regarding their belief

regarding the assessment

but admissibility

is a separate issue

I mean I agree that

under those circumstances the taxpayer can testify

but I don't see how that

connects with

the validity of

somebody like Mr. Cooper signing

the abatement application

maybe we've gotten a little

track but I guess my point

in talking about that

is that I believe there is a substantive purpose

in the signature and certification requirement

and it gives at least some minimum

level of evidence to the select board

for their review

and that's what we're missing because

sorry your honor

I wanted to finish your sentence I'm sorry

that's the piece that we're missing

is that the town wasn't given the opportunity

to have that baseline of evidence

regarding whether they personally believe

they had a good faith basis

and what reasons they believe supported

their argument that they were disproportionately

assessed

so what language in 7616-3

provides that

the taxpayer is required to sign

the application what language can you point to me

and then snatch it that

authorizes this rule

so in 7616

which prescribes how the board

has to

be certified in sort of the minimum requirements

you're correct that it doesn't say

the taxpayer has to

do the signature and certification

and nothing else is allowed

but under 71B8

the BTLA

which in its responsibilities

has prescribed this form and

under that authority it says in other considerations

I believe something to that effect

that the board believes is appropriate they can include

and under the board's broader authority

in overseeing

the abatement system and their handling of appeals

it's reasonable

for the board to

this requirement

to ensure the taxpayers really believe

they're disproportionately assessed

that they're not simply filing abatements

hoping for some sort of compromise abatement

and that there is this level of evidence

going before the select board

so is the issue before us whether that rule is reasonable or not

I don't believe it is your honor

and under

20137 of the Board of Tax and Land Appeals

rules it specifies any arguments

that could have been raised

before the board can't be raised

for the first time

in a motion for re-hearing so it's not a circumstance

where it's a new legal error or a new

issue which you would have

to raise in a motion for reconsideration

or a motion for re-hearing it's something that they could have

and I think that

goes to the second piece of when

the board had to take a look at this case

and they were told you have no choice

but to grant me an abatement

when the order from this court was

whether or not

there is reasonable cause not willful neglect

is a factual issue for the board to determine

and in that original pleading

they didn't outline

the Travier race argument

and I believe the Board of Tax and Land Appeals

didn't address it

they didn't outline legal protection

although I believe the board did address that

I apologize my recollection is wrong on which is which

but what are the limits

of the board's discretion in devising the form

I think the language of the statute

provides the limits

and I apologize they don't have it

in front of me but it's something to the effect of

other reasonable requirements

the board sees fit to include something

so it has to be reasonably

related to tax abatements

but it's necessary to process a tax

abatement application at the select board level

and in this case

both the board and I hope

myself here but particularly that there are

valid reasonable reasons that the board

would impose this requirement

what about the general proposition that

we don't abrogate

the common law

unless the legislature speaks

very clearly

and here the common law would allow

someone as an attorney

to sign on behalf of their client

the legislature had an opportunity

to clearly

address this issue and it didn't

so we should read it expansively

until they act

with due respect Your Honor

I didn't see a case

cited by tax

payers council that stood for the proposition that

attorneys have a common law

right to verify facts

to offer evidence to sign affidavits

anything related to the evidentiary

piece that's before us

and the common law made

up of jurisprudence

presumably if attorneys had that right

they would have been able to point to a case that said

attorneys have this right

to be something that the legislature would have had to abrogate

and the second half of that

is that this is

an administrative appeal

through part of the executive

this is not attorneys

acting in their normal role before the court

this is precisely why I think that there is

I think

1019 or 2019

that gives attorneys the right to appear before

clients seeking an abatement before the BTA

so this

entire system

applying for abatements and applying for abatements

through the BTA is a creature

of statute

as such they can prescribe their

rules under the rulemaking authority the legislature

granted them and here it's a reasonable extension

there's no further questions

I'll rest on my brief Your Honors

thank you council

case is submitted
