This is case 2020-0033, State of New Hampshire v. Katharine D. Pate.

Ms. Woodcock.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Elizabeth Woodcock for the State of New Hampshire. I would like to reserve one minute for rebuttal.

The trial court in this case committed error in reading in certain exceptions,

so certain requirements to the exception for the warrant requirement.

It is very clear that the this court's exceptions that include the community caretaking exception

and its kind of subset the emergency aid exception applied here.

The police officer appeared on the scene knowing that someone had called in 911 that a person

was unresponsive in a public parking lot.

When he arrived, he saw the car, he saw the windshield wipers going, he looked in and saw

the defendant slumped over, and the trial court then committed the error of saying

that he needed to use less intrusive means, and he had to have knowledge

before he actually took the step of opening the door.

Because I understand that it was not raining, correct?

That's correct.

Was the vehicle running?

I don't think that the car was actually, that the engine was running.

I think that the ignition was engaged, Your Honor, but I don't know that there was any testimony

that the engine was actually going.

But the person was slumped over, the windshield wipers are scraping the windshield, and he

has information that someone has called 911 concerned about the unresponsiveness of this person.

That she may not be breathing, the person may not be breathing.

We see the call to that effect as well, right?

That's correct, and that was argued to the court at the time.

If you look at the transcript, the prosecutor says he arrives, he said,

how much time is it before your brain dead, six minutes?

The prosecutor is trying to point out to the court that time is of the essence.

And the court seemed to think, well, you have to go through this list.

You have to dispel all these other suspicions before you act.

Let me ask a question that before I do, I was just looking back at the court order

because I forgot in my notes the vehicle was running, and the court found the vehicle was running.

So just, I assume that nobody challenges that finding.

I stand corrected, Your Honor.

I thought that it was just that the ignition was engaged, but the court may very well be right.

So what I took away from the trial court's order was the court recognized there was some emergency issue here,

but it felt that the officer should have either knocked on the window or yelled to the occupant,

either of which would have taken only a couple of seconds.

So it wasn't like it was going to delay saving this person if they were indeed in distress.

Right.

The court seemed to think that you needed to use a least-intrusive means approach towards this situation.

But the United States Supreme Court has said that you don't need to use the least-intrusive means in a community caretaking situation.

But isn't that just an analysis that feeds into whether the action taken opening the door is reasonable?

Not so much a separate element, but the court has to analyze whether the specific action of opening the door is reasonable under the circumstances.

Doesn't that include what else could have been done?

Well, I think that the trial court, first isn't that, Your Honor.

I think that the trial court actually said that you have to do certain steps before you open the door.

You have to try to tap on the window or call to the person.

You can't just open the door.

And it reads in this requirement.

It also read in a requirement of knowledge.

It lists off, oh, there are all these other innocent explanations.

But this court has never said that you have to rule out all the innocent explanations.

This court has said you basically look and you have articulable suspicion.

And I think anyone looking at a car in a parking lot with the windshield wipers going on a day when it's not raining,

the person is, you know, keeled over in the car.

That's articulable suspicion that something is up.

And the police officer acted on that suspicion.

The court was requiring him to do things that no other court has required the police officer to do.

Something doesn't have to be up in the criminal set.

Something just has to be wrong in the community caretaking expense.

That's correct.

I mean, when you think of community caretaking, it can be any number of things.

You see a car that's been parked in a parking lot for a couple of days, hasn't been moved.

You check it out.

You see a little kid standing on the door.

In checking it out, do you open the door or open the trunk?

Or do you sign the flashlight in?

Or do you go get a warrant?

Well, I think under the community caretaking exception, you're not required to have a warrant, Your Honor.

But if you look and you see a car that has been parked in the parking lot for a couple of days, hasn't been moved.

You know, of course you run the license plate, you try to find out who the owner is, that kind of thing.

Community caretaking is looking out for the safety of the property or the safety of the individual.

How much deference do we owe the trial court with respect to its conclusions as to what a reasonable person would do,

or a person of caution would do under the circumstances confronted by the officer?

I think that the court owes the trial court no deference in terms of its application of the law.

It's a de novo review.

And so if you're looking at it and you're saying, okay, did the court apply the law correctly,

I think the answer in this case is no.

It didn't.

It built in requirements that the community caretaking exception and the emergency aid exception

never asked the police officer to be aware of.

And reasonableness is de novo, essentially, for us.

What the trial court might deem reasonable or not, we don't owe any deference on that,

because that's ultimately a legal conclusion.

I think that's correct.

To the extent that the trial court finds facts, of course, there is some deference.

Factual matters.

Right.

Yes.

But in terms of the application of the law, there is no deference.

And the problem for this particular case is that the trial court got it wrong on two different levels.

It got it wrong when it required this sort of knowledge.

You have to kind of know that something is wrong.

You have to dispel all these other possible explanations which no court has ever required.

And you have to use this least intrusive means.

And the United States Supreme Court has said that that's simply not the law.

So good.

Let me ask you this.

We were talking about whether the car was in running or not.

In the state's rendition of the facts, there's a reference to testimony that the car actually was in reverse, not in park.

The trial court didn't make any finding about that, but that appears to be undisputed testimony in the record.

Is that something that ought to matter to us?

I don't know that it would matter in terms of whether the officer opened the door or tapped on the window,

because I'm not sure that the officer knew that the car was in reverse.

I think that what happened was that he realized that after he had opened the door and the EMT people had arrived

and he was trying to get the keys out of the car and I think that he asked them to put the car in drive

or he put the car in drive and then they removed the keys.

He wasn't able to shut the car off.

But it is at least illustrative, even if you didn't know of it, it's illustrative of the fact that a car that's not in park

but the engine's running, if you startle somebody or you talk to them through the window, the car can move

without shifting out of park.

That's true, Your Honor.

And I think that the police officer, aware that these windshield wipers were going, was concerned.

He says over and over again in his testimony, he talks about how he really was very, very concerned about the welfare of this person

and of course he had experience.

He'd been a police officer for several years.

Was this the gentleman who was afraid that she might have a weapon and might shoot him?

I don't think that he felt that she would have a weapon.

I guess a prosecutor below put it.

He was trying to figure out what in Tarnation was going on there.

That's right.

The first time I've seen that word in a brief, it's a benefit.

Tarnation is a very good word and I think that he was trying to find out exactly what was going on.

It was a very difficult circumstance for him and I think that the trial court was very careful in its factual findings

but I think that it missed the vote when it came to applying the law.

What is the evidence that's at issue here?

What's the motion to suppress in regard to?

She was arrested for driving while intoxicated and so the court suppressed all of the evidence.

From the time that he opened the door, everything got suppressed and the State's case cannot go forward.

And as I understand it, there was some drug paraphernalia found in the vehicle as well or no?

No, I don't recall that, Your Honor.

I think that it was just that the court suppressed all of the evidence of her intoxication.

So there was no blood evidence or breath evidence?

She...

Does it feel too bright because?

I think that there was, Your Honor, but I don't think that we ever got to that point.

I think that the court suppressed everything from the time that the police officer opened the door

so that there was no discussion about what the rest of the State's case would actually present if the case were to go to trial.

It was just that the police officer, according to the court, had violated her Fourth Amendment rights

and therefore everything from the time that he opened the door was suppressed.

So is this an all-or-nothing proposition if we were to find that the officer, in fact, had the right under the emergency aid exception

or the community caretaking exception to open the door, then does that mean that everything after that is okay

or do we have to engage in a more nuanced analysis?

Or does the trial court on remand have to engage in a more nuanced analysis?

Well, I wouldn't say that if the court decides that the officer acted legally,

I wouldn't say that that would preclude the defendant from filing any additional motions,

that that would be within the purview of the trial court.

But if, when you ask if this is all or nothing, we have no case if the, if this court agrees with the trial court.

I see my yellow light is on.

Can you address the diminished expectation of privacy in the vehicle that you believe the defendant has?

Yes.

I mean, I think that that is a fairly well-established law, Your Honor.

And I don't think that it is the cornerstone of this particular case.

But if this were a different situation, if we were talking about a house or some kind of dwelling,

then the expectation of privacy obviously would be higher.

But even given that higher expectation, if you look at the LeBar case,

the police officers approached the house that climbed over a gate because they were concerned

about the well-being of a person who was in fact eventually murdered.

Does it matter here that the car was not locked, that it was easy to open the door?

I don't think that the court has to go that far, although I think that that could be a consideration.

If the door were locked, of course, the police officer wouldn't have been able to open it.

But I don't think that a locked door or anything else would necessarily change the level of expectation

of privacy in a motor vehicle.

I see my red light is on.

I will yield to Mr. Sam Parrell.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you, Ms. Woodcock.

And you have reserved a minute.

Mr. Sam Parrell.

May it please the Court.

My name is Richard Sam Parrell.

I represent Captain Pate.

What the State is asking here is really for the Court to establish a new rule and give law

enforcement free license to open up a car door and enter it, even when in the officer's

subjective opinion it's just as likely that the person is praying, crying, or sleeping.

And that extends to the State in a situation where they're given discretion in absolute

determination in terms of when it's appropriate to enter a car and when it isn't.

That decision should be reserved for the Court in analyzing as this Court has set forth

in the standard under Boyle about what is reasonable and what is appropriate.

Can we consider the information that the officer received on the way to the scene?

The two calls?

Is that information that we should consider?

I think that is part of the totality of the information that should be considered.

The same way the Court should consider the fact that when the officer gets there the

report is about a man in his 20s and the person that is encountered is a woman who's

older than him.

But it's the same vehicle that was identified by the callers, right?

It is the same vehicle.

It's parked in a parking lot.

The information that is provided through dispatch is not entirely correct.

But there's no sign of an accident.

There's no sign of blood or injury.

There's no imminent risk to pedestrians or to other motor vehicle traffic.

And the officer acknowledged that this is a situation where the occupant of the car

could be doing something that is completely benign and lawful and could be just

sleeping in the car.

Can we consider, as Justice Bassett indicated, that the car was eventually found

to be in reverse?

I don't think that's a proper consideration here, because I think as everyone

has acknowledged, that's a fact that is determined later in time.

To the extent it's a fact determined at all.

It's not part of what the officer has an understanding of or knowledge of at the time

that...

Your position is that the officer should have walked away?

No, not at all.

The officer should do what in this situation the trial court found was reasonable

and appropriate, which is take the millisecond of time to knock an

announce.

And there's a very good reason for that.

And there are plenty of situations where the failure to knock an announce creates

a risk for the occupant who's going to be startled and react, and for the officer.

And that's part of the reasonableness analysis and the appropriate analysis, too.

If the officer had knocked and did not get a response, would he then be entitled

to open the car?

If he did not, and there was no response at all, then under the community

caretaking exception, it might be appropriate to open the door at that point.

But none of that is done here.

There's no consideration for that here.

Well, then again, we have an unresponsive person in a car.

I assume that EMTs arrived with sirens and flashing lights, and a police

officer arrived in the same fashion, and all this noise and commotion

outside the car, that didn't disturb the occupant.

Well, there's no evidence that there was any noise or disturbance outside

the car, but I would also respectfully disagree with the characterization

that the occupant was unresponsive, because as soon as the officer opened

the door and laid hands on that person, she responded.

So she, as the officer acknowledged, could have been sleeping, being upset

crying, and she responded as immediately upon being interacted with.

So I disagree that she was unresponsive.

While the report was that she was unresponsive, we don't know what the

basis of that is, and that was not what the officer encountered.

But she didn't know that the EMTs were on the scene and a police

officer was on the scene until the car doors opened.

I guess that's my point.

She didn't, but I think also the facts which are, I don't believe, disputed

is that, you know, the officer arrives and immediately goes to the car, doesn't

do anything, I mean that's part of the issue in this case, doesn't do anything

between arriving and opening the door that would have alerted an occupant,

particularly one that was not sitting up straight and with their eyes open.

So why is it reasonable for the officer to rely on the call which

indicated that the driver, the occupant of the vehicle was unresponsive,

meaning that somebody doesn't know that unless they've made an opportunity

to arouse the individual in the car?

So he has that information.

So why should he believe that any attempts that he makes to get this person

to respond are going to happen?

Because the alternative, Your Honor, is that the rule would be whenever

a unknown third party makes a call to 911 that someone's unresponsive,

law enforcement now has free license to open the door of a car.

And any time you and your spouse go to...

There's a little bit more than that, though.

I mean, there's a windshield running and there's no rain.

There is a windshield running.

And that, I understand where that is, you know, a fact to be considered.

But it doesn't...

And hands raved over into the passenger seat, at least?

Yeah, the description is that the occupant was slumped over to one side.

But there's no, I mean, what is noticeable about that is that that is consistent

with something like sleeping or being upset.

But it's absolutely not consistent with any signs of physical injury.

There's no blood.

There's no...

Nothing about the car that indicates it was in an accident or there's injury.

Well, at some point there's going to be a tipping point beyond which somebody

who, for example, might be having an overdose is not capable of being resuscitated.

So if it takes a minute to bang on the window or yell,

then perhaps that is the golden minute when that person slips from being able

to survive with Narcan to not being able to survive.

And you're saying that we should err on the side of letting that minute pass.

No, I believe the court should err on the side of allowing the trial court

to make that determination of what's reasonable and appropriate.

But also I think that's a red herring here, respectfully,

because this officer testified that he has experience with handling drug overdoses.

He keeps Narcan in his cruiser and he did not take that to the car with him.

So that could clearly not be his mindset at the time of approaching the vehicle.

And I think the real danger is that by creating a rule like this,

the court invites officers after the fact to start justifying their actions in opening doors.

But if we were to reverse here, we wouldn't be creating a rule.

We would just be looking at the facts here and it's a reasonableness test.

We don't know any deference to the trial court.

If we decide under all of the circumstances it was reasonable,

that's not going to be creating a new rule, is it?

I think it does.

I mean, because I think as I was starting to say before, anytime you and your spouse,

you go to the grocery store and your spouse goes in to pick up a few items and you say,

I'm going to catch a few, you know, I'm going to snooze for five minutes while that person's inside.

Under the rule the State is proposing, officer can come and open the door and grab you.

And if there's anybody, an unknown party that thinks that you're somehow unresponsive.

So I do think there is some real danger in allowing some sort of rule that allows

police to open the door in any community caretaking situation and grab the occupant

without knocking or announcing their presence, startling that individual,

potentially creating a hazard to themselves and the occupant.

I think there is some real danger to, because you effectively create that rule.

As an analytical matter, should we approach this as just community caretaking exception

or emergency aid exception or doesn't it matter are they one and the same?

They're not one and the same, but I would submit that the emergency aid exception

is a subset of community caretaking but a higher subset, or sorry, a higher requirement

because if we're talking about an emergency aid exception, in that case it really does

put a premium on there being some imminent risk of harm that is obvious.

And the key case from this Court is the Mackleman case where the car is on an embankment

about to slide into Route 89 and the officer commits the trespass, goes on the person's

property so that the car can be removed.

This is nothing like those facts.

And that...

And nobody's arguing exigency?

Nobody argued exigency below or in this Court.

And with respect to the emergency aid exception, that also was not specifically

argued.

And I understand the State's position that it was argued in some other form of language,

but that poses an additional problem of not giving the trial court an opportunity

to specifically conduct that analysis, which I think even if it had doesn't meet

the standard that this Court has laid out for emergency aid exception.

So are you aware of any other cases where the Court imported an element of knowledge

to the police officer under community care protection?

So I would disagree with the State's characterization that the Court required an element

of knowledge or required a less intrusive means test.

If you look at the actual Court order, and this is at 44 and 45 of the State's brief,

the Court said made a determination based on reasonableness and appropriateness

under this Court's standard, and then specifically says, although not controlling

in this case, the reasoning in this Washington case is compelling.

So the Court here did not impose a knowledge requirement, did not impose a less intrusive

means requirement, did not hold the State to some burden of requiring them to prove

the absence of those things, and instead it considered those things as part of the

totality analysis that it was conducting in terms of reasonableness and appropriateness.

But the last sentence of the trial court before it states its view that it was an

unlawful intrusion is a less intrusive step such as calling out to the occupant

or knocking on the window would protect the expectation of privacy and not unduly

delay the officer's attempt to assist or investigate.

And then the next sentence says, okay, and this is unlawful.

Right, and so I don't think there's anything wrong with considering it as part of

the analysis. How do you conduct a reasonableness analysis without thinking about

what the alternatives were? And here I think it's perfectly appropriate for the

Court to think about the facts as they were presented and what the alternatives

were. But we don't owe any deference to the trial court's assessment of that, do we?

In terms of reasonableness?

From the legal standard it is a de novo standard that this Court looks at,

but with respect to the factual determinations, as Your Honor has

previously noted, that there is deference given to the Court.

So let me just ask you a variation of the question I asked Ms. Woodcock.

Is this an all or nothing thing? So if we say that the entry was

lawful, then everything that follows is okay?

No. The motion to suppress that was filed has a second component that never

got reached here, which is there was a blood sample taken at the hospital

from this defendant. Although she denied, she didn't want treatment

and she was brought to the hospital anyway, then there was some additional facts

at the hospital about the manner in which the blood was taken and why,

and that never got reached here in terms of the motion.

So in terms of what was seized here, we're talking about her body

and her blood, period? That's it?

That's correct. There's no issue about drug paraphernalia.

I know that came up, but the officer immediately says after

waking her that he began to search for contraband and other information,

so the Court did not address that in its order specifically about what

the evidence was, so there may be some other factual determinations

that the Court needs to make as well at the trial court level.

So again, I would submit that these are not requirements that the Court

imposed in this case. I also wanted to briefly touch upon sort of this

discussion of motor vehicles and whether there is some sort of lesser

expectation of privacy. This Court has been very clear about in the

automobile exception context rejecting that in Sterndale, and Chief

Justice Brock in that decision was very clear that the Court was seeking

to avoid what he described as the constitutional quagmire surrounding

the Fourth Amendment in motor vehicles. So I would agree that when

we're talking about homes, there is a heightened expectation of privacy,

but I don't believe this Court has ever articulated motor vehicle searches

in the context of a lesser expectation of privacy. And I would suggest to the

Court that it should not do so in this case.

Your red light is on.

Oh, I'm sorry. I'm looking here.

I'm sorry.

That happens.

We've had to make accommodations. Thank you, Mr. Sanperro.

Ms. Woodcock.

Thank you, Your Honor. Very quickly.

I think that the Court did impose a knowledge requirement.

If you look at page 44 of the State's brief, the Court writes that the

officer did not know and a reasonable person would not know that all these

other innocent explanations had been excluded.

The second thing is that I think that the Court did impose a less intrusive

step kind of requirement. And finally, the defendant did not respond

immediately. When the officer opened the door and the EMTs started to arrive,

he tried to move her, and she was not particularly responsive.

And as you can see in the transcript, she keeps saying, why, why, why?

She's not immediately sitting up, quickly responding to the officer's inquiries.

She is not responsive.

I see my red light is on. I would ask that the case be submitted.

Thank you, counsel. Case submitted.
