So, reading the two, one.

All right, good morning. The matter before the court is state of New Hampshire versus

Stephen Gordon matter 2020-226. The state of New Hampshire is represented by Elizabeth

Woodcock. Mr. Jordan is represented by Brad Davis. Mr. Davis, my understanding is that

you have not reserved any time, so you have 10 minutes for oral argument. Is that correct?

It is, Your Honor. Yes.

Okay, so please proceed when you're ready.

All right, thank you. May it please the court. I'm Brad Davis. I represent Stephen Jordan in this appeal.

And the question before the court is whether or not Mr. Jordan presented sufficient facts that his annulment petition should have been approved by the Superior Court.

Clearly the balancing test under 651-5 is whether or not the factors weigh more heavily in favor of Mr. Jordan's rehabilitation, and that in fact outweighs the public interest in keeping his convictions a matter of public record.

It's the case is clear there was really two events. There was three charges that were misdemeanors stemming from when he was 27 years old in 2005.

And then there was the felony conviction for second degree assault in 2008, conviction of 2010. That is the most serious of his offenses.

The factors that were presented in favor of the annulment, I think are extraordinary because we have an individual who's now 40 years old, totally remained of good behavior since his incarceration on the second degree assault.

And not only that, it's someone who not only has reformed and gone through recovery for his addiction, but he's taken it another step further in that he's obtained his bachelor's degree in psychology,

obtained a job at the Farnham Center, which is a well-known residential recovery center for addictions.

He's pursuing his process was to get his actual license to be a licensed drug and alcohol counselor.

Was there a DOC recommendation issued in this case on these charges?

I believe there was. It didn't come up at the hearing, so I would have to assume that they had checked off the box to approve the annulments.

There was no issues with their reports, so I'd have to assume that they did make the recommendation.

Was alcohol involved in both the 2005 and the 2008 incidents?

It was, yes.

What about the convictions that were annulled in the Dairy Circuit Court in 2019? How many of those charges were there and what were the nature of the charges?

There was a lot of null-prost cases, but essentially in Hooksit there was a resisting arrest and a simple assault where there was 60 days deferred.

In Plymouth there was a disorderly conduct case from 2006. He was just placed on good behavior.

And in the Dairy Circuit Court there was a criminal mischief and criminal trespass where he just had fines.

So those were essentially minor offenses compared to the felony level conviction in the Grafton County Superior Court.

To what extent should the court consider those? Can they consider it all?

I think at the time, certainly yes. The court could consider those other cases because there were annulment petitions pending, but they had not yet gone through.

They hadn't been approved yet, so I think certainly the Superior Court could take those other cases into consideration.

I wouldn't dispute that.

So on Dairy and Hooksit were prior to 2006?

Yes, they were. Hooksit was 2003, date of offense, Plymouth was 2006, and Dairy was also 2003, so those were further back in time.

And all of these predated your client's occurring as addiction problem? Is that true?

That is true. That is correct. And just the offenses in the misdemeanor offenses in the Superior Court were 2005.

So just to correct the record, I guess the Plymouth one in 2006 was just after that in the reckless conduct was also 2005.

So the Plymouth disorderly was 2006.

Those annulment petitions were approved in the circuit courts without hearings.

So it's really just this one here. And the felony is the problem because in order to obtain your late lead act sort of license is that's a problem with the state if you have a felony conviction.

And certainly employment is going to be an issue. He had a job pending with Copper Hospital to be a late act.

And that he was unable to take that position. And that's I think the most substantial factor and looking at the Baker Court, which I cite in the brief.

That's the only factor that seems to be acknowledged by the court was the example of obtaining professional licensure.

So I take that as that that is a substantial factor for the court to consider and that does weigh heavily in favor of annulment.

And an individual that's trying to enter a career and remain in that career of helping other folks that have gone through addiction and similar to what he has gone through is I think is a very, very substantial factor for the court to have considered.

Part five for me, I guess I had misunderstood based on the pleadings that I thought that he was late act or was a licensed late act, but that he just wasn't being able to be hired by Concord Hospital unless he had the annulment.

But that's not my understanding is wrong. Is that right?

It was actually both because at the far one of the questions raised was at the Fartham Center, you know, he's a program coordinator isn't that working in the field.

But they were unable to keep him because the idea was he get his clinical hours which he completed passes exam and would become licensed in order to remain in that position.

But at Concord Hospital, the position was dependent on him being licensed so at the time he was not able to get his license because of the felony conviction.

So those were the facts that were before the Superior Court at the time.

I had understood he left the Fartham Center to take care of a relative saying that he couldn't continue at the Fartham Center without this annulment is that right?

It was a combination of both so the way I understand it from my client was since he was unable to get the license.

And then it was the fact that he had this ill mother that he made the decision that well I need to go take care of my mother right now and decided to do that.

And then upon, you know, the idea was to return to the field.

If he was able to get his license and work, hopefully at Concord Hospital, certainly would want to pursue other jobs but the key was to be able to and that the ultimate goal was to get that professional license as a drug and alcohol counselor.

So I agree with you that in Baker we do identify licensure as a factor but we specifically did not intend to limit the court's discretion to consider other factors right?

That's correct.

So is the impact on the victim that's a factor that the court can consider?

It is because I would certainly fall under the public interest and the state's position that really it's that law enforcement in the community have a right to know his history and described him as a threat to law enforcement and that it would undermine the

public perception of the criminal justice system but as I pointed out in my brief is law enforcement still has access to the records anything that's for a legitimate law enforcement purpose they can access those records.

And certainly the court can can use those records on sentencing issues in the future should there be a subsequent conviction.

But I think the public's perception is is we want offenders to reform. I mean they want them to go through the correctional system and reenter society and become productive and and do all of the things that Mr. Jordan is done.

He's now married.

He owns a home.

And I don't know that an annulment undermines the system and certainly the New Hampshire legislature has identified certain offenses the violent crimes that can never be annulled.

So clearly there's there is offenses that are serious to me that even if the three of us were inclined if we were the trial judges to have granted this annulment it's particularly hard given the standard of review here for us to reverse the trial court.

Why why why can we do that? Why should we do that here?

Well what we're asking the court to to consider is that it would that the factors that were presented to the Superior Court were so substantial in favor of annulment that it that it is an unsustainable exercise of discretion to weigh heavily on the fact of keeping the convictions a matter of public record.

When the legislature has clearly defined that if the time periods are met you know that you have you you can go forward with an annulment if you can demonstrate that the rehabilitation outweighs the public interest which I think Mr. Jordan has done in this case.

So that's what we're asking the court to do and certainly you know it's hard to determine which factors are more important than others.

And I think in this case these are the factors this is the type of individual that you know has demonstrated that he's rehabilitated and gone beyond that and those factors heavily outweigh you know in favor of the annulment being approved.

Your red light's about to come on do you have any closing comments?

Wait the annulment doesn't erase the act from the internet record and certainly your clients not seeking to deny that the prior crimes happened.

Correct.

So this is a piece of data if you will still available to the law enforcement still available to the courts and frankly still available to the public doing a Google search.

And that's true. And that's that's something he can't control and he understands it certainly doesn't erase that these events did happen.

Again he's just looking to be able to move forward with his life and be more productive.

Thank you very much. Mr. Davis, Ms. Woodcock.

Thank you your honor.

Just as Bassett asked a question about what the what the information was if you look at the transcript at page three.

Let's talk about how this particular conviction prevents the defendant from getting licensed and obviously from possessing a firearm as well.

So that's what the trial court had as information. I don't have any information about the Department of Corrections and I'm not sure that the trial court did.

Beyond that I think that the issue here clearly is one of the trial court's discretion.

It heard from the defendant it heard the advocacy of his lawyer who was very well prepared very, you know, very complete in his presentation.

And then the trial court also heard from the state and from the victim.

And I think that if you look at what the victim has to say about how this has affected her life and the trial court was trying to weigh the equities.

You can't say that the trial court exceeded its discretion or exercised discretion improperly in saying that under these circumstances an element is inappropriate.

How can we put this factor in the concept that the sentence is directed at sort of that balancing with the impact on the victim.

As opposed to this later annulment of a particular crime that the legislature has identified as being available for an element.

So how do we evaluate the impact on the victim in those two circumstances where the defendant here has so called paid his debt to society.

Well, I think that that that was one of the issues that the trial court considered and weighed carefully.

This wasn't a very sort of casual just sort of let's just drop in and have a conversation.

The court really considered all of the different issues and while sentencing certainly has is is retribution for lack of a better word for the victim.

It really doesn't end there in an assault like this the victim is victimized essentially for life.

But she continues to serve what amounts to a life sentence.

And while it is laudable that the defendant has gone ahead and done things to try to address his alcohol addiction and to try to become a productive member of society.

It still doesn't take away the harm that he did to this individual.

And who had, you know, she describes it as really heartbreaking.

She came flew back from Afghanistan was jet lagged as she sat there and tried to go through this trial explain what had happened to her in what was really a brutal assault.

Am I to understand that the strangulation or choke choking variant of assault was not in the law at the time this offense occurred.

That's correct, Your Honor.

So if he had been charged subsequently after the legislative change to statute, would he have been charged with first degree assault?

He might have been. I don't know. It's one of those things that the prosecutor would have to make the decision to present it to the grand jury and the grand jury would have to return it.

From what the victim testified, Justice Donovan, it sounded to me as if he had been charged with multiple charges and that there was one conviction that was returned.

And I'm not sure. I went back to look to see if there had been a direct appeal so that I could see what those other charges were.

There wasn't a direct appeal to my knowledge, so I don't have that record and the trial court didn't have it.

But the victim seemed to feel as if she had been, not quoting her directly, but that the outcome of the trial had sort of victimized her once.

And that if this conviction was annulled, the defendant would walk away from the more serious consequences of his actions.

It sounded like again, but I may be reading too much into what she said.

In any event, the trial court…

How should it affect our thinking about this in terms that, I mean, it's not like he's trying to get a plumber's license.

He's trying to get a license for alcohol and drug counseling where his past experience and the terrible things that he did can actually help him in his role

and maybe help some other people avoid the problems that he's had and that he's inflicted on other people.

Well, I think that that certainly was presented to the trial court.

There are a lot of different careers that people can go into and plumbing wouldn't necessarily be one that you would exclude from having had difficult experiences.

It might make you more compassionate as you were looking at someone's horrible situation in their house.

You think of the poor people in Texas with the plumbers in high demand these days.

And patience and compassion under those circumstances are equally important as they are in counseling people.

But I think…

And yet it might be more concerning to have someone going into private houses as opposed to the controlled environment of a laid-at counselor.

Well, I'm not sure I agree with you, Your Honor.

There have been plenty of circumstances where counselors have abused their counseling authority.

So if there is a will to commit a crime, there is certainly a way regardless of what kind of profession you undertake or what job you're doing.

I have another question though.

How does following the, again, statutory avenue for annulment undermine the integrity of the criminal justice system?

I'm curious about that.

Well, I think that the question really is did the trial court fail to follow that statutory scheme?

And the answer to that is it did not.

The trial court weighed the evidence and looked at what had been presented to it and concluded that annulment was improper.

And I think that when you look at what the trial court was looking at, if this had been a different situation,

if the victim had not come in and given the really heartbreaking description of the assault and the effect that it had had on her,

then I think that the trial court would have been presented with a different record.

But here, the victim has been very clear in the ongoing trauma that this has caused to her.

Now, you can ask yourself, well, okay, that is just her.

How does that undermine confidence in the system?

Well, I think that the confidence in the system is multi-fold,

but part of it is certainly how a defendant is treated.

And the other part is how the victim is treated.

You know, we have a victim's bill of rights in New Hampshire.

The victim has the right to be heard at these kinds of proceedings.

And the trial court gave her that opportunity and she was persuasive.

When you combine that with the defendant's additional criminal record,

I think that the trial court looking at this person who was not a juvenile,

he was 28 years old when he attacked this woman.

And while 28 isn't as old as you might live, certainly it doesn't make you middle-aged.

You're no longer a youth.

Ms. Woodcock, it seems that there are some cases that are very clear.

This case seems to be, by all accounts, a close case

where there are important factors on both sides.

But it seems that the argument that you're advancing would,

once the court has before it, the trial court has before it all of the evidence

that essentially your argument makes the trial court's ruling almost unreviewable

because the court had all that information.

What can we do about it?

Clearly the court doesn't have, it's got bounded discretion.

Well, I agree with you, Your Honor, it's not unbounded discretion,

but this court has traditionally deferred to the judgment of the trial court,

particularly in circumstances where it's seen the defendant,

heard him make his presentation, listen to the skilled arguments of the lawyers

and seen the victim.

The court under those circumstances is looking not at a black and white record,

but at human beings who are appearing before it.

I see my red light is on.

If the court has no further questions, I would ask that the case be submitted.

Thank you very much, counsel.
