Good morning. The matter before the court is number 2020-0443,

State of New Hampshire v. Richard Sargent.

The State of New Hampshire is represented by Attorney Egan Hageman.

And Mr. Sargent is represented by Wade Harwood.

Mr. Harwood, I'm told that you have not reserved any time for rebuttals,

and you have ten minutes, and you may begin any time.

Thank you, Your Honor.

May it please the court, Wade Harwood, on behalf of Richard Sargent.

Rick Sargent has been held for 241 days on evidence that the trial court noted

would have significant issues on reaching a beyond-a-reasonable-doubt standard.

That evidence did not meet the applicable legal standard of clear and convincing evidence

to hold him without bail.

We're asking for an expedited ruling in this case as we are scheduled to pick the jury next week.

There are three reasons why the evidence in this case did not meet the standard of clear and convincing.

First, the evidence almost exclusively comes from that of Ben Keller.

First, Mr. Keller, if you take him at his own word,

was unsure that Rick was the one who sold the drugs that killed Mr. Harwood.

Second, there was an alternate source of drugs in the apartment.

Third, there are a number of reasons not to believe what Mr. Keller says

because he's contradicted by other things.

Can I ask some questions about your second point?

The second source of drugs in the apartment.

It seems to be some confusion about whether the syringe found in the victim's left hand

had any drugs in it.

I think the state maintains that there was fentanyl found in that syringe.

And you say otherwise.

What's the case?

If I could clarify that, Your Honor.

There was fentanyl and only fentanyl found in the needle tip itself.

There were no drugs found in the cylinder of the syringe.

So that may be where the confusion was.

There was fentanyl found in the tip.

There was fentanyl found in the decedent's blood.

There was no cocaine found in the decedent's blood.

But there was cocaine found in her urine, right?

Correct.

Can anybody explain that?

There's more evidence after depositions regarding the timeframe on that.

The evidence presented at the bail hearing was that it would have been longer

because it takes time for the body to process the drug,

and then the metabolites end up in the urine.

So it does take some amount of time.

So if she used drugs and lost consciousness and died in quick order,

none of the drugs that she had just used would ultimately make their way into the urine.

They would only be in the blood.

Regarding how long a period of time that takes,

more evidence has come out in the depositions and will come out at trial.

But I think that is what we're going to do on the record before the court today.

But I can represent at a deposition we learned it would take at least an hour or two, I believe,

was how long it would take for anything to get into a urine.

The issue about the drugs and that alternate source is important

because there were drugs found in the bathroom that did contain cocaine.

So they clearly were not the drugs that actually killed Ms. Engelhardt

given that there was no cocaine in her blood.

Also no cocaine in the needle tip that was in her hand.

So when I asked the state's sole witness if he knew where those drugs in the bathroom came from,

he was quite clear that he did not.

He could not say whether those were the drugs that were sold by Rick Sargent

or were some other drugs.

So we have one source of drugs that we know are in the apartment,

that we know contained cocaine which was not in Ms. Engelhardt's blood

and was not in the needle, the tip of the needle of the syringe that she had in her hand.

And the only evidence at the bail hearing was that the state's witness, the leading investigator,

had no opinion as to where those drugs came from.

He said they might have come from Mr. Sargent.

They might not have.

He could not say one way or the other.

He was very clear on that.

It wasn't a case where he said, I can't say for certain, but for X, Y, or Z reason,

it is more likely that those came from someone else or those came from Mr. Sargent.

He simply had no opinion whatsoever.

Does it makes little sense that the victim would have traveled to Franklin to purchase fentanyl

if she had another source of fentanyl in her apartment anyway?

I would dispute the premise slightly.

I agree with the underlying point, but there was not clear evidence that she went to Franklin.

That's the point in the premise that I dispute.

She clearly went somewhere.

The text did not indicate where she went.

And the only evidence that it was Franklin or the strongest evidence that it was Franklin

comes from Mr. Kellard who we do not believe is a reliable source of information.

She did clearly go somewhere.

You're on her.

And so I don't dispute that.

What I can say is that there were hours.

Wasn't there testimony of your client that she showed up at his apartment?

That was a different day.

And he didn't have any drugs?

There was some testimony about multiple days.

There was testimony that she showed up at his apartment potentially that morning.

He did not have any drugs to sell her and that she actually gave him some drugs.

What I can say again about that, there was certainly time for her to potentially

go into multiple locations.

There was also potentially hours after where she could have picked up drugs

from another source, including someone potentially coming to her apartment.

Again, when the investigator was asked at the bail here,

he had no opinion as to whether she had injected herself or someone else had injected her.

And certainly if someone else was there who injected her,

someone else could have brought drugs with them.

We know that the scene was ultimately changed and tampered with.

In your brief, you identify the standard of review that we have a differential

standard on findings of fact.

And then we review the other issues, the NOVO.

And here, as I understand it, the trial court didn't make any explicit findings

of facts to which we would be deferring.

So essentially, this is a NOVO review.

Is that right?

That is correct, Your Honor.

That is certainly our position.

There were no explicit findings of fact.

There certainly could have been, I've seen cases where judges have made

findings of fact, but he did not make any specific findings of fact

regarding the underlying facts.

He simply made the legal conclusion that the state had met its burden

of clear interventionality.

And so as to this issue that you've identified about possible dual

sources of the fentanyl, there are no factual findings one way or the

other in regard to that.

Correct, Your Honor.

That is exactly the point.

And given that we know of at least two sources of drugs there,

the one that killed her and the one in the bathroom,

and that there was no findings of fact made and no evidence to

indicate that one was more likely than the other to have come from

Mr. Sargent, quite frankly, the state, in our opinion,

did not meet a standard of preponderance of the evidence.

I think at most it was a true 50-50 and not a 50-149 set of

state.

Well, the state maintains that all of Mr. Killers' statements are

corroborated by the text messages.

What do you say about that?

I would disagree with that, Your Honor.

What is corroborated is that she bought drugs from somewhere,

but there is nothing in the text messages to indicate a name,

a location, anything that points to Mr. Keller.

All the text messages indicate are that she purchased some

drugs that morning.

That's it.

That's all the text messages say.

I think it's important to note that when Mr. Keller was

initially interviewed by the police that night, he indicated

quite a bit of uncertainty.

He told the officer on the scene that he bought, she would have

bought drugs from Rick or Tasha, Mr. Sargent's wife, and that

in his written statement that he gave that night, he said

that as far as I know, and that's a quote, as far as I

know, that's where she got the drug.

When he was actually putting forward his knowledge, he would

not indicate that he was in any way sure where the drug

was going to go.

So we have an uncertain witness.

We have an alternate source of drugs, and we have the number

of ways that Mr. Teller's statements were contradicted

by physical evidence that I laid out.

Your constitutional claim, procedural or substantive?

The constitutional claim is substantive, Jan.

All right.

Thank you.

Red light is on.

Thank you very much.

Attorney Higman.

Good morning.

May it please the court.

My name is Megan Higman.

I represent the state of New Hampshire.

I'll take questions at any time.

The trial court properly found that it met its, that the

state met its burden under RSA 5971C to hold the defendant

without bail pending the resolution of the death

resulting charge.

Why isn't there an alternative source of fentanyl?

Given the evidence at the apartment and given the

forensic evidence from the victim's body?

Certainly, Your Honor.

The testimony that the trial court heard with regard to

the victim was that she had a needle, as Your Honor had

heard from opposing counsel in her left hand.

That needle tested positive and documented the presence

of fentanyl.

Her blood had the presence of fentanyl.

The drugs that were referenced earlier by opposing

counsel were in a separate room, the bathroom.

Those drugs tested positive for cocaine and fentanyl.

The victim did not have cocaine in her bloodstream.

The trial court heard that the testimony of the

lead investigator referring to the medical examiner was

that the cause of death was acute fentanyl intoxication.

It was not any other substance that contributed to her death.

So the drugs found in the bathroom were not the drugs

that she took.

Is that the state's position?

That is the state's position, Your Honor.

How do we know that those drugs weren't the ones

supplied by Mr. Sargent?

Your Honor, the trial court heard testimony specifically

that there was no evidence either from the victim's

cell phone records or the cell phone examination or any

other evidence that suggested that there were any other

sources of drugs that day.

That was the testimony before the trial court,

that there was no other source of drugs.

In fact, when the police were responding on scene,

they made contact with Mr. Keller.

Mr. Keller had indicated that's the victim's boyfriend.

Mr. Keller had indicated that he had already reached out to Rick

and had notified him that the police were on scene.

The responding officer asked Mr. Keller if he would

contact Rick to find out if the drugs were any different

than usual.

The trial court heard that the response to that was

essentially that he wasn't aware that it was any different,

but he would help in any way that he could.

The defendant's own statements were credited by the

trial court to indicate that he admitted that the victim

came to his house that morning.

And then when he further indicated that she came

and actually supplied him drugs,

the trial court found that that was not credible.

Did the state review Mr. Keller's phone records?

Your honor, the state did not.

And that was not something that was presented to the trial court.

So we only have his word that he called Mr. Sargent

and Mr. Sargent made the statements that he testified to

or provided to the police.

Respectfully, I disagree.

The on scene police officer made observations of that communication.

Ms. Hageman, how is it,

what's the basis for your statement that the trial court

found Mr. Sargent not to be credible?

Given that we don't have any factual findings,

so we don't know how the trial court sorted those things out.

So your honor, the state's perspective is that the trial

court did make factual findings.

I'll direct your honor's attention to the trial transcript

from the bail hearing page 163 through 164,

where it specifically makes the reference to the defendant's

post arrest statement where it found that it was not credible

that she came to his house to supply drugs.

The state's position is that the trial court did in fact

make several factual findings.

Specifically, the court notes that the most compelling evidence

that was presented in the case was both the timeline

of what was shown from the text messages

coupled with Mr. Keller's statements

and the defendant's own admissions

about seeing the victim on that morning.

And just for your honor's reference,

I'm referencing page 163 from the bail transcript.

Thank you.

So that sounds a little bit like an inference

and an inference and an inference.

And can that rise to the level of clear and convincing?

I think it can, your honor.

The standard is clear and convincing evidence

based on the evidence presented

and reasonable inferences that can be drawn from that evidence.

Based on both the evidence presented

and the reasonable inferences,

the trial court found that there was clear and convincing evidence.

The state recognizes that the trial court did in fact

make reference that there were issues

that would need to be addressed should the case proceed to trial.

But the court recognized that the standard of proof

was not beyond a reasonable doubt as it would be at a trial,

but the standard of proof was clear and convincing evidence

as established by state versus verbal.

It's also not a preponderance of the evidence.

So we're, it's not as low as a preponderance.

Clear and convincing is more than that, correct?

That is correct, your honor.

I'll break down the three pieces that the superior court found

were the most compelling pieces of evidence,

specifically the timeline.

The timeline indicates that the victim's last text message,

her last communication with her boyfriend was at 10.44 a.m.

From there, Mr. Keller made repeated efforts

to make contact with her to no success.

He made efforts to contact her around noon

and then shortly around two.

Again, he's indicating to her in those text messages

that she's scaring him and he's essentially asking her

to reach back out, but he hears nothing further.

He then receives a phone call at 3.17 p.m.

indicating that the victim had not gone to the bus stop

to pick up her daughter, essentially from school.

He then leaves work and goes to the residence,

locates her, not breathing, contacts the police,

the police respond around 4.15 p.m.

and locate Mr. Keller performing CPR.

Are there also discrepancies in terms of the liver mortis

findings by the medical examiner that his story might not

and that timeline might not factor it?

I disagree, Your Honor.

I think the defense counsel had raised issues

on cross-examination as to those topics.

I don't think that there are discrepancies.

I think defense counsel's characterizations are different

than what the state's theory would be about those.

For instance, with regard to the needle in the victim's hand,

the state put forth the argument that the needle

could have very well been transferred from one hand

to the next before she passed away.

What is the state's response to the argument

that Keller said that he had ingested the same drugs

and had no problem?

Therefore, how could the drugs allegedly sold

by Mr. Sargent have caused a fatal problem in the victim

and no problem with Mr. Keller?

Your Honor, the state's response to that was that

just because two people consume a drug from the same source

does not lead to the conclusion that they are both going

to respond to that in the same way.

Two people can certainly consume the same substance

and have different responses.

Now, I anticipate that that issue could be further explored

at trial when additional testimony is presented.

But for purposes of what the trial court heard,

the state's perspective on that is that that does not

lead to that only reasonable conclusion

that they must be different drugs.

In fact, it actually leads to the reasonable conclusion

that two people can respond to the same substance

differently.

Did Mr. Sargent plead guilty to his conviction

for the sale of controlled drug on this particular day,

or did he go to trial on that charge and lose?

Your Honor, I'm not sure that I understand your question.

It's my understanding that he was charged

with the sale of controlled drug.

Was it the drug in this particular case?

Oh, so Your Honor, I think to answer your question,

he was charged with sales after this incident

that he pled guilty to.

The conduct in this particular case,

he's charged with both death resulting

and an alternative sale of a controlled drug.

Neither of those have been resolved.

OK, thank you.

The defendant attacks in both at the bail hearing

and also on appeal issues that would certainly

be appropriate and anticipated at trial.

The trial court even contemplated

that those issues would be likely addressed at a trial.

Specifically, he focuses on what he claims

would be inconsistencies at the crime scene,

the possibility of other sources.

However, the defendant's point

to claim that there's a lack of evidence

to support the trial court's finding.

The state's position is that given all of the facts

that the trial court did hear

and the reasonable inferences taken from that,

there was more than ample factual support

for the trial court's finding.

And that the state did meet its burden

of proving by clear and convincing evidence.

I see that the red light is on, Your Honor.

I will ask the case to be submitted

unless there's further questions.

Thank you very much, Ms. Hageman.

Thank you, Mr. Harwood as well.

Case is submitted and the court is in recess.

Thank you.
