This is case 2020-0474, appeal of city of Berlin.

May it please the court. My name is Chris Bolt, here on behalf of the city of Berlin.

This issue is a question of which is the proper DRA equalization ratio to be utilized when assessing an abatement application.

It is uncontested in the record that the city of Berlin utilized the one known and knowable ratio that was available from DRA in 2017,

which is technically called the 2016 equalization ratio.

That is issued in the February to May timeframe in each given year.

That is issued pursuant to RSA 21J-9A.

That's the protocol statute of how the DRA commissioner is charged with creating the equalization ratio.

In this case, it is important because the 2016 ratio is at 110.7%.

The 2017 named ratio available in May of 2018 is at 96.2%.

What is important is the city utilized known and knowable available ratio in setting these taxes that are in question here.

Just these taxes or all taxes?

All taxes had come into reevaluation in that given year.

This was not a general reval year.

2015 was a general reval year. It came back.

2018 was a statistical update.

2020 was the next reval year.

Do you disagree that the determination of which equalization ratio to use is a matter of fact?

It is a question of fact, but there must be evidence upon which the fact can be found.

That creates the question of law for this court.

In Appeal City of Nashville, we held that whether there is a dispute, it comes down to whether there is evidence or whether the city actually used that rate.

Correct.

There is no question the city used the rate.

2017 rate.

It utilized the 2016 rate for the 2017 tax bill that was issued in December as was the other case, the second half tax bill.

What is very clear is it did not use the 2017 rate available in the spring of 2018 for these taxes or any other taxes issued in 2017 because they're after the fact.

So it used the 2016 equalization ratio for any improvements, any new buildings during that year and if there were to be an abatement for Eversource because of this, they would be the only entity in the city of Berlin that got the advantage of that different rate.

Is that right?

It is my understanding that there is no one else that had claimed they entitled to the after the fact ratio.

The other people who didn't file appeals who built houses, the ratio that would have been applied uniformly throughout the city would have been the 2016 equalization ratio.

Correct.

And it's only the SNH here that is seeking to use a different ratio.

To the best of my knowledge that is correct.

Everything else, any reval property would have been used with a known and noble and that is the evidence that is in the record.

We provided pages in the appendix.

I believe they're in about 247 to 252 range of the appendix for the testimony of Mr. Sans Lucy.

What is important on that burden of proof question when we're talking about the evidence?

As you all know, the burden of proof is solely on the company to prove both the fair market value and the disproportionality.

They can claim using the DRA value that that's the right ratio.

We, however, came and met our burden of proof to put the ping-pong ball back in their side of the table by having Mr. Sans Lucy testify to Mr. Sans Lucy and Mr. Fogg

testifying what city's practices are concerning this revaluation issue that we've just discussed.

That puts it back with the company and the company did absolutely nothing to countermand our evidence.

It was the only evidence on what the city actually did, what was known and knowable.

They rested without even cross-examining Mr. Sans Lucy or Mr. Fogg on that point at all.

Knowing what the city did can't be the end of the inquiry because obviously the city came in and said we used 2016.

There must be a reasonableness test or something to be applied.

Correct.

In Nashwood, based on Sonopee, based on Leonard, you have the what is known, what is used by the community.

And that is consistent with our law and frankly the city thought it was following the law by doing so.

Does it matter what other communities do and what's the record on that point?

It does not matter what other communities do as it has been testified to.

We started with 101 communities being sued for multiple tax years.

We ended up having a total of 138 tax appeals tried over the four-week window of November and December of 2019.

And some people, some communities made the tactical choice to not contest the equalization issue.

I believe the record shows because the tax, excuse me, the 2016 and 2017 ratios are in the Sans Lucy report.

I believe pages one, two and three at the very beginning of his report have all of the community's ratios.

I believe the ratio change of that 110.7 to 97 was the largest of any community by far.

Yeah, I was going to say my experience is those numbers vary very little from year to year.

So is there any explanation in the record for why the variance was so great?

I mean, in my view, there wouldn't be this litigation but for the delta.

Sure, and keep in mind the equalization ratio is all based on residential properties.

The process does not put in the values of utility properties as is stated in the report that's in the appendix until the very end of the process.

You're dealing with primarily residential.

I'm not sure that is in the record, Justice.

While I may know the answer, I'm not sure it's in the record.

But for standpoint of what another community does, what the other 47 did is irrelevant.

We have our separate case.

This is the only year bourbon was sued.

It was the only hydro of all the communities involved that had a hydro.

It's the only one that was challenged.

It's obviously the flagship of PSNH at the time, far larger in value than any of the others.

But it's definitely one of a massive important issue for the city.

I'm happy to take other questions.

I do want to reserve the two minutes.

Can you respond to the preservation arguments raised by the utility?

Like the old quip of voting in Chicago, we raised it early and often.

It was raised before trial so much so that the company filed a motion to have the DRA values set as the values to be used.

We filed an objection to that.

We had objections throughout the trial.

We raised it in our limited motion for reconsideration.

We have properly preserved the evidence, the record for this issue.

Does the case of Stevens versus City of Lebanon cut against you?

I don't believe so because in that situation, I believe that's the restaurant case where they had done a significant amount of renovation to the building.

The community, the municipality, did a bit of ping-ponging as my recollection with which rates to use.

It utilized one year, the prior year, one year, the prior year, the next year, and then the current year, the last year.

And I think that's where it became improper for the community at that time.

We have consistently used, the only issue is this 2017 tax bill, but the city has consistently used the known and knowable then current DRA equalization ratio.

So in a practical matter, how would it work for a community that doesn't receive the equalization ratio until the next year in sending out its tax bills?

You couldn't, Your Honor.

It's physically impossible.

And what one of the concerns we had with when the BTLA came in and raised some after-the-record closing type of argument.

Those were issues of fact that we didn't have the chance to challenge.

Our expert could not give reasons for why this situation was different from the Gorham-Portland pipeline case, for example.

Different communities, different assets.

And I want to make sure I reserve time.

Did I answer the question?

I'm not sure I did.

Yeah, no, I think you did.

So if we agree with you, what are you asking us to do, remand for litigation on this issue?

I believe it does not need to be remanded.

As a question of law, you can simply rule that the known and knowable equalization ratio available in April 1 of 2017 is the equalization ratio to use, the 110.7 period.

That then applies to the value that the municipality won on.

The city won the underlying case on the value of Smith-Hydro.

But it's the which equalization ratio applies is the only issue.

And that's a simple question, a ruling of law.

Would be the overruling that if we did that?

I don't believe so because also Nashua had the community refusing to give a ruling on what it used.

Basically, blind man's bluff.

The city didn't do that.

The city was open and obvious.

This is what we've used.

This is what has to apply.

Otherwise, you have the taxes being paid on one ratio and abated on another.

Let me ask you this.

Is it your view that we should say as a matter of law that the city a municipality in the state has to use the available equalization ratio at the time they send out the tax bills?

Or merely that it was allowable for Berlin to do so?

I believe you can limit your opinion to it's allowable for Berlin to do so in this case.

Because I believe it's the Sonope case that includes the phrase.

It's either Sonope, Leonard or Nashua that includes the reference that the municipalities can use the DRA value equalization ratio or not use it.

Right.

So we're not saying you have to use X.

We're saying in this situation, we used X for the abatement purpose.

It has to also be used for X.

And the person, the entity seeking the abatement has the burden of proof to convince the BTLA that that's not the proper number to use.

Correct.

Thank you.

Attorney Lick.

Good morning again, your honors.

May it please the court?

Again, Derek Lick from the Solveway office representing Eversource.

I think it's important to take a step back in this case and realize what the city of Berlin is asking you to do.

Is asking you to step in the shoes of the Board of Tax and Land Appeals and force them to make an alternative finding of fact of an issue that is directly in their wheelhouse.

The technical issue of what median equalization ratio should be applied to any given tax year for any given tax appeal.

In this case, I would agree that what the party should focus on is what was known and knowable, but our view is it's what was known and knowable at the time the BTLA entered its decision and ultimately came to a determination of the value.

After the close of the evidence though, right?

After the close of the evidence.

No, your honor.

In this case, it was, as Attorney Bolt indicated, there was vibrant discussion and motions filed in anticipation of this battle.

And ultimately, the BTLA heard arguments on both sides, both in written form and at hearing, sideshow questions, were opposed to counsel.

And the Board decided in its own discretion to use the more accurate and up-to-date equalization ratio.

But doesn't that create a disconnect between the tax value or the tax paid and the abatement given?

No, because ultimately the value that ultimately our source was taxed on wasn't indeed was on the town's tax records.

It is true that when trying to determine portionality at the end, you know, you first determine fair market value.

What is the value of this particular set of property here?

And that wasn't in dispute here, right?

That was not in dispute here.

Let me back up.

It was in strong dispute between the two experts, but the Board ultimately chose to go with Berlin's expert and his valuation.

That's not being appealed.

And we did not appeal that decision.

We chose not to do so in this case.

So that number is an accurate number.

And now the real question is, okay, having found the fair market value of the hydroelectric plant in Berlin, how should it be found to be proportional with respect to taxation?

Do you use a particular equalization ratio from 2016, or do you use the one for the tax year issue 2017?

And ultimately, the Board concluded, as is its longstanding historical practice.

As a matter of fact, I'm not aware of other cases where it doesn't use the most up to date accurate data for the year 2017.

How does that keep it proportional to other Berlin taxpayers if their tax bills are based on the prior year equalization ratio?

Well, what you have to do...

Or those that have been updated, right?

A fair point, Your Honor.

Ultimately, any party that files an abatement and an appeal have the opportunity to determine which equalization ratio should be applied.

And typically it's the year that ultimately is found by the DRA, and this is 2017 tax year.

So it's the 2017 equalization ratio.

You are correct.

Anybody in the city of Berlin that chose not to seek an abatement of their taxes for that year ultimately was being assessed on a number that was different than the 2017 number.

In our view, it was wrong.

Nevertheless, because we appealed and we had a big stake here in dealing with a property valued between $40 and $50 million, we want to make sure the right number was used.

So what if it supports the Board's decision in 2017, was the proper equalization ratio to use?

In this case, there was really no battle over whether the DRA properly prepared and computed its equalization ratio for either year.

The sole question is, well, which one is the best?

I think the Board, again, using its historical practice, using its expertise, the fact that it does this time and time again and always uses the more up-to-date number, that's what it did.

And I think ultimately it's based on the fact that the data in the 2017 ratio is much more up-to-date and more aligned with the April 1, 2017 date.

But doesn't it include data, the valuation date is April 1, 2017?

Correct.

If you use the 2017 equalization ratio, that relies to a large extent on data that didn't exist as of April 1 and reflect sales after April 1.

So how can that make any sense?

Well, it makes sense because, again, you look to what data you knew at the time you determined the valuation of the property.

In other words, in this case, when you look at the April 1, 2017 tax date, the DRA equalization number for 2017 looks to sales from October of the year prior up through the end of September of 2017.

Right.

And it comes to a number for what was going on on either side of the April 1, 2017 date.

If you instead look to the prior year's number, you're actually looking at sales data as far back as October of, in this case, for 2016, October and 2015.

So the way this works is the DRA goes out and looks at sales in the municipality over that period of time.

And if you use the 2016 number, you're looking at the sales for as long as 18 months prior to the data issue, April 1.

Whereas if you look to the data for 2017, it's on six months of either side of that date.

And you're relying on the board's expertise and knowledge in this area because there's no evidence submitted on that point.

Absolutely, Your Honor.

There was no evidence submitted that the 2017 number was somehow miscalculated or improperly done or not properly factored in some way by the DRA.

The sole issue is which year to use.

Did the burden shift to PSNH once this was raised by Boroughly?

Oh, and the reason why here is because again, this was not them claiming that the 2017 number was somehow wrong or improperly calculated.

They agreed, and ultimately I utilized 2017 later, the question was just which was the right time period to apply.

And the board here in some ways did in fact chastise the city of Berlin for going out on a limb here and trying to basically undo historical practice.

Again, there were more than 40 cities and towns that had this very same issue.

Only two raised this issue initially with the board and only one, Berlin, is here today.

And again, I think it does play into the fact, Justice Bassett, that there was a wide disparity in the number.

But ultimately, it should be the more recent data that is driving ultimately what our proportionality is.

If in 2017 the data from the DRA is the assessed values of the town that are taxed to everybody else is 96.2% of the fair market value.

That's what Eversource should be paying taxes on 96.2%.

But why is it fair and reasonable that Eversource gets that retrospective benefit that no other taxpayer in Berlin gets it?

Doesn't that mean almost by definition that Eversource is going to pay disproportionately less than some guy who owns an $80,000 house?

Our position is that they were using old data for all the other property and were entitled to use the proper data, updated data.

Are you entitled to uniformity, not the benefit of some better number?

If the number applies equally to everybody, isn't that what the law requires?

The law does require it and the law requires proportionality based on the best data with respect to proportionality for 2017.

And didn't they use the best data that was available on the data valuation, which was April 1st, 2017?

It is our position that the DRA data for 2017 is a better reflection of the proper proportionality with respect to taxation in Berlin than the 2016 number,

which did not include this tax year.

And indeed, again, time and time again, this is standard practice at the Board of Tax and Land Appeals.

Based on your standard of review, you have to find by a clear preponderance of evidence that somehow the BTLA went outside of its discretion here,

and did basically an unsustainable exercise of discretion in choosing this number, the more accurate data.

So your view isn't a matter of law, this is a factual determination?

Absolutely.

And why shouldn't it be a factual determination based on the facts in this case and every community,

and doesn't the delta of 13% enter into whether that's a reasonable result or not?

No, I think, again, there was no challenge to the accuracy of the 2017 equalization ratio.

Never did the city of Berlin say, you know, typically we would use that number.

But in this case, it's very much out of whack and there was some kind of error or some kind of miscalculation.

That was never part of the discussion.

The sole question was, well, we didn't know it at the time when we issued our tax bill.

Fair.

We understand that.

But once an abatement was filed, we didn't know what the equalization rate was going to be either at the time we filed our abatement.

It could have been favorable to us, it could have been unfavorable to us.

It seems to me that if we adopt your view of this, then somebody ought to go out and start a class action

and every community in the state file an abatement for every property owner and then see how it goes.

And if the equalization ratio changes significantly, you've got a great case and you'll get a lot of money back.

I agree that given the spread in this case really drove the issue.

But also, there are very few taxpayers in the city of Berlin or elsewhere that have, you know, $45, $50 million in property,

which is really going to be a driver and a significant issue.

I think the bottom line is that all taxpayers should be entitled to an appropriate proportionality of their tax assessment.

Doesn't that mean the same proportionality should be applied to every taxpayer in the community?

Well, if that was the case, Your Honor, we would never look to updated data.

We would always rely on same-stale outdated data in the Board of Tax and Land Appeals.

This court would be telling that board, we know you're the specialist in this area.

We know you have the technical expertise. We know you're the fact finder.

But regardless of all of that, we are going to tell you and impose upon you that if a town imposed one equalization ratio,

right, wrong, indifferent, could be completely out of whack.

You're now forced to stick with that number regardless of anything you find, because otherwise it would be unfair to her.

That seems like you're arguing for a blanket rule that is the opposite,

which is if a case comes before the BTLA in every instance, the later learned equalization ratio should apply period end of story,

because it's the latest available. And that's nowhere in the regulations. That's nowhere in the statute.

Well, I think that's ultimately what they're arguing for here.

Now, they say it's based on a fact-based inquiry in this particular case.

They made that fact-based inquiry. They made their determination. This is in their wheelhouse.

This is their special expertise. They made that determination.

And by questioning them in this case and taking the position that by changing equalization ratio to the one that's the most current,

the one that's the most accurate for this tax year, you are somehow now disadvantageing all other taxpayers

where they were ultimately the town was utilizing an improper...

You say it's the most accurate if it includes data on sales up through October 1st of 2017 and there's some huge disproportionate sale

that drives up that ratio, changes the ratio because it happened in September of 2017.

Why logically should that drive an analysis of the valuation as of April 1st?

And there was no evidence that that was the case here, that there was a particular sale in September of 2017

that drove the DRA equalization ratio. Zero evidence of that.

In fact, I think all things being equal, the board should do what appraisers do.

They look to sales that are closest in time to the transaction at issue.

And here the board had the benefit of an analysis done by the State Department of Revenue Administration

and they were charged with this very task. They had the right to rely on that data

and they had the right to choose which of the two equalization rates they were going to rely on.

The board seems to hedge a bit because they indicate that the city had access to the majority of sales included in the ratio.

We know there's a distinction between the equalization ratio statewide to equalize communities

and the particular ratio utilized in a municipality.

The board inferring that the city has to reevaluate their ratio on a regular and ongoing basis

to determine when it's appropriate to complete a municipal reassessment.

So as of April 1, is the city required to figure out what the ratio should be?

I would say no, Your Honor, but the board's statement in their opinion does point to an issue that the board had with the city of Berlin.

Essentially the city of Berlin says, how could we possibly know that our equalization ratio for 2016 was out of whack as compared to 2017?

The board is saying back to the city as, well, the data the DRA relies on comes from you, the town, the city.

We look at you give the DRA the data.

But only as of April. I mean, the city when it's sending out its tax bills only knows that data as of April.

The DRA gets it all the way through September. So I'm seeing a disconnect.

Well, I think what the board is saying is every other town and city utilizes what the board is doing.

Berlin wants to be an outlier and they say we want to do something completely different than historical practice at the board and every other town is doing.

And I think what the board was saying is you are complaining because you don't think that you have enough information.

Indeed, you're the one that has the treasure trove of information on which the DRA relies.

This should be no surprise to you. You should be keeping track of values in your own community.

And the fact that you aren't does not excuse you.

So we wouldn't be here if they had recalculated as of April 1st?

That's true. But really all they needed to do was do what every other municipality did in these tax appeals and apply the equalization ratio for the same year of the tax year at issue.

If that was done, we would not be here. It's a simple example.

Am I right that SNH didn't make any particular fact-based substantive argument as to why 2017 was preferable to 2016 other than it's more recent?

And when it became available, that's what you should have used? Is that the sum and substance of the argument?

That is the sum and substance of the argument.

What should use the most accurate up-to-date information available to it at the time it is determining proportionality?

It had that information for that tax year at that time? It should use it.

Thank you for your time.

Very briefly, Your Honor.

To answer that last question, I believe it is important to remember that the city, while it has the sales information coming into it,

it does not know what the DRA is going to do with it.

Any more than any other major federal or state agency with three letters, we can know as humans what they will actually do with the information.

What we have in this case is we challenge the propriety of using the after-the-fact ratio.

When we, with this disconnect issue in mind, were using the known and knowable ratio in setting the taxes.

And the result of the argument that you're really hearing now for the first time, it's not clear in the record that they were arguing,

this is the most up-to-date, everybody does it, might have been in there, but this is not challenged.

It's that disconnect that we have because the taxes being abated are based on a ratio over here,

but the taxes are being paid on the ratio of 2016, the earlier one, that was available and known and knowable.

There is no statute that says you have to use one.

Your cases say consistent, and the city of Berlin was consistent.

We're getting penalized for that because of a swing in the ratio of 14%.

That 14% equates to over $325,000 of abatement only because of that ratio.

And who will pay the $325,000 if that abatement is granted?

All of the city of Berlin taxpayers.

Any other questions?

Thank you very much for the time.

The appeal of the city of Berlin is submitted.

The court will stand in brief.
