Thank you, sir. Blair?

This is case 2020-0414. Request for an opinion of the justices quorum under Part 2, Article 20.

Thank you. Ms. Dean, you're up first, and you may start whenever you are ready. I understand that you have reserved two minutes.

I then understand that the lineup is nine minutes for Mr. Cianci, three minutes for Mr. Oxenham, and three minutes for Mr. Toomey.

Let me just start by saying the court is very pleased to see you, and welcome to the court today.

Thank you, Your Honor. And just a housekeeping method.

I typically have trouble breathing. It has nothing to do with COVID, nothing to do with that.

And so I may be tugging on my mask a little, because literally it fogs my glasses, and sometimes I literally have to take it off.

So I apologize, but it's just because breathing is good.

I understand, and I have that fogging problem myself.

But because of the juxtaposition between you and our court staff, I'm going to insist that you keep the mask on.

Yes, Your Honor.

Thank you.

Please proceed.

May it please the court. My name is Penny Dean, and I represent Representative Hull in this matter, or the former Representative Hull in this matter.

And I'm happy to take questions at any point.

I think what we have here is the general court is trying to get around the Constitution.

There's a way to amend the Constitution. They know it well.

Since 1990, approximately the past 30 years, they've done it a little over a dozen times.

It can be done. It's very simple.

But it takes time, and maybe they don't want to go through the process.

The bottom line is, in this state, we take our representation very seriously, as evidenced by the fact that we have over 400 representatives.

And I think when you look at the briefs and the memorandum of the other parties, they really make my argument in this case.

And that is that the framers of this Constitution were very clear.

And the language they used throughout expected that the parties, that the representatives would not make sausage in private, but would do it in public, in full view of all of their constituents, all that chose to be there.

And I think what's most important in this case is anyone who's ever been in the gallery at the general court would realize there's a lot more going on.

People don't just want to see the votes at the end if it happens to be a roll call vote.

What they want to see is the process and what is going on, the interaction between the individuals.

And if this is allowed, here's what, as a practical matter, is going to happen and could happen.

There's going to be texting back and forth.

There may be phone calls back and forth.

There's all sorts of things that the public could normally see and has a right to see and would see when the representatives are all gathered together,

but which the public will not be able to see when you have a two-inch square or a one-inch square on a screen.

But pursuant to Article 22, the House is free to make its own rules, right?

And we can't infringe on that process, can we?

You can't infringe upon the rules, but they have to follow the Constitution.

They absolutely can make their own rules about many things, but the Constitution is very clear and is outlined in our memorandum.

We go through the specific places that the Constitution talks about attendance and accessibility and quorum and meeting in a place.

And all of those words have meaning.

And so you cannot, as a court, make rules if they start at 8 o'clock or 9 o'clock or many other what I call ministerial rules.

But this is a substantive rule, and it's so important that the Constitution outlines it in several places.

And I think what's more important is you have to look at all of the articles of the Constitution as we've outlined in our memorandum and supplement.

Because you cannot just look at one part.

It's like taking a statute and taking provision A, B, or C and just interpreting A in isolation.

I respectfully suggest that this court has decided in the past that that's not appropriate, and I would say that it's not appropriate now.

Ms. Dean, is it your position?

If I might interrupt, the public is limited to the gallery, and so isn't that itself a restriction that really, practically speaking,

prevents the public from listening in on every phone call, seeing every note that's passed?

So isn't a virtual presentation somewhat the same as being limited to the gallery?

Absolutely not.

When people are in the gallery, even if the gallery is full, which it unfortunately rarely is,

they can still observe, or the press can observe, for them, through cameras, what is happening.

For example, Justice, right now, you happen to have a background that looks similar to this court.

But you can put up any type of background where you're at, and you could be texting below us right now.

And not suggesting that you are Justice, but what I'm trying to say is you're seeing a virtual screen,

and where we have 400 representatives, even if a person has a 50-inch screen,

and I would respectfully suggest to the court that not many people can afford such a screen,

if they have a 50-inch screen, each representative is going to have a passport-sized photo on there.

So they're going to be lucky if they see the head of that representative.

They're not going to see what they're doing.

And so no, Justice, I don't think it's the same at all.

I think what you see is people walking around, you see which representative is talking to which representative, for how long.

You see gestures, you may see notes or papers being passed.

What you could not see, if you're having a virtual session, which is, to me, what you're talking about,

is you can't see the representative emailing back and forth to other representatives during voting, or to other people.

We don't know who.

Well, certainly House members can text one another when they're in the chamber.

In fact, there's a vestibule, I believe, in the back of the room, in which members congregate during session.

And the public doesn't see that.

The public doesn't see that little area.

There are certain areas that they can go to the bathroom, and they can't see the two ladies going to the bathroom,

or all of that type of thing.

But when you're talking about right before the votes, and what is happening on there,

and certainly during the debates, you absolutely can see all of that from the gallery.

Now, you're absolutely right, there's anteroom, there's certain areas that the public don't see, or is unable to see.

But the main thing, which is what the public wants to see, is during one of the many things, I shouldn't restrict it,

that the public expects to see is during voting, they want to see what's happening, who's talking.

There are stories and anecdotes that at last minute, many representatives have changed their vote within seconds of voting,

because of something someone said or did that convinced them.

We want to be able to see that.

The public has a right to see that.

Ms. Dean, the narrow question in front of us has to do with Part 2, Article 20, and a majority, and what constitutes a quorum.

Many of the arguments you seem to be making have to do with where the House meets,

and can the House only meet in the Statehouse, and is that the basis of your argument, that the House chambers?

Absolutely not. Absolutely not.

There's other provisions that the governor can move the meeting place to other places,

and I think you're right.

I have parsed the second part of the argument,

but the first part of the argument, which starts with a question, is what's a quorum?

In order to determine that, I respectfully say that you have to look to the rest of the Constitution,

not to that one narrow provision.

And when you talk about a quorum, a quorum is a group of people, as we've defined,

meeting together in this particular case, a quorum of the New Hampshire House of Representatives.

But in order to get that quorum, you have to talk about what that means, where they're meeting, how they're meeting.

So I think to just take the isolated word quorum in and of itself and not look to the other articles of the Constitution

would be an incorrect interpretation, I would respectfully suggest.

That just as I mentioned with statutes, when you have to look at the whole of the statute,

not just Section 1, 2, and 3, because it needs to be harmonized.

So from your perspective, you would find it constitutionally sound for the House to continue to meet over at UNH?

At this point, I think it may be.

That's not the question we're being asked, but I think it may be,

so long as the public has rights of access, which they have had.

Now, I understand that there are some different rules, but they're, for example, wearing masks today.

That's not what's happened in the past in this court, but it is happening now.

So there are certain accommodations being made.

For example, in Concord, there's a half a dozen places, the Graponi Center, I could go on and on,

where the House could choose to meet.

And there's provisions in the Constitution where the governor or the chambers can move the meeting places.

Well, your argument in terms of the public keeping its eye on what the House is up to

and what the members are up to.

If you're in the House gallery, you can only see the back of most of the representatives.

And you can't see their faces if they're speaking to the speaker, generally.

But if everyone's virtually present or on Zoom, then in many ways, you actually get a better look

at who's speaking and the faces of the representatives.

So doesn't that actually enhance public access?

And, in fact, those people, everybody can be watching wherever they are in the state,

not just the few people that are in the gallery.

There's two reasons I respectfully disagree with that, Your Honor, or Justice.

Number one is that I've been in that House gallery.

If you're on the far left or the far right, I respectfully say that you can see more of their face

than if you're facing straight on.

If you're in the middle of the gallery, you're 100% right.

Depends on how they're standing.

But if you're in the very far left or the far right, I respectfully say you can see,

not the same as a front-on position, but you certainly can see them.

Secondly, what you're going to do is disenfranchise, at least depending on whose statistics you look at,

25% of the residents of the state who don't have access to Internet, high-speed Internet,

Internet that we fought up.

There are two bills that I referenced in our memorandum, just from 2018 and 2019.

Ironically, one of them co-sponsored by Representative Cushing.

We need full Internet access in this state.

If we're going to go to something like that, we're going to have the haves and the have-nots

at a level that you can't imagine.

Well, if somebody is living in Coalbrook, isn't it actually giving them better access to the workings

of the house if they go to the Coalbrook Library and get in through the Internet there,

then have to drive all the way to Concord?

And maybe when they get to Concord, the gallery is full, and so they have to be standing out

on the front steps of the statehouse.

No, Justice, it is not the same type of access.

And so, no, I don't think they're going to have that.

But the issue is, how long is it going to take?

It's taken us decades with the statehouse representatives still fighting for full access

for the entire state for high-speed Internet.

We don't have it now.

Literally, again, depending on whose statistics you look at, 25% of the state doesn't have it.

So if there were high-speed Internet, then this is a constitutionally sound process

from your perspective?

No, sir.

No, sir.

Because you still have to harmonize the entire constitution, and it talks about meeting in

places and congregating and expects that these people will be together at the same place at

the same time.

And so sometimes constitutional arguments can't be lawyers debating how many angels can dance

on the head of a pin.

We have to debate, and I respectfully think the justices have to decide based on what is.

Because if this court were to say that that does made a quorum, so for two years or three

years or how many years it takes to get, if we can, high-speed Internet everywhere, those

people in the state, that 25% of our population is going to be disenfranchised for two or three

years, so that's okay?

That, you know, we're going to do it, and it's a quorum, and it's okay?

I respectfully say that it's not okay, that the constitution, although I certainly understand

that they didn't understand...

But isn't there an analog, people without transportation, which is another need that's been identified

among our low-income citizens?

So people who can't travel can't get to the gallery.

So isn't that sort of a similar defect, if you will, in the current process?

I don't think of it as a defect.

Those people, many of those people are able to get rides with others.

So just like a person without money can't buy food, that's absolutely true.

But I don't think if those same people don't have enough money to buy a car, I don't think

they're going to have enough money for Internet.

And if they had enough money for Internet, do they have a 50-inch screen so they can see

all the 400 representatives at the same time, which is what it's going to require, even by

a one-and-a-half or two-inch square.

So I think this is still disenfranchising them, and more importantly, it's part of the quality

that New Hampshire people care about, about their way of life, about being able to be

proud of the legislative process.

We could make it quicker and easier by having 100 representatives.

This state and the citizens have chosen not to do that.

And so when you talk...

I think my red light's on.

Your light is on?

Yeah.

Thank you.

But you have two minutes reserved.

Thank you.

Thank you, Ms. Dean.

Mr. Cianci?

Thank you, Your Honor.

May it please the court, James Cianci, on behalf of the House of Representatives.

I'd like to make a couple of just very brief points and take questions from the court at

any time.

I'd like to focus the court's attention really on the question that's been asked, and

it relates to the issue of the word present within the quorum requirement in Article 20.

And I'd like to argue that although, of course, that definition would have a certain meaning

when it was adopted, I don't believe that that definition is preclusive.

And looking at this court's precedence in Warburton and in Bednar v. King, it gets to the question

that, yes, the legislature can adopt rules to meet its constitutional requirements.

And in this case, we would argue that it could adopt rules to meet its quorum requirement

under the Constitution.

I'd also like to point out that the United States Supreme Court in U.S. v. Bailin has

also, as far back as 1892, dealt with this issue of how can Congress determine its quorum?

And at the time, it said that it could utilize any method which shall be reasonably certain

to ascertain the presence of a quorum.

And so what we're looking for clarification from this court is, can the House adopt a rule

whereby it could reasonably ascertain a quorum through remote participation?

And we believe that it can.

What about all the problems that Ms. Dean identifies in terms of access to the public under Part 1,

and Article 8, and other provisions in the Constitution, should we not consider those problems

or the public's right to access?

Your Honor, we don't believe that those are actually problems, particularly under Part 1, Article 8.

This court, on numerous occasions, most recently in Hughes v. Speaker of the New Hampshire House,

has said, yes, the legislature must offer reasonable access.

But it's really within the purview of the legislature to determine what that access is.

And so...

So could the legislature just close the doors to the gallery?

No, Your Honor, because I believe under Part 2, Article 8, that's a clear sort of indication

that the legislature couldn't meet in secret.

However, the method by which it provides the public access is really within the purview of the legislature.

And as I understand it, one of the definitions back in the late 1700s for present meant not absent.

Isn't that...

Doesn't that fit what we're talking about here?

Yes, Your Honor.

We believe that by utilizing that definition, the legislature could devise means by which it could determine

that a member who is participating remotely is, quote, not absent.

And that could be through some sort of verification, you know, determining that the person is on screen at all times.

So, yes, you know, the definition of present, meaning not absent, could be determined through electronic means

and would satisfy the Constitutional Quorum requirement.

What measures does the House anticipate using to guarantee or ensure as much access as possible to the public?

How are you going to do that?

Sure, Your Honor.

And that's a question that's been faced by, as I indicated, Congress and 25 other states.

Of course, they have different constitutional requirements than New Hampshire.

I can tell you currently, the legislature, having met three times at the Whittemore Center,

has streamed all of those proceedings.

And, in fact, unlike the normal proceedings in the House whereby there's a fixed camera that takes the video straight down from the gallery.

So, essentially, you're getting a view of the back of people's heads in addition to the people at the rostrum.

The UNH camera takes video of people on the floors.

You actually see more of a view of the body in addition to the people who are participating in the gallery.

So, that's just one way where remote access might actually offer greater access to the public than is currently available,

which currently meets Constitutional Quorum.

Was there also personal access available for members of the public at UNH?

Currently, I don't believe they allow the public in to the building due to the restrictions, obviously.

But, they still do have access, as they would during a normal hall session, through the stream.

Through what? I'm sorry?

Through the House's streaming.

Okay.

So, the streaming video, much like this court, is...

What about Ms. Dean's argument that you can't see who's talking to whom on the floor,

or who's kibbutzing with whom?

Isn't that an important thing to know?

I don't know if I characterize it as important, Your Honor.

It's certainly part of, you know, the public's, you know, I suppose, holding its members accountable.

But, again, I don't think there's any particular method which is prescribed by the Constitution.

It's just allowing reasonable access.

And, is it, I suppose the question is, is it reasonable to allow someone to see every member's facial gesture,

or who's talking to whom?

And, and so I don't, I don't know if the Constitution requires that much access.

So, is there any constitutional parameter on what the House defines as present?

Well, I think it would, again, going back to bailing, it would be a method which is, you know, reasonably certain to ascertain.

And so it, it would obviously have to be more than just sort of, you know, taking a, a head count or taking somebody's word for it.

There would have to be, I use the word verification.

And we would obviously look to see how other states are accomplishing this.

But, it may be as simple as the member is giving a specific ID or a code to log in.

And only that member has it.

And, as I said before.

On that basis, should we require something more of Justice Hans Marconi than just her face on a camera?

Well, I, I certainly trust this court's, you know, ability to verify its, its own membership.

Of course, you have an easier job because there's only four of you versus the 400.

But, I do think, I mean, it is, it is certainly a consideration because I don't think the House would, would, would necessarily anticipate having all 400 participate remotely.

It's more of a matter of how would you verify the identity of those members who are participating remotely.

So, this, going forward, hybrid situation is what's contemplated with some present and some not?

Most logically, Your Honor, because I think you're, you're always going to want to, there's always going to be the members who want to participate in person.

It's really about, you know, allowing the legislature the flexibility to determine its quorum, whereby some members would rather participate remotely, whether due to health issues or, or what, or logistical issues, whatnot.

There are no other questions.

Thank you.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you very much, Mr. Cianci.

Mr. Oxenham.

Good morning, Your Honors, and may it please the Court.

Before I start anything else, I do want to address one point made by opposing counsel about the idea of an, of a virtual or remote session disenfranchising New Hampshire voters.

I would actually submit that we have the opposite situation currently with in-person sessions,

because when we have in-person sessions during a pandemic, then legislators who are infected or may be infected with the disease have to stay away from sessions out of public health concerns and cannot vote.

For example, my own client, Representative Oxenham, had COVID-19 symptoms earlier this year, and medical tests were unable to rule out any other potential cause.

As a result, she was not allowed to participate in any house sessions during the month of March, and she was not able to vote on 98 separate roll call votes, which was nearly half of roll call votes held this year.

And her representatives were deprived of their equal representation in the house as a result of that.

And I think not having your representative be able to vote on that outweighs being able to see hand gestures or facial expressions of representatives.

The ability to actually have the voting representative, I think, is far more important.

Well, presumably, someone who tests positive or has had recent exposure, who's a member of the public, also wouldn't have access to the gallery or be able to get in the state house.

So this virtual presence or ability to watch would, in fact, be the way they can do it.

I would agree with that, Your Honor.

The other thing I also want to point out, going back to what we mean by presence and what Article 20 means by present,

I think it's actually important to note that present occurs in the second clause, whereas the first clause is what we assess the quorum requirement,

which simply says a majority of the House constitutes a quorum.

And in the context in which the present is used, I think it is merely being used as a succinct way to refer to the members constituting the quorum in the sense of not absent,

and it is creating an additional substantive requirement that they must meet in person.

Especially considering that, going back to the intent of the time, I don't think there was any intent to limit the ability of the House to adopt rules that could mitigate the risks of public health during pandemic situations,

both the history they had at the time, and also the fact that Article 22 expressly leaves it to the House to determine its own rules of proceeding.

Well, what other meaning could presence have had back in the 1700s, other than corporeal presence, being there physically?

I think presence, in that sense, it would have been understood to be physical presence, but two things.

One, the word uses is present rather than presence.

And again, in the context, I think it simply means not absent.

They would have, of course, anticipated the time that the only way possible to do that would have been to meet in person.

But I would say the very fact they could not conceive of any other method of doing it means they could not have had an intent to prohibit any other method of meeting its satisfying the quorum requirement.

When we construe the constitutional provision, I must admit, I learned in reading the briefs here about the great smallpox epidemic from 1775 to 1782.

Should that enter into our thinking about what was meant by those words at the time of the adoption of the Constitution in 1784?

I think it should, insofar as it speaks to the intent of how they might want the provisions to apply in situations where,

as I think the main point to take from that is that they probably did not mean to set a requirement that would tie the House's hands

and its ability to respond to and mitigate the risks of a public health crisis,

especially considering how, at the time, it was common to use isolation measures and other ways of limiting contact

in order to control the spread of the disease, particularly since they didn't have vaccination at the time.

Thank you, counsel. Your red light is on.

Oh, sorry.

It's quite all right. Thank you very much.

Mr. Toomey?

Thank you. It may have pleased the court.

My name is Paul Toomey. I'm from Chichester.

I'm here representing Representative Cushing and former Representative Mesmer.

I'm also a former House legal counsel.

And looking around the room, we almost have a quorum of present and former House legal counsels in this room.

It's a pleasure.

I think this case boils down to really one word in Article 20, and it has nothing to do with the gallery.

That was a question that wasn't asked.

And as the court has said many times over in advisory opinions, you only answer the questions that the House asks.

They didn't ask any questions about the gallery.

But just briefly, nothing in the House's plans, there's nothing in front of you that suggests in any way that the gallery isn't going to be open.

The House could very easily, as some states have done, have the officers be present and keep the gallery open and whatever representatives want to be there.

That's not the question before you as to the mechanisms of how the House is going to deal with it.

The question before you was, what does the word present mean in Article 20?

The pleadings in this case, the other parties have sort of parsed that word to death.

I mean, there's probably 100 pages of definitions in front of you, and I don't have anything to add to that.

But I would suggest that that's not really where your focus should be in a case like this.

In Petition of V-Law, which is a redistricting case that I represented the petitioners in 2004,

the following sentence was stated, and I think it should guide you.

While we acknowledge that a literal reading of Part 2, Articles 9, 11, and 26 support the petitioner's argument,

it ignores the purpose and intent of, and then it goes on to discuss the redistricting provisions.

When you're trying to understand something, it is not enough to go to a dictionary and look at the dictionary,

meaning either in the 17th century or the 20th century.

What you have to do is take that information, but then put it in the context of what the purpose and intent

of the provisions that you're looking at were in the Constitution as a whole.

If you were to come at the end of this and keep the legislature from meeting itself,

I would suggest you'd be turning the Constitution on its head and just defeating the purpose and intent of the Constitution.

The goal of the Constitution, if you look at the provisions, and I cited them, I won't go through them all again,

but there's numerous provisions that provide for the continuity of the legislative function in government

in the face of various threats.

That runs right through the Constitution.

And along with that is a threat of a weak executive power subject to control by the legislation.

If you say the legislature can't meet in a reasonable manner,

what you're doing is creating an executive without any restraints on it whatsoever.

But the Constitutional Provision 5A regarding continuity of government,

it talks about emergency resulting from disasters caused by enemy attack.

And then we don't have an enemy attack here.

Right, we don't.

We have another provision in which they talk about moving the place of the legislature.

I think it's 43 where it talks actually about the governor when the House and Senate can't agree on where to meet

in situations of threats to the health of the legislature.

So they were concerned about threats to the health.

And they said you can move the legislature.

My point is that throughout the Constitution, there are no provisions about moving the executive.

The only provision about continuity of the executive says if the executive can't serve,

somebody from the legislature takes over running the executive branch.

What the people that, in Warburton v. Thomas says,

having recently shed the shackles of colonial rule, the voters, and by that they mean the framers,

feared the re-emergence of a strong executive.

And that's why they set up this system.

That's why there are four or five provisions.

Mr. Tumi, your red light is on.

Would you wrap up?

Well, I guess what I ask you to do is think about what present means.

And it means to be able to hear, to be able to speak, and to be able to mostly to vote.

Anything, the House has a million different ways they could now enable legislatures

to do all three of those things.

And that's the purpose and intent of that clause.

And that's the only clause that's before you.

The gallery clause is not before you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Ms. Dean, you have two minutes.

Thank you, Justice.

I would like to make three points.

Number one, it would be meaningless for the Constitutional provision to say the gallery would be open

if there's not representatives conducting business below.

Number two, the dictionary definition of not absent.

We do not know two things.

First of all, what dictionary the framers consulted, or at least I don't.

There's no information before the court.

And secondly, I think all of you would agree that there's, even in the 1800s, enough dictionaries out there,

we could open them up and probably find a close enough clone to the definition we wanted.

So I go back to the framers' original intent.

And I think most importantly, and now, we can call this pandemic unprecedented.

I would respectfully say that that word does not apply here, the unprecedented word.

And here is why.

If you look at data going back just 30 years, 40, 50, 60 years, we have flu to a greater or lesser degree every year.

Usually, depending on the year, more people die from the flu than have died from COVID, depending on the year.

This is not something that they didn't know about.

They've known about this for years and years and years.

We had the 1918 that I referenced, okay?

The bottom line is this is not a surprise.

This is something, this particular variant is a surprise, but not the fact that we are faced with some sort of virus

or some sort of decimating disease, if you will, that affects the public.

But in fact, that's the argument that those facts are being advanced by your opponents

and arguing that at the time this was enacted and adopted in 1784.

In fact, people had in mind the fact that there had just been a smallpox epidemic

and that, therefore, people possibly participating without being physically present

was well within the minds of the original adopters of the Constitution.

I think their arguments, when read correctly, support my position, justice.

And here is why.

The framers fought over words, over language.

And the bottom line is they chose the word they chose.

They could have chose different language.

They did not.

They were very, very clear.

And throughout the talk about, and again, you have to look at the entirety of the Constitution,

as I mentioned, and they clearly used the word present and gathering and greeting groups.

They anticipated everyone meeting together.

What about the case, line of cases that culminates in Hughes, where we say, basically,

as Justice Donovan said, the House has the ability to make its own rules.

And as long as it's a reasonable set of rules, then we're not going to second guess that.

They do have the right to make their own rules, and I conceded that before.

But they do not have a right to trample the Constitution.

And the fact that, for example, 25 states have met this way, 25 states don't have state v. ball.

New Hampshire has been very, very definite over the years that we look to our own Constitution

when it's more protective.

That might be a criminal case, but it is still the same principle.

So they get to make their own rules, but they don't get to trample the Constitution.

They don't get to pick each part of the Constitution that they want to comport with

and ignore the rest.

And the fact that our founding fathers chose to, in numerous parts of the Constitution,

to use the language they were used about meeting and groups and assembly,

I think should tell us how they felt and what they intended.

Your red light is on?

Yeah.

Thank you, Ms. Dean.

Thank you.

Thank you all, Council.

Case is submitted.

Court's adjourned.

All right.
