This is case 2020-0316, town of Lincoln versus Joseph Shenard.

Mr. Marsh, I understand you've reserved two minutes for your bottle.

That's correct.

You may proceed.

Thank you, Your Honor. Good morning to Mr. Chief Justice and members of the court.

I'm here on behalf of the client, Joseph Shenard.

Simple as possible, this case is about the both the court and the town of Lincoln

trying to take New Hampshire's junkyard statutes, RSA 23690 sequential and 23611 sequential,

and treat it as a clean yard statute and somehow apply it to my client's property.

At trial, the town basically put on the case and admitted there's running ordinance,

doesn't define junkyards, doesn't incorporate state statute,

but they wanted to call my client's property a junkyard

because the town manager went out and looked at it and determined subjectively

that he thought there were too much material personal property outside his yard area.

So there's no dispute that he's not operating a business?

No dispute. He's not operating a business. They admit that.

Yet the trial court argued that 23611 can apply to any property, not just a business.

The court essentially ignored 23611 and the statute applied to junkyards

as defined in this subdivision is a useful and necessary business.

Trial court said that doesn't matter.

How does that modify the definition in section 112?

It doesn't modify it. The definition in 112 talks about keeping and storing

of either storing and keeping, storing and selling in list-off criteria,

but then there's examples that are all businesses.

You don't dispute that the record supports that your client stored and kept materials on his parcels?

No dispute. The record shows he kept personal material on his property.

This includes several different properties which a trial town never told the court

which property had what material on it.

They collectively went and said, well, you have some of this item on that property,

some of this on this property. We're going to call it all a junkyard.

How is that relevant in terms of the statutory analysis that we need to undertake?

It's relevant and that's a statutory analysis as the town's applying it.

At trial they testified we take every lot individually and yet they just ignored it all

and said we're going to look at his six or seven parcels.

We're going to call it all a junkyard because he had personal belongings outside

and at trial he testified the majority of his personal belongings outside

were because he had two garages that were in the process of collapsing

and so he had that stored outside.

So it's the town's position that a property owner is required to obtain a license

under 236111 to store personal property on his own property?

No. What their position is is that in the ordinance

the only place the town references junkyard is in its table of uses

and it talks about a junkyard needs a special exception

in the general zone, general use zone

and it says that it lists junkyards under industrial use

and if we look at Merriam-Webster industrial use is going to be classified as a business.

Not somebody putting the personal property outside.

And the issue we had a court is the town manager just kept saying

well I went out and at some point it's my personal opinion

that now there's a quantity that we think constitutes a junkyard.

So is there no limit on the number of say bicycles

you have piled up on your property if they're all taken out of recycling?

For example, can you have a 100 foot pile of bicycles on your property

and not come within this statute?

Under Lincoln's current zoning, yes.

Should Lincoln have done what most towns do

and have a yard, a clean yard type of zoning ordinance?

Yes, they don't have it.

So why wouldn't a 100 foot pile of rusty bicycles

qualify as a junkyard under 236-112?

It's a place, I don't think there's an issue that it's a place

and those bicycles are being stored and kept.

Why isn't that the end of the inquiry?

Because that's the statute if you read the section as a whole

when you incorporate it to 236-111

and 236-112, they don't say stored inside.

It says if you have a business that's utilizing all these things

then it's a junkyard.

The town test, they want to pick and choose

how the apartment is being used.

So it's a place, it's a place, it's a place,

it's a place where you can store your stuff.

So it's a place where you can store your stuff.

So it's a place where you can store your stuff.

So it's a place where you can store your stuff.

So they can choose how they apply.

They said at trial that if this stuff was stored inside the barn

or inside even a cover and they couldn't see it,

it's no longer classified a junkyard.

That's the issue here.

That's the evil that the legislature is trying to address.

The fact that it can be seen.

If it's in a barn it cannot be seen.

And it's really not in a yard, it would be a junk barn

and the statute doesn't address junk barns.

No, the statute of 23611 sequential talks about businesses

and identifies junkyards as defined 112

as being useful businesses in New Hampshire

and the whole purpose of 23690 all the way sequential on top

is to try to keep, you know, in New Hampshire looking good,

especially against the right-of-way.

All these properties abut the LA right-of-way.

So at trial we argued that...

Between inside storage or outside storage,

the statutory scheme doesn't...

The statutory scheme does not specify.

If you were operating a junkyard business,

had it all inside, it still applies.

Those statutes still apply about what you need to do

if you're a junkyard business.

Why does it matter that it doesn't apply?

It doesn't distinguish.

This junk is outside.

It's not in a barn.

I guess what goes to is who classifies it as junk?

If you have an old Yankee who is cleaning his barn

and has stuff outside,

the town can go up and say,

oh, I'm going to nail you for a junkyard.

You can't have anything outside.

If a town wants to control what's in outdoors

or personal property at someone's house,

they need to specify that in an ordinance.

Put the taxpayer on notice

as to what's going to constitute a junkyard

and how it's going to be determined.

Let's say when we go from one town manager to the next

and they go out and take their subjective view of the property,

they decide, hey, this is a junkyard.

But if you had a little less, it's not a junkyard.

But that's what trial judges are for,

to temper such excesses.

And in this case, the trial judge took a view.

The trial judge took a view.

There was no identification of property lines.

There was no identification or proof at trial

as to whether or not a plow truck

or a boat that was parked on the property

were even registered.

All these assumptions were made.

The town's burden of proof to prove to the trial court

what exactly was on there and why it's a violation.

That never took place.

The town basically showed up at court

and said, you saw the view.

There's a lot of stuff outside.

We think it's junk.

And the town manager testified to the court that,

well, it got to a point where it's too much.

I even asked them, well, if there's a little less,

would it be a junkyard?

No, it wouldn't be.

You can't have regulations in fine and penalized taxpayers

if they don't know ahead of time

how you're going to treat something as a junkyard,

when it's going to be a junkyard, and when it's not.

And you can't ignore 23690 sequential

when you have all these properties

abutting inside the LA right-of-way.

That was just thrown out by the trial court.

What's the purpose of 236129?

That's that.

What's the purpose of the definition of junkyard

under that stat?

236129?

Yes.

Which applies to defines junkyards any place,

otherwise meaning the definition of junkyard

regardless of whether it is an establishment

or a place of business.

If I think that opens up,

because you're in the 236111 sequential,

now you're getting into the areas where the state wants

to give the towns the opportunity to go ahead

and regulate what they determine to be junkyards.

And that gives them that authority,

whereas 23690 sequential addressed with how the state's

going to handle junkyards in their LA right-of-way.

But in this case,

the problem is that Lincoln never defined junkyard

other than to say you need a special exception

if you're going to have an industrial used junkyard.

But there's nothing in the statute that says they need to do that.

I mean they were operating under the authority of 111

at sec, weren't they?

Well that's what they were arguing they were doing,

but I maintain that you cannot read

the 36111 sequential if you're not going to read

236111 where it says the state's saying

for the purpose of the definitions in this section

junkyards are a useful business in New Hampshire.

They're not saying it's a useful business

and it's useful to maintain some people's personal property

on their property.

I don't follow you on that.

What principle of statutory construction

would have the useful business clause

of 111 modify the very specific definition in 112?

Because I don't believe the definition of 112

when it lists out keep and store

to keep and store or to keep and sell in 112

and then it lists off example businesses.

I don't think that says this includes

someone who decides for the weekend

to store their personal property out front.

It says store and keep or store and sell.

Correct.

So that means you could have a business

where you're storing and selling

or you could have a private place

where you are storing and keeping.

Businesses store and keep and store and sell.

If you interpret it the way the trial court did

and the way Chief Justice is implying to interpret it

that everybody in the town of Lincoln

that has personal property stored outside

that they're keeping is classified a junkyard.

You can't have this ambiguous

objective definition of junkyard.

The only way when you read the statues as a whole

when in 23611 it comes right up and it clearly says

is a useful and necessary business

as junkyard as defined throughout 236.

It's a useful business.

So under your interpretation of 23611 and 112

is it material to your argument or our analysis

whether or not this was a business or not?

Yes, that's the primary aspect

as to whether or not you apply that statute.

And does that does...

Is there anything in the record to indicate

did your client ever buy any of this stuff

or ever sell any of this stuff?

Would that turn him into a business

subject to regulation of your theory?

No, under spew to that trial

this was just his personal property.

He never bought any of it?

I'm sure he bought, you know,

his possessions at home.

Presumably he didn't steal it.

Yeah, I mean he owns most of it.

He had one of the properties had two tenants on it

and had some of their personal property outside.

As far as the court was concerned,

that didn't matter.

This is just all stuff outside,

so it's all junkyard.

But the issue is that if you're going to

interpret it the way the court did here

then anyone that stores personal property

outside the residence in Lincoln

can be considered a junkyard

because it's personal property.

It doesn't matter.

The only logical way for me to read the statute

with given 23611 is that this applies to businesses.

So if he never...

If he bought some of that material,

presumably he did,

or if he sold some of the material

that he had stored there,

that doesn't bring him within

the orbit of the statute as you interpret it.

Why not?

No, no, I mean I actually have

three lawnmowers at my house.

I'm going to sell two of them.

They're all stored outside.

If you're going to interpret it that way

then my yard's a junkyard

because I have three lawnmowers parked outside

and I'm going to sell two.

It comes down to whether or not it's a business

and the town can see the trial.

My client does not run a business there.

It's his residential property

and all his personal belongings.

And section 114

requires the application

for a license for a business.

Correct.

Correct.

And so with that

I'll go ahead and sit down

giving the yellow light and move on.

Thank you very much.

Good morning.

My name's Peter Mallea.

I represent the town of Lincoln.

I waive the three-minute non-questioning period.

Property ad issue

is in the town's appendix at page 7

which was the town's exhibit one at trial.

It's tax map 107.

There are two junkyards really

ad issue in this case.

One is on Chinards,

what we call the house lot,

which is where he lives.

And the other one is across the street

from the house lot

and down the street a little bit.

There are three contiguous lots on Route 3

and throughout the course of these proceedings

we referred to them as the Route 3,

the Route 3 lots.

There's a junkyard on the house.

The house lot is one.

The three lots across the street

are the Route 3 lots.

So there's a property owner in Lincoln

who stores private property

on his own property

required to obtain a license under 236-114.

No.

No.

If somebody wants to operate it...

It makes it a junkyard.

Excuse me?

What makes it a junkyard?

Well,

the town brought this lawsuit

pursuant to 236-112, that definition.

The town sought a mandatory injunction

pursuant to 236-128.

And 112 has a finite list of items.

Correct.

Old scrap copper brass,

rope wreck motor vehicles.

So a tall pile of bicycles

doesn't fit that definition, correct?

Under Judge Bassett's example earlier,

if it was a 100, whatever,

100-foot-tall pile of bicycles,

maybe there would have been enough scrap metal

in there to qualify under 112.

Again, it is somewhat subjective.

It could present a nuisance

apart from being a junkyard.

Correct.

The town could seek to abate a nuisance

without calling it a junkyard.

Correct.

Yes.

On the point of enforcement,

in the trial transcript,

there was this exchange between

Attorney Marshall and the town manager,

Attorney Marshall asked,

so a landowner in Lincoln doesn't know

when he's going to be considered a junkyard

until you come out and say,

you know, in my opinion,

you've got to the quantity

where you're a junkyard.

And the answer is, yeah,

I think that's fair.

Is that the way the statute works?

It is somewhat subjective.

I mean, 236 colon 112

doesn't contain a square footage requirement.

It doesn't contain a weight requirement.

It doesn't require the town to take an inventory

of every single piece of junk.

It has a long list of items,

and if they accumulate to such a degree

as it becomes excessive

in the opinion of the town's

enforcement official,

then the town can charge a junkyard violation.

And that subjects the property owner

to a violation level of fence

and $50 a day fine.

Well, first of all, subjects the property owner

to a visit from the town manager

or the co-enforcement officer,

and as the town manager testified

in his seven and a half years of being town manager,

in the few times that he's had occasion

to address junkyard violations,

he's picked up the phone and the yards have been cleaned up.

And Mr. Shenard's property was already

sort of in the process

of being prosecuted by the town of Lincoln

a couple of years before Mr. Burbank

arrived as town manager.

So for 10 years it has been,

and throughout Mr. Burbank's seven and a half years,

Mr. Shenard's property has been

an ongoing junkyard case.

In fact, it was a case Mr. Burbank

testified to before this one.

An out-of-court settlement

did not result in the cleanup,

and this case had to be filed.

Frequently the town receives complaints

from the motel across the street

from Mr. Shenard's house lot on Liberty Lodging.

In fact, one of the complaints

from that motel precipitated

the filing of this lawsuit.

Their guests look out onto Mr. Shenard's

junkyard at his house lot,

and the town has

worked hard to try to help Mr. Shenard

clean up and it hasn't happened,

so that's what brings us here today.

So the town brought,

Shenard testified that all four lots are his,

all the junk is his.

He never alleged that it belonged to anyone else.

The judge took a view.

The judge walked the house lot,

walked the root three lots across the street,

found in his decision

that he found almost every single item

described in 236.112

strewn across the house lot

and strewn across the root three lots

across the street from the house lot.

And he

meticulously went through the rest

of the local

licensing regulations.

So 236, 90 to 110

that's the

statutory subdivision pertaining to junkyards

which allows the Department of Transportation

to regulate business junkyards

within 1,000 feet of the highway system.

And then 111 to 129

is often called the local

licensing provision because it gives the governing body

the authority to regulate

a much larger class

of junkyards. They don't have to be

businesses, they don't have to be located

within 1,000 feet of the highway system.

And why does Section 114

reference a license

for a business?

Section 114, why does it

reference the need

to get a license for the business

of the junkyard?

Well, I guess the fact of the matter is

most of the junkyard

prosecutions are brought against

businesses

and those businesses need licenses.

I don't think there's anything that would have prohibited Mr.

Johnson from applying for a license

if he wanted to try to get his junkyard

licensed but he didn't.

Right, but if it's just

personal property

why would an individual

apply for a business license

to store the lawnmowers

outside?

He's storing an excessive amount

of items as defined in

112. So if he wants to keep

that excessive amount

of storage then he needs to obtain

a certificate of approved location.

So a license for storage

not for...

Why wouldn't a special exception do it?

Well, that's the special exception

when we talk about the special exception

we move over to the town's zoning ordinance.

So separately the town

asked for reimbursement of

costs and attorneys fees under

RSA 676-117.

If the town had not included that

request we would only be dealing with

the state statute but the town

asked for reimbursement of costs and fees

under 676-117.

If under that statute a municipality

successfully brings an injunction

action to

stop a violation of the town's

zoning ordinance then a town

is entitled to and

must receive I believe

reimbursement of costs and fees.

Is there any precedent for applying

the 676-117

attorneys fees provision

to other statutory

enforcement actions?

Yes because 676-117 says

that

if the town is the prevailing

party in any legal action brought

to enforce by way of injunctive

relief as provided in

676... Have we ever applied that

to an injunction

case brought under a different

statute not

the zoning statutes?

Have you ever applied it using the words

or otherwise is what you're asking

a different statutory scheme?

Not to my knowledge

so if we bring an injunction under

676-15 or otherwise

the or otherwise applies to us

because we brought an injunction pursuant to

236-128

any local ordinance

code or so if we bring an injunction

and we prevail and we prove

that there was a violation of the town's

zoning ordinance then the town should

reimburse its costs and fees. Judge McLeod

at first said

the town is not entitled

to reimbursement of costs and fees because

the town didn't let violation of the zoning

ordinance. Motion for reconsideration

pointed out that count 3 was entitled

zoning ordinance. Count 3 said

junkyards are only allowed in the general

use district with a special exception.

Judge Reconsidered agreed that we

had made that argument

but still declined

toward the town reimbursement of costs

and fees. So on that point

you are seeking costs and fees

for violation of the zoning ordinance

correct

okay where in the record

before us is the zoning ordinance?

The zoning ordinance

is one of the town's exhibits

which

in which the

table of uses was presented and the town's

planning director testified at the table.

The exhibits aren't actually

before this court not I could find

in the. Well then in the transcript

the town's planning director testified

to the town's zoning ordinance.

My question is you want us to

find that you're entitled to attorney's fees

for violation of the zoning ordinance.

Where is the zoning ordinance in the record?

It's in the transcript

if the town's

planning director testified. There is a testimony

about it. Correct and

we put in exhibits through her

and I thought those exhibits had come up to you.

One of the exhibits was the land use

table. In Lincoln

a junkyard is only permitted

in the general use district where these properties are located

with a special exception.

He doesn't have one so we alleged that's a violation

of the town's zoning ordinance.

Judge McLeod said the problem is

the Lincoln's zoning ordinance doesn't define

junkyard and he thought it was inappropriate

for the town's staff to use

the statutory definition of junkyard

236-112. He thought

dictionary definition should be used.

His dictionary definition said usually

resailable junk.

He said,

under the dictionary definition

I can't find that

violated the town's zoning ordinance so the town doesn't

get reimbursed costs and fees.

I think it's reasonable for the town to use

236-112 because I know

in the past you've held that

when a term is not defined the dictionary

definition should be used as a guide

not should be used period

as a guide leads me to believe that

other definitions can be used

as well as a guide including

236-112 which is the definition

being used in this case

to seek the injunction.

Can you address attorney Marshall's

argument on the statutory construction

issue in the reference to useful

and necessary business

in section 111?

I think

correct me if I'm wrong but what he's referring to

I think the Shenard argued that

the court should not have applied 236-112.

There's a different definition of junkyard

in the department of transportation

subdivision it's at 236-91

and it says that the junkyard

has to be a place of business

and Shenard argued

that because his junkyard

is located within a thousand feet

of the state highway system

the court should have used the definition in 236-91.

Well as I understand

it's slightly different

there are two regimes the DOT regime

and the local regime and under the local regime

in the purpose section it does make reference

to a useful

and ordinary and necessary

business as junkyards and does that

should that

affect our

statutory analysis?

No because

236-112 controls

and 236-112 allows

the governing body to regulate

junkyards that are used

for storing and selling junk

or junkyards that are used for storing

and keeping junk that's what we have here.

So to conclude

I guess my argument on costs

and fees

I thought it was appropriate to use

236-112 as a guide

and I think it's consistent with the dictionary definition

that Judge McLeod came up with

because his definition is usually

resaleable junk

236-112 is junk

that is used for

storing and keeping or storing and selling

so kind of usually resaleable

applies to 112 as well

and the dictionary definition was closer

to the definition in

36-91

regardless of

how you come out on whether or not

the town should be reimbursed for costs and fees

I think definitely Judge McLeod's

decision in relation to the junkyard

should be affirmed

the injunction should be upheld

What about

Mr. Marshall's argument about the

various parcels and that

it's a different analysis because

there's a parcel across the street

and then we have three separate parcels

on route 3

Is that material to our analysis?

No, primarily because the judge

talked off four parcels

and he saw the junk

and we submitted many many pictures of the junk as well

but most importantly he saw the junk

If you look at the

this is exhibit one in our appendix

these are the lots across the street

that's the house lot

when we originally filed the lawsuit

we found most of these lots going all the way up this

strip here except for one

we alleged that the junkyard was on all of them

which it was at the time

by the time we got to trial he had in fact

cleaned up these lots directly across the street

from his house

so the junkyard has now been

confined to these three lots

and that lot

and again the judge walked the lots

and he was pretty clear in his order

that he saw almost all of those items

in 236-112

which is very much inconsistent with the testimony

that the Chief Justice read

that you know it when you see it

and if it's three lawn mowers

that's not a problem but if it's 10

maybe you're getting close and then if it's 30

whoa you're now violating

there's no better guidance than that

that's correct and if

somebody like Mr. Shinara disagrees

with a local municipal

enforcement agents decision

then as you said that's why we have judges

there is notice provisions

that him would note

yes absolutely

any further questions

thank you

extremely brief

one to correct one thing

there was a trial

the transcript is clear there was a prior hotel owner

that had one complaint

the current owner at the time of trial had no complaints

same hotel

complaints of my client's property

the real issue

when you get down

aside from all the legal arguments we're making

is that

at trial the time manager

repeatedly said

we don't regulate what personal property

anybody can put outside their house

whether it's front yard or side yard

and when I specifically asked them

if no one could see the property

if it was in a cover it

behind a fence would it be a junkyard

no we wouldn't consider it a junkyard

you can't

town can't

use and pick and twist the state

statute about junkyards

it either follows the state statute

we maintain is clear

based on businesses of junkyards

if they want to keep up someone's property

the residential property

be clean in the yard area

have ordinances vote on them in town

to restrict what people can store outside

if it's an eyesore

again the town could

enforce it against it as a nuisance

correct many towns do

bring a nuisance action

this was improper

isn't that concern mitigated by the fact that we have a view here

the judge saw

what he saw

no because the judge came out

wasn't aware of where any property lines were

it was a quick walk

we went around the house

and then along the road in front of the other properties

the judge couldn't tell

whether the old boat's registered

couldn't tell if that old truck

that he uses the plower's yard is registered

none of that was addressed

which if you were going to come under the statute

and you're going to say there's X number

of unregistered vehicles

you got to prove that to the court

you just walk through and make assumptions

the view is just limited to show

here's the stuff

and the view was not limited to

what could be seen from the

road

correct and the final

issue is that Mr. Srinard

described during the view

that this stuff would be in those two barns

but the roof collapsed in

thank you

thank you very much

thank you very much
