This case, 2020, 0521, Louise Spencer versus Governor, State of New Hampshire.

Whenever you're ready.

Thank you.

Good morning.

May it please the court.

My name is Catherine Anthony.

I represent Louise Spencer, the petitioner appellant in this case.

I would like to reserve two minutes.

Yeah.

Thank you.

This case is about fundamental principles of New Hampshire law and government.

And those principles are that officers of the government are at all times supposed to be

accountable to the public.

And that in furtherance of that principle, the government should be open, accessible,

accountable, and responsive.

And that is achieved through part one article eight of the Constitution, the mandate that

access to records should not be unreasonable or restricted.

We believe that our paper set forth the reason that Chapter 21A, the right to no statute, should

apply to the governor's office.

And so I'd like to focus my time today on the constitutional mandate about not

reasonably restricting access to records.

Before you go there, 901A applies to the governor's office in your view as an agency

of the government under which section?

We believe that it applies, that the governor falls within the definition of a public

agency to which public records aspects of the statute apply.

So you are not distinguishing between, for example, the Department of Environmental Services,

which is an agency established by the legislature, versus the governor's office,

which is a constitutional office, not established by the legislature.

Well, the statute applies to public agencies which are defined to include offices of the

government.

It says office, right?

Correct within the definition of a public agency.

So are you not going to address that?

I can tell that my colleague would like to hear more about that.

But this is a, let me ask the ultimate question.

This is a very important case.

Do we have a sufficient record to decide what you're asking us to decide?

I think that this court has the authority and the ability to decide that on the facts

and the record of this case that the various aspects of the relief that the petitioner

is seeking that the governor's records retention and disposal policy is unreasonable

as a matter of law.

Is that really raised?

Now that we're going to parse this out.

Is that raised?

Is that preserved anywhere?

We do believe that we raised that.

It was the petition pointed out that the policy undermines the principles of Part 1 Article 8.

We also argued in our briefing that it rendered the search in this case unreasonable.

And in order to reach the issue of the search, it's necessary to consider the aspects of the policy.

How can we decide that?

Isn't that well beyond the expertise of appellate judges?

Well, this court, the standard to apply here under the constitutionalist is one of reasonableness.

And I believe that that is a standard that courts do and can apply.

Also, I believe that this court just last term, the Burt versus Speaker case did reiterate that it is an obligation of this court to review the constitutionality of actions taken by government officers.

Can you dispute the fact that the governor's entitled to an executive privilege or a deliberative process privilege?

Well, I do believe that with respect to the deliberative process privilege, the trial court's opinion, the cases cited do establish that that is supposed to be an internal privilege.

And the records that issue in this case are not internal communication.

So with respect to the deliberative executive privilege, which could be interpreted to be a broader privilege, that privilege is considered to apply to...

I don't believe the exact parameters of that privilege in New Hampshire law have been decided by this court.

But the cases that have addressed it, both in New Hampshire and elsewhere, do recognize it as protecting the governor, the executive's ability to have candid objective advice of close advisors and assistants.

Again, we think that this case is outside of the scope of that privilege, which should be...

Well, because, again, that privilege has been interpreted to apply to close advisors and assistants to inform the governor in his decision-making process and the functions of his office.

And I think that if you...

Correct. And I do think that there is a question as to who should count as a close advisor.

We think that this case where the records are for communications between...

So, first of all, the privilege is understood to apply to communications between the governor himself and close advisors.

It's also understood to protect certain communications made by his own close advisors, even if he's not a party to them.

To whom? To everyone?

That would be a petitioner's position, that it should not be to everyone.

It should be, again, to other close advisors who are advising them in gathering information to lay to the governor.

I have the state of New Hampshire. It calls the governor of the state of Vermont on an issue of common interest.

That's not within the executive privilege?

I think that that is a question that...

I do think that there are different degrees. I think that there are different levels to this.

I think in this case, following the trial court and the governor's position in this case on how broadly the executive privilege should extend.

And in this case, it was communications with a partisan organization with its own interests.

That is, I think, would not typically be considered candid objective advice.

You're talking about the 11, right? I'm starting in the rub.

The 11 communications?

Correct.

Those are the communications that we know exist.

Any other communications that might exist would be similar in character to those.

So these communications were generated by someone within the governor's circle, arguably within executive privilege, correct?

The individuals who were engaging in communications, their own communications with the governor would be within that circle.

What are the third parties?

Well, the third parties in this case, we believe that it's the specific nature of those parties.

I think following the argument through to its logical conclusion, the privilege under the position taken by the government and the trial court in this case,

it could apply to a lobbyist pushing an agenda, a businessman with interests in the state.

That's all true. And I'm going to just cut you off because I agree that could be a parade of ridiculous outcomes.

But aren't you asking us, on the other hand, to, to its logical conclusion,

evade the very thought process of the governor and his close associates?

Well, the Superior Court in the Hessin case did discuss the parameters of the executive privilege and talked about how it should be a functional analysis of the needs of the governor to do his job.

I think petitioner's position would be that the governor does not need to engage in secretive communications with partisan operatives to do it.

Who are we to say? Who are we to say? Could the governor make that call?

Well, I think that Part 1 Article 8 and its grounding in the principle that the governor is accountable to the people,

that is the authority by which this court can decide. I don't think this court has to decide the exact parameters of exactly how broad that circle will be.

Can you clarify for me, as I understand it, Mr. Formella, when he was counseled to the governor, said there are no emails that are responsive to this request.

They've been destroyed. We've got this policy. If there were any, there aren't any.

But we've got these 11 that were communications between age to the governor and an outside third party.

We're talking about 11 emails. Is that right?

Well, we're talking about those 11 emails that we know about.

Petitioner also takes the position that to the extent there are deleted emails that could be recovered,

that were also responsive to her right to know request, that those would also be swept in the scope.

But I believe those would be similar in character.

But the 11 are communications from within the governor's office to someone out in the rest of the world.

Is that your understanding?

That is my understanding, correct.

And the other, and those emails were provided to the trial court, but they aren't part of the record before us. Is that right?

I believe that is my understanding. They were provided to the trial court for in-camera review,

but Petitioner did not have an opportunity to review them or any Von Index.

They were not part of the record.

What I meant about the record, we're going to draw a line there. We need to know about around what we are drawing lines.

Yes, Your Honor. And I do believe that the very nature of these records, as they are described in the record that we do have,

which is in the turn of formalis affidavit describing what those emails are,

I don't believe that we need to see the exact details of those communications to understand that that should,

that extends well beyond the bounds of what the executive privilege is generally understood to protect.

Do I understand that both the deliberative process privilege and the executive privilege,

your view is that that would be part of the analysis under either the Constitution or 91A,

that just saying there's this presumptive openness under 91A or the Constitution just gets us into an analysis

of whether these emails fall within the scope of those privileges. Is that right?

That is correct. I believe under either the statute or the constitutional provision.

In either case it is the governor, the party invoking the privilege whose burden it is to establish that it applies.

And we've never really explicitly addressed the scope of either of those privileges?

Not to my knowledge.

Speaking to those 11 emails, I think we also have the other question in this case of whether or not there are governmental records in the first place.

This court, again to my knowledge, has not addressed the exact definition of governmental records under the statute,

which I believe the governor's office agrees is, even if the statute doesn't apply,

that that definition is informative to the constitutional analysis as well.

Does your wife agree with that? That it would be the same definition under the statute as under the Constitution?

I think that under the facts of this case, that definition is sufficient to apply.

I don't know if there might be other definitions, broader definitions that might apply under the Constitution,

but I think at a minimum the statutory definition should certainly apply.

And it makes no difference that these emails were taken from the AIDS private email accounts as opposed to their government email accounts?

No, and I don't think that that's a dispute in this case.

The governor's office agreed, and in fact, without being specifically asked in the right to request,

did go out and gather those emails in the first place,

acknowledging that the location of the emails is not dispositive as to their character as governmental or non-governmental records.

And what we do have here is a trial court has laid down this time-based boundary between before veto and after veto

to determine whether or not these are governmental records.

So the trial court, based on the record we have, these are described, all of the emails are described similarly,

that they're emails with these external parties related to the governor's veto and resulting veto message.

And so, given that they were all described fairly similarly, this time-based distinction,

the only way to reconcile that emails before the veto are governmental records,

emails after the veto are non-governmental records,

is to assume that the trial court was defining official function.

I should take a step back.

The definition being that governmental records consist of records created or maintained in furtherance of official function.

So if these were all, if the same type of email before the veto was in furtherance of an official function,

but the same type of email after the veto were not,

the only way to reconcile that is to assume the trial court decided that the official function was limited to the actual act of the veto itself.

And why is that wrong?

Well, Petitioner, I think that the statute and the constitutional provision are supposed to be under the court's decisions,

construed broadly in favor of transparency and to limit the definition of governmental records

and to limit the definition of an official function to only something that is specifically enumerated in the Constitution is an overly narrow reading.

Here we have the governor's, for example, communications director,

who was directly engaged in the messaging strategy to the public after the veto was signed.

It's difficult to understand how that's not part of his official function as a public employee.

I believe that it could, Your Honor, subject to the privileges and exemptions that would otherwise apply.

How does that not pull the off?

Well, I think that the office has a constitutional obligation to be open and transparent.

There are, as I just alluded to, there are privileges and exemptions that could apply conceivably.

We don't believe they apply in this case, but we believe that they could.

There are certainly cases in which privileges and exemptions could rightfully apply to the records requested.

I just want to clarify, your request here isn't for internal emails between the governor and his advisors or between advisors.

This is limited to communications between someone in the governor's office and external parties. Is that right?

That is correct, Your Honor.

External parties to the government or external parties from the governor's office?

For example, Speaker of the House, an agency commissioner?

Yes, Your Honor. In this case, it was external to the government entirely.

And I see that my time has expired. Thank you.

Thank you. You still have two minutes.

Thank you very much.

Ms. Ramsey?

Good morning, Justice.

If it pleased the court, I'm Jennifer Ramsey with the Attorney General's office, and I'm representing the governor's office today.

I'll take questions at any time.

Is it reasonable under the New Hampshire Constitution for there to be a policy in place for emails that should be retained?

No longer for 30 days?

No longer than 30 days?

I see no problem with the governor's document retention and disposal policy.

The policy which the governor voluntarily provided in response to the briefing in this case essentially requires employees to keep their email boxes cleaned out and keep their desktops clean and process things in a timely fashion.

Is that driven by technology or is that driven by a policy decision that you should clean out your emails after 30 days?

I have not gone behind the policy itself to ask the governor's office why they adopted the policy that they adopted.

I know that the policy expresses that it's in the interest of government efficiency, and there is evidence in the record that there is a size limitation on email boxes, for example.

So under the Constitution, would it be allowable and reasonable for all written communications to be shredded upon receipt or all emails to be deleted on receipt?

It might technically be, but it would be a really odd policy because it would cripple the ability of the office to function.

So you have built in practical concern with any policy that was too extreme, and this policy seems to be working for the governor's office so far as I know.

Is this issue really before us? I'll be quiet.

No, that's fine. The issue being whether the policy itself is reasonable in and of itself, I don't believe that was raised below, Your Honor.

I think that's an argument that's been raised now.

Do you agree that it's undisputed that emails from a AIDS private email account can in fact be governmental records? Is that something you agree to?

I think they could be, but you need to look at a functional approach.

You and Attorney Anthony said that you didn't think that we disputed that or that it was relevant that these emails were in personal email accounts.

We do contend that that is an important fact. It's not dispositive.

If you had a state employee trying to circumvent the right to no law by utilizing a personal email account, that's not just in and of itself protected records.

But where here, there is a clear reason why these employees are using their personal email accounts to segregate their personal political records.

How can we decide whether these emails fall within either of the two privileges we're discussing if we never see them and we don't have an understanding of what's in those emails?

So Justice, that's it. I did not realize until I was sitting here just now that you all do not have the emails. That's a surprise to me.

And if the court wishes to review them in camera, I would be happy to supplement the record to provide them.

And I don't know if Attorney Anthony would agree to that or not.

Thank you.

Yes.

So I'd be happy to do that. Judge Kissinger reviewed the emails in connection with his decision.

I would ask that there be provisions to prevent any objection to that. Just as bad.

No.

All right.

We'll do that.

Please do.

Yeah, we will.

So Justice Hicks, you asked how this court, who we are to say how this court could make a decision in the first instance.

I would refer the court to a case that cited in the House in the opinion of its state ex rel Dan versus tapped, which is a 2006 Ohio case.

In that case, the court did actually give deference in the first instance of the executive's legal counsel in making that determination in the first instance to whether or not the privilege applies.

That's only apart from whether the legal case that was involved in the initial communication was just correct. It's just the after the fact legal counsel's advice or opinion that this was privileged.

You're correct.

Right.

Yep.

Yep.

In the face of the wording of 91A does why doesn't the governor's office fall within the scope of an agency given definition in the statute?

So the

It says an office.

It does say an office. It says an agency. I would say to the court that those terms do not necessarily answer the question.

They are very generic terms. Not every office is an office. It's an office that this building is an office of the state, but it is not subject to the right to know law.

I think that the court in deciding that needs to think about the larger constitutional issues and separation of powers that are presented and decide whether the governor's office should be subject to the right to know law.

Given that the law does not contain an exact explicitly an executive privilege defines government records in a way that is so broad that it would gather in documents that are subject to the executive privilege.

And that the separation of powers principles that protect this court from having to know requests sent to it, as well as the legislature having right to know requests into it, although the legislature chooses to apply the law itself.

This court has said that's a non-justice question.

How much of the executive branch would be exempt from the right to know statute beyond the governor's office?

Anything that the legislature has created with the delegation of authority, the legislature can regulate via the right to know law.

The governor and his personal staff should be excluded because otherwise you are carrying an inherent function of the executive in New Hampshire.

RSA 21G identifies the constitutional offices of the executive branch as the office of the governor, the department of state, the state treasury.

Are all of those exempt as well from 91A because they're constitutional offices?

It's an interesting question that I hope this court will not have to deal with anytime soon.

Those offices voluntarily comply with the right to know law.

None of those constitutional officers like the secretary of state or the treasurer, to my knowledge, have the equivalent of a personal staff for their office.

When the legislature is creating all kinds of regulations about what happens within the secretary of state's office, just like in the executive branch where they create other agencies below the governor, for the governor to administer.

I don't believe that those agencies are likely to be other than at the chief executive himself subject to the same treatment as the governor's office.

But if that question were to come before this court, that the court would need to do the same kind of a rational analysis to decide.

What if we don't agree with you?

Do you agree that the executive privilege would not apply to any communications with parties outside the government?

I do not.

The intersealed case, the federal case answered that question.

It says that in order for advisors to do their job, they sometimes have to gather information from outside sources.

And to the extent that we're looking functionally at what those advisors are doing, that that is also subsumed within the executive privilege.

So if a lobbyist reaches out, sends an email to the governor's aides, that categorically is not open to the public under either the Constitution or 91A from your perspective?

No.

The flip side of the question, which is whether or not there's sort of a lobbyist privilege, would be that I think that that would go too far.

That what was happening was an unsolicited solicitation by a lobbyist to the governor's office that didn't want any part of the governor's deliberative process or his aides advisory work.

Then that lobbyist's communication, the law of the end of the advisor unsolicited would not be privileged.

So I thought you were taking the position that only the materials before the veto could have been part of his decision process.

So those afterwards would not be part of the decision process.

So actually in the corporal law, we took the position that all of the 11 emails were not governmental records because they do not pertain to the employees engaging in their official functions.

Obviously you have not seen them, but when you see them, I hope that you will come to the same conclusion.

Judge Kissinger gave the benefit of the doubt to his Spencer in treating the pre-decisional emails as possibly related to the veto.

And so analyzed those with respect to executive privilege.

But I think this court kind of firm the trial court on either basis, either because none of the emails are governmental records or because they are subject to executive privilege, frankly, in their entirety.

So the two privileges we're talking about, you agree that we've never really addressed the issue of the existence or the scope of either the deliberative process privilege or the executive privilege?

I haven't found any cases where you've done so, Justice.

So do we have to do that in this case?

You can do that in this case.

Do we have to?

Not if we find that the governor's office, 99A doesn't apply to the governor's office.

In that case, we don't have to reach that decision.

Well, the records are also requested under the Constitution directly.

And the governor acknowledges his obligation to provide records directly under the Constitution.

So yes, Justice Bassett, I do think that this is the appropriate opportunity for you to explain this court's view.

So even if we reject the notion that 99A applies to the governor under the governor's theory of this case,

we have to look at both the deliberative process privilege and the executive privilege to determine whether these emails fall within it.

Is that true?

I think that's right.

Part of the reason I say that is because subsisting within that idea of executive privilege is the idea that things that are within executive privilege sometimes are treated not as government records at all, depending upon the statute.

So for example, with respect to FOIA, the entire president and his personal staff are just exempt from FOIA, and that's kind of treated as outside the scope of the statute because executive privilege would likely apply to everything within that office.

And we'd have to look at the language of our state constitutional provision.

Yes, which requires that the governor provide reasonable access to governmental records.

And we'd have to define governmental records under our state constitution.

Yes, you did.

And perhaps someday accountability. What does that mean?

Oh goodness, I don't know.

Even it's a tall order, so it seems.

Do you agree that here what is at issue here, the 11 emails, are all communications with some external person from the governor's office?

And there is not a pending request for materials that involve direct communications between the governor and his advisors or between advisors?

Is that your understanding?

It is.

We have talked a whole lot about the scope of the reasonableness of the search, and I don't know if the court has questions about that.

But I was prepared to talk just a little bit about the shifting of the burden of proof under ATV Watch because I know that that's something that was raised in the briefs.

I believe that it's not correct, as is suggested, that the governor has not met his burden of proof to demonstrate that he conducted a reasonable search.

And I think the questioning earlier indicates to me that you all understand that the attorney for Miller, short of actually searching back the case, has satisfied himself as thoroughly as he can.

That there never were any government-related or government-generated emails.

Well, you say that there never were.

He assured himself that there never were, or did he assure himself that at the time he made the request there were not?

It seems very different.

I understand your question.

I think he assured himself that no employee had ever created such an email and then deleted one.

Because that was addressed in his affidavit.

They reached out to attorneys to make sure that there wouldn't ever have been anything on government servers.

The only way he can go first to verify that would be to actually look at the back uptakes.

So he interviewed staff.

He did.

Confirmation to the best of their recollection.

Yep.

Correct.

Was there any expert testimony on what might be a reasonable search or an unreasonable search like there is in the civil litigation era?

No, we didn't do a factual hearing at all.

This case was decided on cross motions for summary judgment.

And I don't believe that it's an appropriate argument to say that it needs to be remanded to the trial court for additional fact-finding since there was no discovery pending and there was no motion for continuance.

I think the parties determined to submit this to Judge Kissinger on cross motions for summary judgment.

He made the rulings on what is essentially an undisputed record.

Any minor factual disputes are not really material to the case.

And so I believe that this case is appropriate for this court to decide as a matter of law.

And then I would request that you affirm Judge Kissinger's decision because I think he got it right.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you.

Attorney Anthony.

Thank you, Your Honor.

It's just a few brief points in response to Attorney Ramsey.

I believe that with respect to the question of the search and the policy and whether the policy is before this court, I think that the question of whether the policy was reasonable and unreasonably restricted access is inexplicably intertwined with whether or not the search here was reasonable.

Just because of the extreme nature of the policy, the 30-day disposal policy has written 30 days as a cap.

The way that I've read the policy, something could be deleted immediately after it was created.

We think that under the circumstances and that a search that doesn't include records where there's a plausible reason to believe that some might have existed before the request was made, that that search is inadequate as a matter of law.

We believe that we argued at the trial court that we believe that the trial court could find the search inadequate as a matter of law for that reason, but in alternative we believe that further factual development was necessary.

And that's sort of where we are procedurally here.

With respect to Attorney Formella's affidavits on the adequacy of his search, I do believe that there are some statements he made that could be understood to say that he'd ask certain members of the staff whether any records had been created on governmental accounts.

But the way that I had read the affidavits, I believe that there's a plausible reason that that question was not necessarily unclear whether that question was asked of all staff.

I do believe that there is an ambiguity there and where you have other inferences in Petitioner's favor that responsive records might have existed.

There's a clear recollection of the conversation with Attorney Formella in which she remembers him saying that he wasn't surprised that responsive records no longer existed on government accounts because of the policy, the ongoing position of the government's office that there's no obligation to search for deleted records.

And then also the inference that those communications might have existed at one point because we have communications on personal email accounts about a subject matter is that Petitioner expected the parties might have been talking about

taking the inference in the light most favorable to Petitioner, there is a plausible inference that there were also communications between these parties on official accounts at one point as well and by operation of this policy those were deleted.

So yes.

So I think that as your honor stated this is an important case and I think that it for many aspects here on the bounds of reasonableness and the governor's actions and we do believe that part one article eight

requires construing all these things in favor of transparency and accountability.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you.

Okay, submitted and congratulations to you both for a great presentation.

Thank you.

Your honor.
