Good afternoon. The matter before the court is PPI Enterprises LLC versus the town of Wyndham.

This is a consolidated appeal. The docket numbers are 2020-0249 and 2020-0250.

The appellant PPI is represented by John Cronin.

The town of Wyndham is represented by Bernard Campbell for the Planning Board and Christopher Bolt for the Zoning Board of Adjustment.

Mr. Cronin, I understand you've reserved two minutes for rebuttal.

That's correct, Your Honor.

And then the town of Wyndham, I understand Mr. Campbell will take 10 minutes. Mr. Bolt will take five minutes.

Is that correct?

That is correct, Your Honor.

For the record, Justice Bassett is participating in this appeal. He's not present with us, but he will be reviewing the recording of this proceeding.

So with that, Mr. Cronin, we welcome your argument.

Please, the Chief Justice and members of the court for the record, John Cronin representing PPI Enterprises in this particular appeal.

Initially, I'd like to congratulate the Chief Justice and welcome to the court.

So, looking forward to your tenure.

With respect to this case, I think it sets a prime example of why we don't elect judges.

This case, as you go through the history and you look at it, if one thing is clear, the Planning Board, like so many that run for office, lose their way and lose sight of their duty.

And I think what's telling on the June 5th, 2019 final hearing, the 7th, I believe of the public hearings over a course of 13 months.

Member rounds articulates his position that our job is to do what the residents want us to do and hold up the integrity of the Planning Board.

Well, that's the perfect wrong answer.

The job of the Planning Board is to assist applicants to navigate the very complex planning regulations to get their projects approved.

But Mr. Cronin, there's no question that the Planning Board was in error in this case. The ZBA said so.

That is true, Your Honor.

And that leads us to what looks like is a pretty complex process with a lot of different appeals.

As the court knows when you are proceeding with a Planning Board appeal at the local level, and I know Justice Hicks, you've had the joy of sitting on the trial court and listening to your fair share or more than your fair share of land use appeals.

And I know other members of the court have been involved in land use matters from the other side of the bench.

But you have a duty to do a cross appeal to the ZBA on matters relative to the zoning ordinance and then appeal any issues with respect to the planning regulations to the Superior Court.

And that's what was done here.

Attorney Cronin, why didn't you take two appeals at once?

I mean, you make the point, your brief with respect to the zoning board's lack of an authority to remand that it would have divested the Superior Court of Jurisdiction on appeal.

Noting that the Board of Adjustment has the initial duty to review anything under its jurisdiction. Why did you take the two appeals at the same time?

Because if I did that with the talents of Attorney Campbell and Attorney Bolt, they would have quickly pointed out that I didn't follow the proper procedural course and go to the ZBA on matters relative to the zoning ordinance.

The case likely would have been dismissed and someone could have accused me of committing malpractice.

I think with respect to that issue, that determination, based on the enabling and preliminary statement in the ordinance, had to go to the ZBA.

And we did in fact take that appeal up to the Superior Court after it was ripe.

I guess, as I read the statute of contemplates, go to the ZBA first, and then once that, once those issues have been decided, then you get an appeal to the Superior Court on all issues arising out of the planning board.

And I think that would have, if that reading in the statute is correct, I think there's an initial question about jurisdiction on the planning board appeal, but that would have streamlined things a bit.

I think you're reading the statute correctly, but I think it's out of context as it applies to this case. And I'll tell you why.

When we go into the planning board with an application, you have to submit a formal application that meets a checklist.

All the towns have one. It asks for drainage reports, plans of particular size and shape with different items on it, whether it's the elevations, the grades, and all the things that you would expect a planning board to review in their process.

They will not accept that application if there are any outstanding zoning issues. They say, we're not going to exert our effort until you get through the zoning board and get what you need for relief.

In this case, we didn't need any relief from the zoning board because this use, the proposed storage facility is allowed in the table of uses in the ordinance.

So the only thing that we had to navigate at the outset were the planning regulations. So there was no need to go there first.

The only reason we had to go to the ZBA was based on the decision of the planning board at the end of the road.

And I don't think we had an option. At least I'm not aware of any option to avoid that and go directly to the court.

So the situation that you're in now is that the matter has been remanded to the planning board so that it can complete its work on site plan approval. Is that correct?

That's correct. That's correct, Your Honor. The Superior Court at the suggestion of the town said, yeah, we should remain that and have them take a look at it.

There was no record at the time for the court to base that decision on and there was no guidelines with respect to the remand.

Certainly a process which by statute is supposed to take 65 days, not over a year and not seven meetings, contemplates that they have done a full review.

The trial judge in this case I think spent most of his career as a prosecuting attorney up in Merrimack County and certainly I wouldn't expect him to be aware of the nuances and the land use issues.

But with respect to going back to the planning board, he was mistaken in his belief that it was up to the applicant to get specific findings that you met every regulation.

And that's clearly not the case. The existing law is the planning board has a duty to assist and they also have a duty when they deny a plan to make specific statements of the reasons for denial.

With all the time they had to review this plan, the only reason that they denied it was based on the zoning provision which was deemed to be improper.

I think that they would argue that that's because of that they did not perform a complete planning board analysis.

And now they're entitled to do so. And why isn't that the correct path.

It's not the correct path because your honor if you do that you're going to get piecemeal decision making. It's going to frustrate any opportunity for someone to use enjoy and develop their property just just imagine a scenario that you spend 10s of thousands of dollars and sometimes hundreds of thousands of dollars on engineering.

And, you know, if there's, there's a couple of statements or quotes that we hear all the time, you know, justice delayed is justice denied and time kills all deals.

Well, let's let's deny him on this one and let him go through the process. If this one doesn't hold back, we'll go back and find someone else.

Aren't there other remedies. Aren't there other remedies for that bad faith conduct if it is in theory, but in practice, good luck with those.

Well, let me ask you and let me ask you another thing if we follow your strikes me that you're asking us to make some bad law and among other things a an absolute denial of further planning board review would disenfranchise the butters who as you know have perhaps as much standing as anyone in this case.

How do you answer that.

If you look at the minutes from the meetings, the butters were properly noticed and had every opportunity to come in and express their concerns about this plan.

There was nothing that was articulated about anything other than the blasting. And that was prior blasting done in connection with construction of the high school.

They had every opportunity to come in and say, we don't like the drainage. We don't like the color of the roof. But the reason you don't see that there is no legitimate basis to deny this plan.

It met the regulations in every respect.

Then why can't you get a summary decision from the planning board now.

Well, you would think you might be able to, but if you look at a board who's focused on appeasing the people that vote for them, and they take great strains to find a remote excuse to deny it.

And at the zoning board hearing, they articulate and I think member Bretton that let's send it back to the planning board they can find another reason to deny this.

So by going back to the planning board, you go through the whole thing. You've wasted 13 months. You've raised the seven meetings with hearings and experts and engineers.

And you start from scratch.

Even in the superior court.

If it did go back.

With a closed record, my understanding is.

The public hearings.

Were over and the board was in its deliberative status, if you will, when it made this.

Um, errant decision, and so if it were to go back for a close, you know, further deliberations, they'd have to articulate their reasons. You may still have.

Your bad faith claim.

You know, sort of pending if, in fact, there were shenanigans at that point, would you not.

But that would be a hollow claim. It takes years to prosecute the owners want to reasonably develop their property and move on pursuing a bad faith claim and the standards against the volunteer board.

As the court knows, it's very, very difficult point is if it, if it went back for the planning board to make a decision properly.

Since it clearly did not the 1st time around that would be appealable that decision.

Were it to be negative would be appealable to the.

Court without going to the ZBA at that point.

Assuming that they don't find another reason in the zoning ordinance to deny it might take is that they're going to have a hard time finding anything in the planning regulations because their own expert.

Issue to report. And there's nothing in there that says anything about a denial of the plan and your honor knows that when they send those out for 3rd party review.

Generally, the engineers get the checklist of everything they need to correct before the final hearing and it gets done. Now, part of the problem with the superior court order.

And if just as Hicks says, hey, it's bad law for us to decide this in the 1st instance, I certainly recognize that might be 1 of the concerns of the court here.

And you have to balance and I think you're going to see more and more of it as you have people with any development notions volunteering for these positions.

When is enough enough. If they're going to take 13 months to do something and cost people a lot of money.

They better do it right and for years I've heard it different courts have you asked for requests for findings.

I've prepared more requests for findings and rulings that get thrown in the barrel, and I've never had one planning board answer them.

So if you went back and said we're going to remand this to the planning board. In this particular board, I would have expect that they might say let's reopen the public hearing which they have a right to do in suspend their rules.

So part of the concern with the trial court just says remand with no guardrails no definition. If you say we're going to send this back you have a complete record.

Everybody was noticed. They all had their their speak you have the minutes with your paraphrase but you have videos. You look at that record and you make findings with respect to the existing regulations why this plan shouldn't be approved.

Now that's a different story than just saying remand open it up and start from scratch, which is the biggest fear in this particular case because not only it's the end result it's the time.

You know markets are dynamic we've been in a bull market for real estate for a long time. While you're doing this market conditions change, you get approval when the bubble bursts, and you can't get financing and you can't do things.

So time is really an enemy of every property owner in this case so you know my feeling on the record in this case where it's clear, not only by my say so but the town's own expert that this meets the applicant regulations.

The court could say hey look at look at you have determined that it meets all the planning regulations and that's the standard and planning boards in the future if you want to deny something.

Get it all on paper, because it's not unusual for me to go to planning boards not windows particularly, but say if you're going to deny it I want you to give me every reason, and they'll give you one and say the other issues are moved.

And all that things is set up for an appeal now.

I think I'm painting the picture with some cynicism and that may be a personal view that let's say that everything was sincere on this thing.

And you've got volunteer board members that really don't know the importance of creating a record and making findings. And there's no one there really to tell them what to do.

I think if this court elected the remand route it would be appropriate in your opinion to give a little guidance and let them know what the consequences are.

Right now, if you had a sinister board member with an empty development agenda, you can get elected to a board by telling the public, we're going to build a moat around this town, like the court told them they shouldn't in Britain, and my guess at the ballot box be overwhelmingly voted in.

And there's really no consequence to a board member that goes astray and ignores their duty and the rules all to the detriment.

There's really no consequence other than the bad faith claim, which to me is a hollow result.

So I'm not going to repeat what's in the brief.

Ideally, we'd like you to say, hey, there's enough in this record to say that this meets the regulations and they should go forward.

If no, you're the red lights on. Oh, I'm sorry.

I'll just wrap up if, if, if not.

Remand it with particular guardrails that they're not going to start from scratch. Thank you.

Campbell.

Thank you. Please record. I'm attorney Bernard Campbell from Salem. I appear on behalf of the town of windham's planning board in these matters.

Attorney Christopher bolt appears for the windham zoning board of adjustment. I'll address the issues with the planning board and then I will yield to attorney bolt.

To the extent that we don't touch everything on our oral argument. We're certainly not waiving that and we rely on the brief sections that we've attorney Campbell.

What more does your client need to pass approval on this progress project?

I don't know that it. Well, what it needs your honor is it needs to have the matter remanded to the board so that the board can take final action.

This court, this court needs to affirm the lower court ruling because it has to vindicate the provisions of 677 15 1 a, which the legislature specifically added in 2013 to address these situations.

The legislature in adding these provisions sought to eliminate the burdens on applicants communities and on the court system in this case, as noted by the chief justice caused by the confusion of where we're supposed to be appealing.

The fact is the procedural case. Yes, your honor.

Just, we haven't got a lot of time. What are the guard rails.

On remand. Where do we look in the statute? Where, where are the protections for the applicant on remand.

The applicant makes quite a bit of argument about the length of time that this matter has taken.

But it's clear keeping in mind there is no certified record of the planning board proceedings because that was all suspended.

But it's clear the applicant never invoked the shot clock rules that are found in 677 for one C1. They, there's a 65 day limit.

The applicant could have gone to the board of selection and win him anytime after the 65 days to get basically a 10, a 30 day mandatory order to get that.

But then the applicants inviting in a way retaliation or cutting off his nose despite his face. I mean.

The applicants going to spend more time to try and get it right and get a favorable result.

Exactly. And in this case, so good deed goes unpunished. There's extra time. And then at the end of that time, there's a, let's say incomplete.

Decision out of the board.

Well, your honor, the, the, and the point is there is this 65 days and I acknowledge your point, but that is one of the rails that if this gets remanded 1st and foremost, you have acknowledged that the public hearing is already closed.

And the board could just simply go back to a deliberation.

The fact is, is that this the trial court, and we have to put ourselves in that position. The trial court made the decision that this case needed to be remanded because there's essentially no record on which it can rule.

Well, it had no record, although the.

Certainly the applicant asked for the record to be transmitted and some trial courts do review the certified record. So, if in fact, the board waived its.

Opportunity to pass on other issues.

Relative to the site plan, why could the trial court not have reviewed the record.

To on its own.

Well, your honor, the point is when the, when the planning board made a decision, 1st of all, under the rules for the acceptance of the plan.

There was a preliminary decision that the plan met the zoning.

As as the hearings went forward and ultimately at the end, the decisions evolve and the planning of the planning board made a ruling that in fact this did not comply with the zoning ordinance, which.

Essentially puts us almost in a position where we have the decision that says that the the the application was never really reached because the board made a decision that it should have heard.

It should have not heard the case because in fact, the application failed to meet the zoning ordinance. Now we notice that in this instance, how could the board have made that determination.

At the outset that it just flat out didn't meet the.

Purpose of zoning ordinances it just seems to me that that was an afterthought.

In this process.

Well, it wasn't limited to use it wasn't limited to something you could point to and say.

This is not permitted it was it really comes across as an afterthought.

Well, it it's certainly your honor and that's why the zoning board of adjustment reversed the decision.

And that's why the town and the planning board, the board that I represent ultimately did not appeal that.

ZBA decision, we accepted it realize that we had made an error and it's and we wanted to come back.

The timing on that.

The decision that essentially was made was granted toward the end of the process. But the fact is, is that the board can make that decision.

Toward the end of the process it effectively represented amounts to a sort of reconsideration of the acceptance.

Which is allowed by prior decisions. Let's say a 74 cock street case involved in the city of Nashua where the planning board.

Determines that in fact, hey, wait a minute, we made a mistake. We're allowed to reconsider and go back and decide that this case shouldn't have been accepted.

And that decision, which then they made then gets appeal. The other point I want to make I want to pick up on justice Hicks's point.

The belief that the applicant would be asking you to do, essentially to say that it's, it's now approved. Essentially cuts out the butters.

Because the butters rested on the fact that the case was denied based on a zoning ordinance. It goes to the ZBA. The ZBA reverses it.

Now where are the butters left. There's, there's no approval.

There appears to be asking us to reapprove it at a judicial level. Your butters don't participate in that process unless they move to intervene.

So the remand at least provides the ability for the planning board to make a final decision, which is open to all, including the butters to decide if they are accepting of that decision or they wish to take it up.

So that I think is another major policy reason why the trial course decision is correct.

They don't, the butters don't participate. You aren't advocating for the hearing to be reopened for more information. It's just a decision that would allow the butters to object, if you will.

It gives them appellate rights to in the process, which the plaintiff's argument would, would essentially vitiate their rights to, to bring that forward.

And so that's a, we believe a strong support for the trial court, but there's really only two options that could be given.

One would be to have some sort of ruling that says the plan is approved automatically and doesn't have to come back or to it has to come back.

And I think the first one is if it were approved automatically, then the butters could fault the planning board for not doing its job.

Well, they, they could, they could fault the planning board, but you again have taken away their right to take independently a challenge to the planning board or to, or to take their own rights with regard to their property rights and you basically wash them away.

So I think that the trial court in this case decided, and you have in your other decisions said that this is a discretionary decision, whether or not to remand or to do something else.

And frankly, I think that Chester Rodin gun case may point the fact that this court has evolved its position on the issue of remand versus the court conducting its own hearing.

And the language in your most recent case involving Dartmouth College, I think points to the fact that there is a reason that we have the site plan approval with the individuals at the local level who are familiar with their community.

And rather than having the trial court become a super planning board or making a decision on a record that in fact it maintains its appellate role by getting the decision from the planning board in the first instance.

And how my last question, how many times does the planning board have to get it right. So do they make another single rationale decision that has to be appealed and if that one's overturned, do they get to go back and try another or when do they have to make a complete decision.

Well, I think you're honored. The next one is the last one. And the reason I say that is the board made a decision that it didn't, it, the board made a decision about zoning.

They made an error. The ZBA reversed it. It's coming back now or comes back now into the trial court order for the, for the planning board to make a final decision on the planning board site plan regulation issues.

And I, um, 670, uh, 7773 the, the notice of decision statute that is decided by the plaintiff, I think governs that if it please the court, I'm going to yield the balance of the time to my, uh, my compatriot and brethren attorney Bolt.

So he can address the ZBA pieces of this.

Thank you, attorney Campbell for the record Chris bolt, Donny, you talk to chandelier here in case number 250 for the wind of ZBA.

I'm frankly heartened by the fact that attorney Cronin spent so little time on the ZBA.

I'm in you stole my thunder.

Madam justice, because this is a case of no good deed going unpunished. We gave the relief.

We reversed the planning board, but I do have a question for you. So the reversal by the ZBA. Is it really within the ZBA's.

Authority to remand or isn't it just by operation of law, the appeal.

The case remains with the planning board.

I think I've been on both sides of the aisle representing developers of butters or municipalities across the state.

I have had many times where a decision has come from the ZBA. Okay, you've got to go back to the planning board and figure this one out.

I read the statutes and I do think this is a simple statutory interpretation case.

By you looking at 676 colon 5.

Roman 3 and to be 672 and 677 15.

I think it is inherent in the ZBA authority to say when a case comes up like this on a limited zoning issue.

Keeping in mind that we have no authority over the site plan or subdivision regulations.

If we come in and we make the single shot decision, the zoning interpretation was wrong. It has to go back to the body.

If we had said nothing about remand, I think it automatically goes back to the body.

That's what I'm thinking. It's more like a referral from the federal court to us.

We enter and we make a decision and back to the federal court. The case remains in the federal court.

The ZBA at that point is divested of jurisdiction and it's for the planning board to decide.

Well, in part though, I think it makes logical sense in good public policy to say that the ZBA has remand authority in these appeals of administrative decision because it puts all of the parties on notice.

The butters who are watching what the ZBA did would know. Okay, it's going back to the planning board and they're not having to be in limbo.

The developer knows it's going to go back to the planning board.

That's the other board knows. Hey, it's going to come back to you. So it's the other option.

The ZBA says, yep, you made a mistake. What else is there?

Right. I mean, I think it automatically has to and it's for a clarity purpose.

But it doesn't have to go back with carte blanche to the planning board.

Well, again, the ZBA based on 6765 has no jurisdiction over the site plan regulations.

We couldn't tell them what to do if we wanted to.

Right. And the planning board appeal to the court, I think.

Deals with that aspect.

Right. And that's why 67715 so clearly states as attorney Campbell made mention as of 2015.

It removed that obligation that we're all laboring under of the dual track appeal. I've got to go to the ZBA and I've got to go to the.

Superior court. Now I go to the ZBA first. And if I've gone to the ZBA.

Then I get to go to the planning board if I still need to. To me, that implies the intention of the statute was to remand back to the planning board when they've got.

An erroneous decision. Just do it again. Fix it. And the statute also allows you to take your planning board appeal, but stay it while the ZBA goes on.

Correct. And that's why there's no certified record at the superior court for the planning board side.

Right. My superior, my superior court appeal does have a certified record.

It is fairly simple and I do disagree respectfully with attorney Cronin's representations of the minutes of those that meeting on August 27th of 2019.

It is referenced by a member of there might be other issues back there.

But we don't know about because that's not in the record coming forward, but it's not a Machiavellian. We're going to gig them and raise something else.

I respectfully disagree with that.

If that were to, they're also limited to their remedy.

If that were to happen, there might be other remedies. Yes, there are other remedies there. The other thing I wish to remind the board.

The court rather that we are limited in what issues come forward in the ZBA appeal.

To those that were actually raised in the motion for re hearing.

And a lot of what was bandied about in the appeal documents to the trial court and then to you are frankly not in the motion for re hearing below.

Thank you kindly for your attention.

Thank you, attorney bold attorney Cronin.

Yes, thank you briefly. I think just as Hans correctly noted that the 65 day rule.

That's somewhat misleading. If you say, I want my decision in 65 days.

What you've done is giving the planning board good reason to deny you because they haven't had a fear opportunity to look at it.

With respect to the butters, I think the general to see the argument that all the butters are going to get disenfranchised as one that everyone would typically be concerned about, but not in this case.

To have standing to appeal butters have automatic standing, but those that showed up.

They have to articulate a basis. They have to participate in those proceedings. Not one of them had any complaint other than blasting.

That has nothing to do with the planning board that's reserved to the board of selectmen.

With respect to the ZBA issue, I didn't spend a lot of time on it because in this case it's probably moot because we already appealed the planning board issue.

We elected to go to the planning board because we're always concerned that there may be an appeal issue that you miss.

And it's probably the more protective route to go despite the legislature's amendment.

So all the ZBA had to do is say, according to the zoning ordinance, you got it wrong.

Then you got the case at the planning board. You don't have to remand it. And I respectfully disagree that giving the zoning board.

Broad remand authority is a recipe for disaster in land use circles where, again, time is the enemy.

If the legislature wanted the ZBA to have remand authority, they would have given it to them. They know how to do that.

They say it in a lot of different statutes. They didn't provide it to the ZBA.

The ZBA's mission is pretty simple. Is this decision consistent or offensive to the zoning ordinance?

That's all they need to do. And it's up to the parties to determine what the next course is.

In this case it would have gone to the planning board to review the record.

And the lack of the certified record on the planning agenda, it's not the plaintiff's fault. The town elected not to provide that.

They didn't want to provide it. And I understand why.

If you look at it in terms of this case, guardrails saying, well, send it back, they may just make a decision on the record.

That tells me that they may not. I think if the court is going to remand it, it should be with very specific guardrails.

Thank you, Mr. Cronin. Thank you, Council. Case is submitted.

Thank you, Your Honor. Thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you, everybody. Stay safe out there. Thanks for the venue.

Thank you.
