This is case 2020-0204, State of New Hampshire v. Roger Roy.

Good afternoon, may it please the court. Thomas Sparkard, on behalf of Roger Roy, I have reserved one minute for rebuttal.

Planned to make two points this afternoon. First, the executive branch should be legislatively

stopped from arguing that the domestic violence statute renders conduct of felony that previously constituted only a misdemeanor.

And second, even if a stop-all does not apply, the domestic violence statute is ambiguous on this point.

A party is heavily involved in the drafting of a bill, proposed legislation.

And it appears before one branch of government, the legislative branch, to support and explain that bill.

It tells the legislature repeatedly that the bill will make no substantive change in the law.

That it will create no new crime. That it will not increase any penalty. That it is merely a reorganization of existing law.

And this party is successful. It persuades the legislature to pass the bill.

There is every indication that the legislature relied on the party's representations about the effect of the bill.

And there's no indication that there was any debate about whether there should be a change.

What is the indication that they relied on that?

The indication is these extensive representations that the state made.

It's not just a one-time representation. It is throughout the legislative history.

And the absence of any legislature at all questioned those representations or whether those representations are effective.

In fact, Senator Sucey repeated those assertions that were made by the state that it wasn't changing the law.

Right. It was not just the state that made these representations.

It was the bill's sponsor. It was virtually everyone who supported the bill.

There was a consensus belief that this bill would not make any substantive change to the law.

This notion of legislative estoppel. Has any other court adopted this?

They have not. And for good reason.

As far as either the parties could find, New Hampshire's attorney general is the only executive branch in the country,

either at the national or the state level, who claims the right to tell one branch of government one thing

and then turn around and tell another branch of government something else.

So why does that give rise to the concept of legislative estoppel?

Because the situation is, while it is unique in the specific context in which it arises,

it falls squarely within the spirit and the purpose of the estoppel doctrine more generally.

This is once removed from legislative history.

We don't even get to legislative history unless the language of the statute is ambiguous.

And here we jump even beyond that, beyond legislative history to the thinking of the executive branch

in some previous administration and trying to bind the executive of currently to that view.

That seems like a big stretch to me.

It's not the thinking of the executive branch. It's the representation of the executive branch.

And like any estoppel claim, it's premised on the requirement that those representations induce reliance by somebody else.

Was this issue hatched out in the court below us?

It was not.

Can we move on to the ambiguity of the statute?

Yeah, absolutely. If the court finds that the domestic statute is ambiguous on this point,

then it need not reach the issue of legislative estoppel.

And it is ambiguous.

It raises the question of whether the phrase threatens to use a deadly weapon

requires that the deadly weapon be present and perceived by the victim.

And as State v. Franklin, the Arizona case that I cited in my brief demonstrates,

at least reasonable to answer that question, yes.

And this issue is further complicated by the double jeopardy implications that I point out in my reply brief.

If a deadly weapon need not be present and perceived by the victim for a defendant to be convicted of felony domestic violence,

then this variant of felony domestic violence is not the same offense for double jeopardy purposes.

No, it's a much more serious crime in some respect.

It's not the same offense as criminal threatening with a deadly weapon.

Right.

They're both class B felonies, but each requires an element that the other does not.

And the effect of that would be that for a single threat, for a single act,

a defendant could be convicted of both felony domestic violence and criminal threatening with a deadly weapon.

Provided the threat is made to a family member or intimate partner?

Yes.

Yes.

What if he had said I'm going to run you over with my car two weeks from today?

Yeah.

Yeah.

Crime or no?

Not according to Roy's position, but according to the State's position, yes.

It is.

According to the State, anytime somebody threats to do an act.

But it's not, again, it's not criminal threatening.

It's threatening under the domestic violence statute.

Right.

That's sensible.

Right.

According to the State, anytime somebody threatens to commit an act,

and that act, if committed, would involve the use of a deadly weapon,

and the recipient of that threat is a domestic partner?

A stop will stop.

Well, it's not.

Because we all know that the legislature did not consider this change in the law.

It did not debate this change in the law.

The assumption before the legislature was that this was a simple reorganization

and that there would be no change in the law.

And as Franklin demonstrates, the State's interpretation might be reasonable,

but it's not the only reasonable interpretation of the statute.

It's also reasonable to interpret the domestic violence statute as requiring

that the weapon involved be present and perceived by the victim.

So regardless of what the defendant might have allegedly said,

or be said to the victim here,

you try to get out of this room and I'm going to shoot you.

Yeah.

And that's not a crime.

If the victim does not perceive a weapon, then it is a crime.

It is criminal threatening, but it is not a felony.

You said it would be criminal threatening

or threatening under the domestic violence framework?

No, it would be criminal misdemeanor criminal threatening.

Misdemeanor.

It would be criminal threatening with a deadly weapon

because no weapon was used to convey the threat

and for the same reason it wouldn't be a crime at all under the domestic violence statute.

Do I understand the record here correctly

that there was testimony from the victim that the defendant said,

I have a gun?

Isn't that...

The guy saw that in the briefing.

Yeah.

So the complainant testified that the crimes occurred during,

I think, a three-day period.

And she says that the defendant threatened a killer

and at some point said that he had a gun,

although the record isn't clear as to whether the statement about having a gun

was contemporaneous with the threat to kill her.

She also said that Roy made a gesture towards his waistband

whenever she got up to leave the room.

So the facts are clear.

I don't think there's any dispute about what the facts show

and the light most favorable to the state.

They show a threat.

The state charged Mr. Roy with brandishing the firearm.

Is that right?

That was the allegation in the indictment,

the factual allegation in the indictment.

And the record doesn't show any evidence that actually happened

beyond just reaching for his waistband.

That's true.

And there would have been grounds for misdemeanor domestic violence

without the weapon.

You said no crime,

the weapon could have been misdemeanor domestic violence.

Well, it would have been misdemeanor criminal threatening.

But I don't see a provision of the domestic violence statute

that would cover sort of a run-of-the-mill threat

that does not involve the use of a deadly weapon.

So for all these reasons,

the domestic violence statute is ambiguous

as to whether the weapon must be present and perceived by the victim.

And by definition, if a statute is ambiguous,

then, or if a statute is subject to more than one reasonable interpretation,

it is ambiguous.

And this court will look to legislative history.

In many cases, legislative history is not helpful

or not very helpful, but that's not the case here.

The second we look to legislative history, it's case closed.

The legislative history overwhelmingly supports Roy's interpretation.

Overwhelmingly supports the view that this statute did not affect

any substantive change in the law.

It did not create a new crime or increase any penalty.

It was merely a reorganization.

So like the criminal threatening statute

and the felony variant of the statute,

this variant of the domestic violence statute

requires that the deadly weapon be present and perceived by the victim.

But that subject wasn't really debated by the legislature,

just whether or not they intend to change the law.

And that's how you get to that point, I assume, right?

Right. It was.

I mean, everyone's assumption was that this bill would not change

the law substantively at all.

That it was merely a reorganization.

It was merely a way of labeling crimes that arose in a domestic context

as domestic violence for record-keeping purposes,

for purposes of the federal prohibition on firearms possession and ownership.

Can I just ask you to clarify under your interpretation

the weapon has to be present and perceived?

It does.

And so if the weapon is present but is never seen,

then there couldn't be a successful prosecution?

When I say perceived, I mean seen or heard or felt.

And if the weapon is never seen or heard or felt,

then it's not possible to say that the defendant used the weapon to convey the threat.

So if it's just tucked in somebody's belt and it's there, there's no doubt it's there,

and he just says, I have a gun and I'm going to shoot you.

That's still not enough.

If she doesn't perceive it.

Well, only if the complainant does not perceive the gun or perceive the bulge in the gun

or perceive any effect, any physical effect of that gun being tucked in the belt,

if from her point of view it's the same as if there were no gun there,

then the defendant has not used the gun to convey the threat.

The defendant might have attempted to use the gun to convey the threat.

If it was the defendant's purpose that the complainant see the gun,

then the defendant could be guilty of attempted felony domestic violence.

But he would not be guilty of the substantive violence.

And in this case, the facts are somewhat complicated

because the defendant and the victim spent a fair amount of time together

for this threat arose.

Yes, the complainant testified they were together for three days.

They were in her bedroom virtually the entire time.

They had consensual sex.

And during that time she never saw or felt any firearm.

And the defendant was arrested shortly thereafter.

There was no firearm possession.

The police searched the complainant's apartment and did not find any firearm.

Can you address the second issue briefly?

I mean, as I understand it, the texts were, there were redactions from the texts

just taking out the most explicit sexual language,

but it seemed to me the overall thrust of that language came through.

Well, the overall thrust did not come through without the explicit sexual language.

I mean, you got the sense that the complainant was interested in meeting Roy,

but you didn't get that enthusiasm, the degree of that interest in meeting him

without the sexually explicit text messages.

But what was excite, didn't shed any light on who initiated the conversation?

It didn't, it didn't.

But it did impeach the complainant's testimony that she was apprehensive about meeting Roy.

I think Roy was sketchy about meeting him.

Didn't the rest of the texts make that clear that she wasn't apprehensive?

Not, not as thoroughly and conclusively as the sexually explicit text messages would have made clear.

And insufficiently and such that it's not within the discretion of the trial court to have made those redactions?

It's not. Particularly in a case like this, there is not a substantial risk of prejudice.

This is not information that in this day and age would shock the jury.

The question for the trial court is not whether just whether there was the potential for unfair prejudice,

but whether that potential substantially outweighed the primitive value of the evidence.

And it was not within the trial court's discretion to find that substantial outweigh.

If the court has no further questions.

Thank you. You still have one minute.

Thank you.

Mr. Sager.

Good afternoon. May it please the court.

My name is Weston Sager, and I represent the state of New Hampshire.

I'm happy to take your questions at any time.

This court should affirm defendants convictions for three reasons.

First, the evidence presented at trial was sufficient to convict the defendant of felony domestic violence criminal threatening.

Second, this court should reject the defendant's statutory interpretation and legislative adoptable arguments

because they are both unpreserved and without argument.

And third, which we touched on very briefly, the trial court should,

the trial court sustainably exercises discretion when it excluded certain sexually explicit text messages

because this information was both cumulative and irrelevant.

So is your position that I commit felony domestic violence if I tell my wife I'm going to shoot you with a gun

without ever even reaching towards a pocket or a waistband?

I guess that threat is enough for somebody to be convicted of a felony.

Well, I think it would depend on the circumstances of the case, Your Honor.

I mean, that's really a determination for the jury.

But that is certainly something that the jury could consider as, you know,

being sufficient under the criminal threatening domestic violence law that we have in place here

because that law says that it threatens to use a deadly weapon against a family member or intimate partner.

And it goes from a class A misdemeanor to a class B felony if the person uses or threatens to use a deadly weapon.

And if it's a gun that would constitute a deadly weapon and that would be domestic violence criminal threatening.

Thank you, Your Honor, with criminal threatening and domestic violence criminal threatening.

So there are two charges that are possible with that one statement.

There would be alternative theory, Your Honor.

And that was actually explained by the deputy AG at these legislative hearings was this thing that they would be charged alternatively.

And as far as the double jeopardy argument that the defense makes here,

I mean, this court's law is very clear on both double jeopardy and merger.

And that would be, you know, up for the court's consideration as to whether, you know,

being both, let's say convicted of those alternative theories,

whether that would violate double jeopardy or should be merged under this court's laws.

So that issue I do see being an issue here.

And I think segues into something I want to touch on,

which is that I encourage this court to actually listen to the committee hearings on these particular, on this particular legislation.

Because the...

You agree that the statute's ambiguous?

Oh, not at all, Your Honor.

It's plain, under its plain and urinary meaning it is unambiguous.

This statute is very clear, uses or threatens to use.

I'd also like to point out too that the statutory interpretation argument is not preserved.

And also that at trial, defense counsel actually agreed with the court's understanding that the domestic violence statute had slightly different language.

During these committee hearings, Attorney General or Deputy Attorney General Anne Wright made it pretty clear that what was going on here was that,

you know, these don't create any new crimes or any, you know, additional punishments.

But what she really meant by that is she's not created a new crime, like you would think of like NFT fraud or cryptocurrency fraud, something like that.

What she said was she's drawing on these particular existing criminal laws to create the domestic violence, these 11 different crimes that are listed in 631, 2B.

And that those punishments that are correlated with those crimes are roughly equivalent to the crimes for the sort of the generic versions of those crimes that do not involve, you know, the domestic violence, the family members or intimate partners.

And she said that they would...

Except we're here threatening to use a deadly weapon, moves it from misdemeanor in the generic sense to felony in the domestic violence sense.

And that's, and what we have here is if you look at the plain or near meaning of the domestic violence statute, that is what, that is the best indication of legislative intent as to what the legislature wanted in this particular instance.

I just will also point out though that at these committee hearings, which also are of dubious value to this court in interpreting a statute, this court has said so.

But nonetheless, Deputy AG Anne Rice was saying that there are slight differences between the domestic violence statute and the generic versions of these crimes.

And that really what she was trying to do was to sort of conform them not to necessarily New Hampshire law but to federal law because of this issue of wanting to not be over inclusive and who gets on the NICS database

and felons and certain other people who commit misdemeanor domestic violence, they want to make sure that those groups match what the federal law wants.

So, and I think also in the Judicial Council's notes that are in the bill, they also say that this is not a carbon copy in so many words of what the current laws are in existence.

But again, this is all legislative history and this statute is plain and unambiguous on its face, its uses are threatened to use.

And the deadly weapon issue, this came up also in the legislative discussion of this particular bill.

Domestic violence creates a large percentage of all of the violence and crime in the state.

It's something like 50% of homicides are domestic violence related.

And that supports a broader interpretation of the domestic violence statute because it is a more serious type of crime because if you are threatened with domestic violence, criminal threatening here,

unlike if you're going to a bar, you have nowhere else to go.

You're in your home as was the victim in this particular instance.

So, there are good reasons and legislative reasons why domestic violence would be not a carbon copy of the generic versions of these crimes because it's a more serious crime, particularly to the victims of those crimes.

What do we do about the language and the indictment about brandishing a firearm?

Well, your honor, the indictment doesn't have to have exact factual specificity.

The indictment just needs to give the, you know, essentially notice to the defendant of what they need to defend at trial.

I believe this happens all the time where just the factual indications might evolve during the course of the trial.

But the fact remains that the victim was a victim of, you know, domestic violence in this particular instance.

It's possible, your honor, I don't know off the top of my head, but in this particular instance, regardless of what the factual circumstances were alleged in this particular indictment,

the defendant did in fact commit, you know, criminal threatening domestic violence in this particular instance.

Excuse me?

There was no firearm seen by the victim.

There was no firearm found on the defendant by the police.

That does not mean that he was not in possession of the firearm, however, when this incident occurred.

And it was threatening.

He threatened to kill the defendant.

Any constructive amendment of the indictment?

I don't know, your honor.

I don't have a position on that.

I just know what the, at the trial they did discuss this and because of what was alleged at the trial that they could go forward with, uh,

uh,

uh,

uh,

uh,

uh,

uh,

uh,

uh,

uh,

uh,

uh,

uh,

uh,

uh,

uh,

uh,

um,

uh,

uh,

with considering whether or not the defendant

commit criminal threatening domestic violence

in this particular instance.

So I also wanna just touch base too

on the legislative a stop-all argument.

I provided in the notice of late authority

a couple cases for this court to consider,

one of which is from Wyoming

and one of which is from the US Supreme Court.

I just wanna explain why I included those cases

in the notice of late authority.

The Wyoming case did consider a sort of a diversion

of what the defendant is putting forth.

It had to do with term limits

and a legislator sort of supporting term limits

and then backtracking on that.

And the Wyoming Supreme Court said

there's no precedence for this

and it shouldn't be considered.

And that was in 2004.

And then in 1990, the US Supreme Court

and I think it's gonna call it Richmond

to that particular case,

there was an issue of an executive agent

like a federal person providing

not necessarily the most reliable advice

to a particular individual.

And that individual was alleging

that the government stopped

from making a contrary argument later on.

And the US Supreme Court,

although it's a very narrow holding,

it really just involves the appropriation clause

of the federal constitution.

They have a lot of really good reasoning

in that particular decision

about why legislative a stop-all

is not a tenable legal doctrine

to adopt.

Because what you would do

if you adopt a legislative a stop-all argument

is you would chill speech in practice.

You would prevent people like deputy AG and rice

from going to the legislature

providing guidance on particular things

or fear that that would be used against them

down the road.

Also, I think what the defendant is saying

is that you would need to conduct

an a stop-all analysis regardless

of whether a statute is ambiguous or not,

which would not only put a huge burden on these courts,

but also would invite lots of additional litigation

for people who can challenge now

the plain and ordinary meaning of a statute

and say, hey, this person is a stop from arguing this

because they said something several years ago

in front of a legislative committee.

It's not a particularly defensible decision

and particularly without there being

any legal precedent for this type of doctrine.

Another thing I want to point out too

about just statutory interpretation

in this particular instance

is that the language for domestic violence

criminal threatening is clear.

It says uses or threatens to use,

at least for the felony portion.

And that language, that Roman numeral two

applies to all 11 forms of domestic violence.

It's not just the criminal threatening.

And I think that's an important thing to consider.

So if the court were to read out

of that Roman numeral two,

it threatens to use, to mean essentially

the same thing as use

as I think the defendant is arguing.

That would have far reaching implications

for not only domestic violence criminal threatening,

every flavor of domestic violence there is.

So that's something that needs to be

carefully considered by this court.

The other thing is that in this particular statute,

the state's brief notes,

is that there, I think it's one H,

they say, look for one H,

which is a different type of domestic violence,

that the victim actually needs to perceive the weapon.

So under this court's principle

of statutory interpretation,

you need to compare those two

and say, what does the legislature actually mean here?

And it's clear from what the legislature passed,

what we have in front of us,

which is this particular law,

which is the best evidence of legislative intent,

that this is what the legislature wanted,

and that this is how this court

should interpret this particular statute.

And if I could just, I see my time is running,

just briefly touch on the second issue,

which is the text messages.

This is cumulative information.

I think the court asked some questions about this.

It was very clear from the text messages

that this particular victim

was interested in a sexual relationship

with the defendant,

and that those text messages were provided

to the jury in a redacted form,

as well as for impeachment purposes.

And the complaining was cross-examined about these messages.

Correct.

That is exactly correct, Your Honor.

Thank you.

Yeah, I don't have, if there are no more questions,

thank you very much.

All right.

Mr. Barnard?

Thank you, Your Honor.

Briefly.

A man threatens to shoot his wife.

There's no gun present,

there's no weapon perceived,

but he makes the threat verbally.

Should that be a felony or a misdemeanor?

Reasonable people can disagree.

I acknowledge that.

But that determination should be made by the legislature.

It is the cornerstone of our process

that a person can't be found guilty of a felony

unless the legislature has determined,

after consideration and debate,

that that conduct should constitute a felony.

That consideration and debate has never occurred here.

So would you be making the same argument

using Justice Hick's scenario

if somebody says I'm gonna get in my car and run you over?

Would you be making the same argument

about the legislative history and threatening?

I would be.

Unless, if the car is not used to convey the threat.

The car isn't there.

So if the car is out the window, that's one scenario,

you can be convicted,

but if the car is parked in the garage,

that's a different scenario.

If the car is, I think it would be a factual question.

At some point, the defendant is using the car

to make the threat.

And if the defendant isn't using that object

to make the threat,

then he could not be convicted of felony domestic violence.

If the court has no further.

If the court has no further.

If the court has no further.

If the court has no further.

Thank you very much.

Case submitted.

Yep.

Please rise.
