Thank you, Claire. The matter before the court is Lisa Rasmussen and Robert Rasmussen. Mr. Rasmussen

is represented by Sharon Rondo. Lisa Rasmussen is represented by attorney Mark Hanlon. Well,

counsel, when you are ready, you may proceed. Thank you. Good morning. I am attorney Sharon Rondo.

As you indicated, I am appearing for the appellant Robert Rasmussen. The appellant has raised 10

issues on appeal. I will address those issues by addressing the areas of practice that they apply

to. First is the property division, the value of the business. The sole asset of this marriage

was a business, a sole proprietorship, essentially a one-member LLC that had one product, one producer.

The court established a value in its final decree of $340,000. There are insufficient

factual findings to determine whether or if either of the expert evaluations were considered

and specifically what portions of either were accepted by the court or rejected.

Both appraisers agreed that the company was non-marketable. The wife's appraiser, however,

did not discount his value. While the husband's appraiser did discount the value of the company.

Did trial counsel object to the admission of the 2016 evaluation conducted by Mr. Howell?

Trial counsel objected several occasions with respect to any alleged buyout agreement

or communications or agreements of the parties through mediation. She objected at page 15 lines

one through 14 of the June 11, 2018 transcript hearing. She also in that hearing objected two

other times at page 17, line three, and again at line 18. She also objected during that hearing at

page 22, lines 11 and 17. But Ms. Ronda, let me just ask, as I read the record, the 2016

evaluation came in as an exhibit by agreement without objection. Is that right?

That came in by agreement. It appears, yes, Your Honor, that was that's consistent with my

reading of the transcript. I think the issue is that the court also let in that there was an

agreement with respect to a buyout and more importantly that the parties agreed to the

value of that evaluation. The contention, the contention is that that was part of mediation

and under the rule should have been privilege communication. And on the final day of the

hearing, Attorney Marshall objected page 52, line five, regarding the testimony relative to

the agreement on value. The court in line six and nine indicated, I don't want to get into what

they were doing in mediation, but I appreciate that they agreed with it. So the court took in

that the parties agreed to that value, which again, that was part of mediation, whether it

happens prior to or during or after the court in the mediation agreement suggests that mediators

are supposed to keep that information private and parties. Let me ask you this. Did Mr. Rasmussen

take that valuation and submit it to any bank? It was Mr. Rasmussen's testimony that he did

not submit it to Citizens Bank to get his loan that he got for $150,000. Rather he had

a relationship with Citizens Bank and obtained the loan. I do not believe he testified that he

submitted it. And who was the borrower just in relation to that loan? I'm a bit confused. Who was

the borrower on that loan? And where did the proceeds go? There's a loan to Citizens listed in the

court order for $100,000. Is that the same loan? And if so, where did the other money go?

The loan to Citizens, the money went into the business account. I think that is in the transcript,

although I didn't write down the specific numbers. And the loan was to the business, but it is

personally guaranteed. It is my understanding from the testimony by Mr. Rasmussen. And that loan

was not taken into effect in his valuation by the wife's appraiser. He did not take any debt

into effect when he determined the value of the business. What was the purpose of that

loan to buy out Mrs. Rasmussen? Isn't that what the original purpose of the loan was?

I think the original purpose of the loan was part of the mediation and therefore is

privileged and confidential and shouldn't have been entered into evidence.

So one of the arguments your client makes is that the appraiser, Mr. Howell, didn't fully

take into account the debt of the business. What debt specifically wasn't taken into account?

Are we talking about this Citizens' Loan or something else? The Citizens' Loan,

there were also a couple of credit card loans on deck was one of the loans. I believe the

outstanding debt was in excess of $150,000. But wasn't there a dispute as to whether that

debt was associated with the business or was a personal liability by Mr. Rasmussen?

Well Mr. Rasmussen, with respect to the citizens, guaranteed the debt. But even if it was personal

debt, all debt, when you're dividing property you should also divide debt. And in 2016 there was no

debt on the company at the time that the wife's appraiser did that compilation for the parties

for mediation. But at the time of the final hearing you had debt. And debt should be

included along with the assets when you're valuing a company. But the date of the final hearing

remind me? The date of the final hearing remind me? It was actually three days.

Let's see, I've got December 3rd and... That was 2018 into 2019, correct? It was

December of 2019. Into 2020? The order came out in 2020. Okay. So that was three years

following later than the 2016 compilation as you call it. Yeah. And Mr. Rasmussen testified that

the business had no value. Is that right? But Mr. Maloney is expert, testified that

the company had a value of about $170,000 after the discount. Is that right? How do you square those?

I think I square those with the fact that Mr. Rasmussen also testified and Mr. Howell

in his report confirmed that in a 30-mile radius there were 15 other distributors of this

Hunter Douglas Company's product. Mr. Rasmussen also testified that there were two other businesses

that he was aware of that tried to sell and couldn't and ended up closing. So I think that

was the basis of his value. I think Mr. Maloney looking at potential income generation, et cetera,

came up with the value of the $170,000. So your argument here is not that it's

the court aired because the value wasn't zero. Your argument here is the court aired because

it didn't explain sufficiently in your view what it did and why it did it. But the real number

should be $170,000. Is that your position on appeal? Yes, I believe it should be. All right,

certainly should be lower than the value that the court assigned because that value again didn't

take into account debt. And the court I think in the response to the motion for reconsideration

indicated that it took some weight from Mr. Howell. But Mr. Howell in addition to not

discounting for the lack of marketability, also when he was doing his numbers didn't include costs

for some of the sales. And some of the costs that went through that Mr. Rasmussen went through and

also I think Mr. Maloney addressed, there were approximately $89,000 in costs that were not

accounted for, which resulted in Mr. Howell coming up with a product, gross product margin,

of 48.3%. And that's how he came to his number. Additionally, he called items income that were

repairs or remakes. The company apparently guaranteed its lines for life. And when there was a repair

or a remake, what the company would do is they would use the same invoice that they used for

the purchase for the remake or the repair. And didn't the court also find that the party's records

were somewhat suspect and that a pure linear evaluation would not be productive?

I think the court found that their records were suspect, but they had kept records for the

business like that forever. It wasn't like they just started that because there was a divorce.

This isn't a case that he had wonderful records for the entire 20 years and then all of a sudden

says, I'm not going to keep good records. And the evaluator, and I think the court recognized

when the court said the wife destroying the computer didn't matter because all the information

was on Hunter Douglas's website. Hunter Douglas had a website that tracks the sales, tracks the cost,

and all you had to do was look at it. Now granted, Mr. Howell had difficulty looking at it at times

because he couldn't enter the password. He used lower case instead of higher case on one case.

And a second time Hunter Douglas changed their password, but Mr. Rasmussen within an hour called

back and gave him the right password. So the information was there. Granted, the parties had

crappy records and they were bad business keepers. A lot of businesses are. It's not

criminal. So it's, we owe a lot of difference to the trial court, particularly in areas like this

where they're competing experts. And we do get some cases where the discussion of

business valuation is very short. But here the trial court devoted more than a page,

single space to a discussion of the competing expert opinions. And then your client filed a

lengthy motion to reconsider. And then the trial court responded to that with another thoughtful

paragraph saying, well, I accepted some. I didn't accept others. This is the reason.

But clearly it thought about marketability and it thought about all the issues that you're raising

in front of us today. So how can we step in, substitute our judgment on valuation

for the trial courts? I believe your honor, it's telling that on day one of the final hearing,

page 52, when the judge led in testimony of the agreement of the parties to value,

that the judge stated, I do not want to get into what they were doing with mediation,

but I appreciate that they agreed with it. And I think the court's value that is close to the

338,000 from that 2016 appraisal is very close to what he came up with. And he took the party's

agreement, which never should have come into evidence because it occurred in mediation

as being an appropriate value because he couldn't reconcile the two experts.

Well, if you accept that 2016 evaluation and you deduct the debt that you say the

trial court should have, you come pretty close to Mr. Maloney's evaluation, don't you?

Correct. You do. So wasn't that an error on the part of the court for not taking the

debt into consideration? If the company was sold, though, to a third party, the debt

which is cosigned by Mr. Rasmussen wouldn't necessarily be an encumbrance on the transfer

of the assets. There's no secured debt here, right? The company can be sold and the debt can stay

with Mr. Rasmussen, is that right? I honestly don't know whether the debt is secured or not,

but I would suspect if he sells the business, he's going to pay off the debt. And I notice

I have a red light, but in continuing, if the property division number is wrong, then that was

the basis for the alimony. So isn't the alimony also wrong? Thank you. Thank you, counsel.

Mr. Hanlon? Thank you, Your Honor. Judge, the trial judge had the advantage in this case of

having two experts to discuss the value of the business. When you go through the transcript,

you see that the majority of the testimony in this case concerns the value of the business.

Yes, the experts had different values, vastly different values. One portion of the value

is with respect to Mr. Rasmussen's expert, is the 30% discount for marketability.

So because the gentleman continues to operate the business, when we talk about fair market value

and we talk about the three approaches, the income approach, which is the approach that

our expert used, is the correct approach in this case. Because this case, this business is

a moneymaker for the gentleman, for the appellant in this case, and should continue to be a moneymaker

for that person. Then how do you explain that the trial court did not accept your

expert's number? I think part of the issue, Your Honor, is this discount that I'm talking

about with respect to marketability. When you look at it closely, the determination of a discount

for marketability is frankly subjective. It is not objective. Mrs. Rasmussen's expert did apply a

discount, not in the beginning, but did apply, but perhaps for other reasons, including tax reasons.

So that's the reason, or that's the basis I would argue, for the great disparity with respect to

the prices. And you've got a trial judge. Sorry, excuse me. Would applying that

marketability discount to your client's expert's number arrive at the number the trial court

determined? No, Your Honor. It would not. Can we tell what approach the trial court used

in determining the value of the business? Yes, I believe it used the income approach,

because that really was the method our expert, the petitioner's expert, did consider marketability

when confirming the figure for the income approach. But I believe, Your Honor, that it was the

income approach. How did the two experts take into account, if they did, the

citizen's bank loan and their valuations? Well, there was testimony received,

and I pointed that out in my brief with respect to that $150,000 loan, what I believe to be

$150,000 loan. So it was part of all of the proceedings. So I cannot tell you that they did

not consider it, because it's part of this case. So both experts were aware of the loan and how the

proceeds had been used at the time they put together their expert opinions or testified?

As I mentioned, I know it's included within the testimony, and it's part of the record.

I'm only assuming, I don't know, I haven't spoken with them and don't know if they

considered that when they reached their opinion with regard to value. But certainly the preliminary

report from Mr. Maloney, I mean, he's well aware of what the 2016 preliminary value was. So he was

aware of that, and the $150,000 loan was mentioned during the trial.

Right, but it was mentioned with respect to the trial courts finding,

with respect to the valuation of the business.

With respect to the trial courts finding, with respect for valuation, that's at,

I don't believe it, I don't believe it was, Your Honor. I can't find

reference to that in the court's decision with respect to valuation right now.

I'm looking at page eight of the court's order.

Right, and as I review the pleadings on this issue of the loan,

correct me if I'm wrong, but it didn't seem that Mr. Rasmussen argued specifically that

to the trial court on the motion to reconsider that, oh, wait a minute, you didn't take into

account the $150,000 loan or the $100,000 loan. That was not either the trust or the focus

of the argument, right? Yes, that's true. Yes. But you had mentioned and I think I saw that

the Maloney report included that debt in its calculations. How did the experts come to

know of the 2016 compilation or stipulated agreement or whatever you want to call it?

Well, Mr. Maloney himself prepared that, Your Honor. That was done by him in 2017

and the valuation was as of 2016, so Mr. Maloney was well aware of that.

You mean Mr. Howell? Mr. Howell, okay.

I beg your pardon. Yes, thank you, Judge. Yes, Mr. Howell was well aware of that.

He had done it and so that's how both experts were aware of that 2016 number.

Again, my question related to that was Mr. Maloney included the debt in his report

and that was before the trial court, even though the trial court didn't mention it specifically.

Correct? I believe that's correct, Your Honor. Yes.

And the cash from that loan, was that also reflected in the balance sheet?

It's unclear to me where that money went and was residing at the time of these valuations.

Was it still in the corporation? I believe that is unclear, Your Honor.

I think the testimony was that Mr. Matt Rasmussen used it to pay his alimony obligations.

I don't disagree with that, Your Honor. So I just wish to say that we have a very large,

well-written narrative, a 15-page narrative in this case. We have a lot of exhibits.

The trial judge said he reviewed the exhibits, considered the evidence when he rendered his

decision. I think there's clearly enough information for this court to consider a review here

and we're requesting that the court affirm the trial court's decision.

Is there a roadmap you can point me to as to how the trial court arrived at that particular

number, $340,000, by adding or subtracting various amounts from either starting point,

Mr. Maloney's or Mr. Howell's report?

Your Honor, the trial judge does not specifically give us the formula that the trial judge used.

He exercised his discretion after a three-day trial and many exhibits and the review of those

exhibits and he arrived at that figure. He did what he was paid to do and reached a decision

in this case when the experts, quite frankly, had disparate values.

Would it have been proper if he had relied solely on the $338,000 agreement of the parties?

Judge, I don't think the trial judge dismissed the fact that in the testimony of Mr. Rasmussen

or at least in the record that Mr. Rasmussen had adopted that figure at one point and that's

contained within the record. That's part of my brief here. I would imagine the fact that the

gentleman adopted that as a figure was on the mind of the trial judge.

And is there any adjustment that would be made for the timing of that adoption of that agreement?

Judge, I note that the trial judge in this case awarded a value slightly in excess of

what the original preliminary appraisal was. So I'd have to say yes, but I'm not certain.

It's not exactly stated in the order. Right. Did Mr. Howell actually testify that the initial

evaluation for 2016 relied on certain representations that he could not confirm

through Mr. Rasmussen? So that evaluation was suspect to some extent anyway.

Yes. There's a substantial testimony from Mr. Howell about irregularities in the

bookkeeping with respect to this business. And Mr. Howell complained about his inability to

confirm the facts, even the facts as they related to the income and expenses that the gentleman

reported on his financial affidavit. So yes. With respect to the trial courts finding that

Mr. Rasmussen was responsible for a portion of Mr. Howell's fees, was there a lot of

discovery disputes in this case that the trial court had to weigh in on that he would know

that's really outside of the record before us? Yes. What the record indicates is unfortunately

that Mr. Rasmussen would provide records based upon a request for production of documents,

but they wouldn't be the records that were requested or they weren't compiled correctly.

And that's what caused the expert's fees to continue to rise. And did you kind of have to

go to court to resolve those discovery disputes? I know that there were hearings with regard

to discovery. Yes. Mr. Hamlin, to the extent that we're all sort of guessing about how the

trial court arrived at its final valuation figure, what would be the harm in sending it

back to the trial court and just say we really can determine whether this is a sustainable

exercise of discretion. We know there are these competing appraisals or valuations, but

we're hearing two different stories about how that number was arrived at or if it's valid. So

can you please explain that? What's the harm in that? The harm judge is that we had a three-day

trial. The majority of the testimony dealt with the valuation of the business and the

alimony issue, but primarily the value of the business and sending it back because of the

poor bookkeeping and other issues that are chronicled in the transcript, sending it back is

not going to make the decision or the valuation more correct. The trial judge exercised his

discretion based, frankly, upon the evidence that the parties presented at the trial and dealing

with a lack of bookkeeping by Mr. Rasmussen in this case did the best that the trial judge could do

and sending it back would not create figures that were not available in the first place.

They just aren't the records, as I understand it, to go back and look for more financial records

to try to confirm these things. They have the records to the extent they existed available to

them. So with all due respect, sending it back, how was that? I don't see how that would make a

decision in changing the facts with regard to the value of the business. What about the

trial courts finding that Mr. Rasmussen needs to pay the wife's share of the business within

180 days, whether he sells the business or not? How is that sustainable? What if Mr. Rasmussen

simply can't do that? Right. So with regard to the payment of the equalization, the gentleman has

the benefit, as you know, reading the transcript, the gentleman has the benefit right now of operating

this business, which according to the order of the court generates more than $200,000 a year for

him. So my client, on the other hand, is employed and doesn't make the money that the

gentleman is making. So it is, with all due respect, Judge, unfair to my client not to have

the capital that she was expecting to have so that she could perhaps start her own business.

So timing here is a factor for both parties, Judge. Although that $200,000 a year is taxable,

so that's a gross amount. It doesn't leave a whole lot of room for error with all the debts

allocated as they are. Your Honor, that's true. But there needs to be a deadline for the payment

of equalization with respect to this business. The business has a value, a substantial value,

as agreed to by both parties' experts. My client is out of the business. She's not receiving

that income. And it is, I submit to you unfair to continue to drag this so that my client

doesn't have that capital, so that she could begin a business of her own if she wanted to

or do what she wants with it. So there's an equitable argument on both sides. I understand

what Judge Dunnevin is saying about what if he doesn't have the money? Well, we don't know that

because this appeal is ongoing. We don't know that. And of course, the trial court has

the mechanism to resolve that if it turns out someone files a motion for contempt because it

wasn't paid. Your red light is on, Council. Thank you both.
