You have a few more seconds. So you're welcome to stand there.

All right, we're good.

Thank you, Claire.

This is case 2020-0457, Mary Rivard versus Governor, State of New Hampshire.

Mr. Foggio, you may proceed whenever you're ready.

Thank you. Good morning. May it please the court. My name is Robert Foggio, and I represent the plaintiff appellant, Mary Rivard. I'm reserving two minutes for rebuttal.

So there are two main issues in this case, and I'd like to start first with the constitutionality of the emergency power statute.

That's RSA 4-45 and 4-47.

And I want to, I really want to emphasize a legal principle that often gets forgotten or taken for granted in these situations,

particularly when we have a worldwide event that we all know occurred over the last 18 months and perhaps is still occurring in some parts of the world.

And that is this principle that we govern ourselves, and that's an idea, a revolutionary idea, that formed the basis for not only our federal constitution, but our state constitution.

And we enter into the social contract wherein we see some of these natural given rights that we have to government in order for the government to protect us.

And it works in a very productive way.

We have, obviously, three separate and co-equal branches, and then there are constraints placed on the legislature.

The supreme power to make laws is vested in the legislature.

And that is significant because under the Gould case, without a well-established exception,

the state legislature is incapable of delegating its legislative power.

And there's a reason for that.

We have to hold these, we have to hold the government accountable.

The government cannot just relegate its duties to its assignees.

And it's a great line from the Gould case, which states that government by an irresponsible master

would be no more illegal than government by sub-agents, not selected by the people or by their authority.

So we have to be able to hold the legislature accountable for the laws that are enacted.

Broad, general delegations rob us of that ability.

And that's a critical principle that we can't get lost in this discussion.

There's obviously a distinct...

While you're at that level, there's an argument at a broad level, your level,

that the entire administrative law system is an unlawful delegation of either legislative or executive power.

So how do you respond to that?

I would probably agree with you on that.

We're obviously not called upon...

Called to the side of the here today.

But I would agree that there's some certain...

There's a significant and legitimate debate as to whether that whole structure is constitutional.

Mr. Faujo, do you agree with the state?

It says that there are no damages claims that remain,

so there's only a request for declaratory judgment and prospective relief at this point?

That is correct.

And in regard to the pre-amendment statute, that's gone.

That's what the trial court ruled on, and that statute has been amended.

And then we have a new statute that you're asking us, I think, in some fashion to interpret.

That's correct.

And how can we do that?

This isn't an occasion for an opinion of the justices.

Wouldn't that be advisory as to the new statute?

No.

The principal sections of the statutes that we challenged remain in place.

There were some changes to the statute.

We admit that.

But those changes don't affect or impact my client's claims.

The most notable change...

I'll run through the changes just to clarify.

One of the changes requires that the governor provide a prize the legislature whenever a declaration of a state of emergency is made.

That's a request for relief?

Sorry?

I'm sorry.

Basically, I think Justice Bastard would like to know, I think we all would.

But what portion or what elements of your claim survive a mootness argument?

Well, as far as mootness is concerned, the entire claim, Justice...

The governor should not have emergency powers at all.

Of course not.

That's not what we're saying.

We simply believe that the emergency power statute as constructed does not contain a specific policy or prescribed standards to guide the administration of those powers.

And if you look at the Michigan Supreme Court case that was presided by both sides, Midwest Institute of Health versus the governor,

the governor, a very similar statute in that case, the court held that it was an unconstitutional delegation of legislative power because it was too broad and too indefinite.

And in that case, the statute had very similar language.

The governor could promise reasonable orders and rules and regulations that he or she considered necessary.

It's a key word here, necessary to protect life and property.

And those powers could be exercised until a declaration by the governor that the emergency no longer existed.

We have very, very similar language here.

But wasn't that an issue when there was a state of emergency declared?

We don't have a state of emergency anymore.

The...

Well, if you're asking about mootness.

Mootness, there's an exception, obviously, to the mootness structure,

which is when an issue is capable of repetition but evades review,

it should still...

It still merits a judicial evaluation.

And we're seeing that happen in some states now.

Some states are reinstituting and re-implementing a lot of these mitigation measures

under certain doctrines and declarations.

And so this is certainly not something that would never happen again.

It's...

I believe it is something that would fall within that exception to the mootness.

But it's never going to happen again under the statute that the trial court addressed.

But the language upon which we're basing my client's claim still exists.

The principle language and the language that we're challenging still exists.

Which is...

Essentially, you're saying there have been additional...

Not even factors, but conditions included in the statute by amendment,

but the central portion, which you claim has insufficient specificity, remains.

That's correct.

That's correct.

And that is the standard by which the governor can declare a state of emergency,

the standard by which the governor can renew a state of emergency,

and the very definition of a state of emergency.

All of that...

Those provisions all contain phrases that are too indefinite,

that are very, very broad and general and too amorphous,

to provide the necessary guidance and standard for the governor to administer those powers.

Even if they are, even if you're right, facts on the ground,

do you quibble with the governor's performance under that statutory authority?

Yes.

The second claim we have is that the governor exceeded his authority

in renewing the state of emergency the many times that he did.

The renewal of it or anything else?

The renewal of it.

That's what we challenge principally in this case.

It's the governor's renewal of the state of emergency,

in which he renewed it, I think it was 21 times.

We were under a state of emergency in the state for 470-some-odd days.

That cannot be what the statute was intended to do.

So are you asking us to step in and exercise our judgment

as to whether or not the medical emergency was sufficient

for the governor to issue a state of emergency?

No.

We're challenging the renewal of the state of emergency,

which itself imports the same requirements into that determination.

Right. But each time the governor makes an assessment

about the risks and dangers facing the state,

are we supposed to substitute our judgment and say,

oh, no, it fell short of that bar?

How are we equipped to do that?

No, no.

We're asking, Justice Bassett,

is that you review the Superior Court's findings on that issue.

The Superior Court granted a motion to dismiss our claim as to that issue.

The findings by the Superior Court were not supported by any evidence in the record.

There were three specific factual findings that the court made.

One is the unknown number of individuals who may have fallen ill

but were neither tested nor hospitalized.

That was one of the three findings that the court used to support.

What was the finding, precisely?

The finding is the court,

there were three specific findings that the court made to conclude

that the governor had not exceeded his authority

to the provisions that we've identified.

Number one, the court alluded to, quote,

the unknown number of individuals who may have fallen ill

but were neither tested nor hospitalized.

I'm unaware, I'm uncertain how a conclusion can be based on a fact

that we don't even know exists.

The second finding was the court concluded

that the outbreak and death toll would likely have been higher

without the governor's initial order

at a time when the state was aware of only six confirmed cases.

So this is, we're drawing a cause and effect relationship

between two unrelated facts.

There was no evidence in the record below to support that.

The government, the state did not have an expert witness to opine on that.

There were no facts in the record to demonstrate

that anyone was even following these mitigation measures.

There were no facts, no studies submitted in evidence

to demonstrate that the governor's mitigation measures

caused either the cases to drop or the death.

Did you mention all of them? What was the third?

The third one was, the court concluded, and I quote,

the highest incidence of transmission in this state

occurs in counties bordering Massachusetts,

which had reported almost 20 times the number of cases in this state

by the time of the governor's June 28th, 2020 extension

of the state of emergency.

On dismissal, you have to assume the facts

as pled, correct?

As pled, we did not plead those facts.

Right.

Those were findings made by the court,

and we contend that there was no evidence in the record

to support any of those.

Didn't the court take judicial notice of a lot of statistics?

I think I remember that.

Correct.

The court's order.

That's correct.

The only on the court may do that,

and we agree that the court can do that,

but the court cited only the cumulative statistics in its order,

and it made a very passing reference to that.

Of course, data without context is often very useless.

The statistics, which the court also did not mention in its order,

demonstrated, and the record demonstrates this.

We mentioned this at the hearing below.

The hospitalization rate was extremely low.

One of the bases, the principal basis

for the state of emergency declaration.

No, I'll let you know.

Keep going.

One of the principal bases

for the state of emergency declaration initially was

that we would likely exceed hospital capacity.

We never came close to that.

But maybe that's evidence that the policy worked.

There is no evidence of that.

That's a correlation, nothing more than that.

We can't elevate a correlation to cause and effect.

That's a classic.

So are you arguing that as a broad proposition,

without reference to any facts,

this law is an unconstitutional delegation?

Absolutely.

So are you asking us to say

that the trial court erred in relying on these facts,

in which case it seems that horse is out of the bar

and that case is over?

Well, there were two sections to the order.

One was whether or not the governor exceeded his authority,

and then the first issue is

whether or not the statute itself on its face

is an unconstitutional delegation of legislative power.

The court separately addressed that issue

and concluded that it was not,

and we contend that that was erroneous as well.

So you're asking us at this point

just to deal with the abstract proposition

as to the constitutionality of the statute?

I'm asking you to address both issues.

As far as whether or not the governor exceeded his authority,

we believe that that should fall under the exception

to the mootness doctrine that I identified earlier.

And which exception?

That this is an issue that's capable of repetition,

but yet may be reviewed.

But aren't the facts going to be different next time?

I mean, we don't know what the next emergency is going to be.

How can our assessment of what happened last year,

and this case was filed, what, in May or April last year?

May of last year.

So that's what we're looking at.

So how does that, how is that capable of repetition?

Well, I mean, I don't think that's a requirement

in addressing that exception to the mootness doctrine

because the facts will always be different

when an issue arises again.

Take, for instance, an issue with a school suspension.

Obviously, the facts underlying a school suspension of a student

may be different the next time around,

but that's a classic issue that courts have found

in the educational arena that would satisfy an exception

to the mootness doctrine,

the capable of repetition of aiding review exception.

Why shouldn't we send this back to the trial court

to look at the new statute?

I'm sorry.

I mean, we have a new statute that took effect.

Correct.

So why should we be opining about without any benefit

of a trial court development of arguments?

Why should we be looking at a new statute

that was enacted almost a year after the trial court order?

Because, again, the principal language

that we're challenging is still there.

There was some tinkering that was done,

but we addressed this in our supplemental brief,

and I think that's my time.

And you'd be seeking more definition

in that principal language.

That is correct.

The resolution would be legislature needs

to set more guardrails in that principal language.

That's correct.

You still have your two minutes.

Thank you.

Ms. Lombardi.

Good morning.

May it please the court,

I'm Laura Lombardi representing the governor.

This appeal should be dismissed

because recent amendments to the emergency power statutes

and the expiration of the COVID-19 state of emergency

has rendered the petitioner's two remaining claims moved.

A declaratory judgment claim requires an actual,

not a hypothetical dispute,

which is capable of judicial redress.

The petitioner can't obtain relief

either as constitutional challenge

or a statutory claim

because the state of emergency is no longer ineffective.

Why isn't declaratory relief appropriate then?

Because there is no declaratory relief.

There is no current dispute.

There is no current state of emergency

and also the statute that's being challenged

has been substantively changed.

So it would be an improper advisory opinion

to render an opinion on the constitutionality

of that statute.

How about the principal part of the statute

that has not been amended

or can't you look at it in segments?

I don't believe you can look at any segments.

The principal language, for instance,

defining a state of emergency,

the petitioner's arguments relate to

whether this is an improper delegation

of legislative authority.

And the amended statute makes significant changes

to the legislature's oversight

of a declaration of a state of emergency,

requiring the governor to bring it

to the legislature every nine days

if it is continued.

Oversight, but doesn't change the delegation

to the governor of defining the state of emergency.

That is true, the language itself,

but I think it would be improper

just to look at one part of the statute

as opposed to the whole

where the argument, the analysis,

whether this is an improper delegation

of legislative authority,

I think you need to look at all the parts

that the legislature has put there.

And so a challenge to the new statute

would have to be brought at a time

when a new declaration has been made.

The governor has never declared an emergency

under the current statute.

So I think it would be improper to...

But how does that happen timing-wise?

What if there's a series of short emergencies?

How does someone ever get relief?

In that case, possibly there could be an argument

that it's capable of...

that it needs to be addressed.

Here we don't have that.

Here we don't have a state of emergency.

If we were...

So if a new state of emergency would arise,

it would be analyzed under the facts at that time,

which we don't know,

and it would also be analyzed under the new statute,

which has never been used at this point.

But even if you are to address the merits of the claim,

first I would argue that you should dismiss

the appeal outright because it's moved.

But if you were to turn to the merits,

then you should affirm.

An important legal principle is that a statute

is presumed to be constitutional

and will only be declared invalid on inescapable grounds.

And here, the emergency power statutes

are a constitutional delegation of legislative power

by the legislature.

They reflect a clear legislative purpose

to protect the health and safety of New Hampshire residents

during major public emergencies,

and they provide reasonably definite standards

for the governor to apply in administering the law.

The statutes do not grant the governor unbridled discretion.

First, the statutes specifically define

what constitutes a state of emergency.

Second, they limit the governor's power

to declare a state of emergency

to only circumstances in which a disaster

of major proportions places the safety

and welfare of New Hampshire inhabitants at risk.

Third, the statutes specifically describe

the governor's emergency powers

which he can only employ during a state of emergency

and for the specific purpose of responding

to the state of emergency.

Fourth, the state of emergency

terminates automatically after 21 days

unless it is renewed under the same standard

that the legislature has set forth.

Does the statute address the governor

to veto powers as amended?

It does not.

I mean, I would argue that that issue

was not sufficiently briefed,

but also there's no reason to believe

that a concurrent resolution

to terminate the state of emergency

would be presented to the governor for veto.

If the legislature were to pass

a concurrent resolution terminating the state of emergency,

the state of emergency terminates automatically

at that point and cannot be renewed

unless it is renewed under different circumstances.

So the governor can veto that resolution?

No.

Under the amended statute?

That's your position?

Yes.

That's correct.

Fifth, the legislature reserves...

Have you discussed that position with your client?

I have not personally.

That is what we have argued in our meetings.

The legislature reserves the authority

to terminate the state of emergency

or to itself declare a state of emergency.

So if a governor doesn't declare a state of emergency

and the legislature believes

that the state is in a state of emergency,

it can itself declare a state of emergency.

These standards set forth by the legislature

are specific enough to allow both judicial review

of declaration of a state of emergency

and also legislative oversight.

Therefore, they are constitutional

and the trial court was correct

in dismissing the first claim.

Can you just clarify the guardrails

that you were just identifying

are in the statute that the trial court looked at?

Is that right or are they in the amended statute?

That the trial court looked at?

Because it's on a dismissal,

the standard of review here is de novo.

So in terms of the facts

that the trial court may have discussed in this order,

I don't believe those are relevant to your review.

Right, but you were just talking about,

well, this is not unlimited power.

Here are the five checks on the power.

So I'm just asking you to clarify,

are we talking about the same statute

that the trial court had before it

or are you talking about the new statute?

I'm talking about the statute

that was before the trial court.

There have been amendments made to that statute,

but I believe if you were to not dismiss the case

and go on to the merits,

you would be looking at the amended complaint

which challenged the statute at that time.

And it is constitutional based on that statutory analysis.

Would you address the assertion

that the trial judge considered facts not in evidence

in support of its ruling,

the three facts that your opponent points to?

I believe those are facts that are included

in the executive orders.

So on a motion to dismiss an amended complaint,

the court is allowed to also look at documents

that are either attached to a complaint

or referred to through the complaint

or in this case, executive orders.

And the analysis for determining an executive

or an emergency order would be to look

at the face of that emergency order

and the facts that the governor relied on

in declaring the emergency.

So it was entirely appropriate

for the trial court to look at the facts

as found by the governor

at the time that he extended

the declaration of emergency.

And the court also...

For purposes of a motion to dismiss,

I guess you're saying.

It's dancing on the head of a pin,

but what if those facts aren't true?

That could be challenged

and inaction conceivably.

But here, the plaintiff didn't challenge

the facts that the governor relied on.

The petitioner raised its own facts,

which the trial court took judicial notice of

and expressed a difference of opinion

of whether the facts rose to the level

of the state of emergency.

And that's a decision that the legislature

has specifically given to the governor to make.

And in an ultra-virus claim,

the petitioner would have to show

that no reasonable person...

To show that an official goes beyond

their authority,

you'd have to show that based on

the language of the statute,

no reasonable person could find

that a state of emergency exists.

And here, the plaintiff did not do that.

The amended complaint

did not challenge the facts.

It put forth a difference of opinion.

And I would argue that, you know,

if reasonable minds can differ,

that does not state an ultra-virus claim.

You have to show that the action

was well beyond the statutory authority

granted to the official.

And here, the facts that existed at the time,

the amended complaint challenges

the extensions in April, May, and June of 2020.

And during that time,

the COVID-19 pandemic was continuing

to spread across the world

and throughout New Hampshire.

And national and state public health experts

described the pandemic

as a public health emergency

requiring mitigation experts.

By June 2020,

the COVID-19 spread

to every state in the country.

The CDC reported

over a million positive cases

and over 100,000 deaths.

And this was all in the record

and juxtaposed against

the plaintiff's focus,

petitioner's focus,

on local hospitalizations

and more sort of localized results.

There was also local facts

in the governor's executive order.

So by June,

there was also the facts

that there was over 4,700

positive cases in New Hampshire

and that there had been 265 deaths

in New Hampshire at that time.

And the traffic report

sort of reconciled

those different viewpoints

in its statement

that the governor

didn't have to wait

for things to get so bad

to act, right?

Correct.

And the fact that

the governor's restrictions

kept us from getting

to that point

is not an argument

that an emergency

was not imminent.

So if you were to find

that our hospitals

that we should remove

all the restrictions,

that would put you

in the place of now

creating an imminent

emergency once again.

And again,

the important fact

is that it's

whether the governor

was within his authority

to do this.

It's not whether

the trial court

looking at the same facts

would itself determine

that this constitutes

an emergency.

It's does this go beyond

the authority

the governor has.

It's the governor

who has the authority

to make this declaration

and the legislature

who has the authority

to terminate it

if they believe

it's not appropriate.

It was not for the trial court

to look de novo

at all the facts

and make its own

determination

of whether

a state of emergency

existed.

You're saying

it's not justiciable

or is it barred

by separation

of powers, Dr.

Neither.

It is justiciable,

but the standard of review

would be looking

at the language

of the statute

and determining

whether the governor

exceeded his authority.

So if a reasonable person

could look at the facts

that they exist

and declare a state

of emergency,

then he has not

exceeded his authority.

The fact that another

reasonable person

might come to a different

conclusion,

that does not state

a claim for an ultra-virus

cause of action.

If there are no further

questions,

I would ask that you

dismiss the appeal

as moot

or in the alternative

to affirm the decision

below.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Mr. Poho.

Thank you.

The recent amendment

requires the governor

to put the issue

in front of the legislature

in 90 days.

That is still

not adequate

because if you compare,

for example,

statutes in other states

in Illinois,

in Alaska,

a 30-day hard limit

on a state

emergency declaration.

In Kansas,

it's a 15-day.

In the statute itself?

In the statute itself.

For example,

in Washington state,

30-day limit

and you have to extend

it, you need legislative

approval.

So you need to

affirmatively request

approval from the legislature.

Same thing in Wisconsin.

60-day limit

subject to extension

by legislative approval.

So are you saying

if there were a 30-day limit

that would be constitutional,

you wouldn't have a problem?

We have a 21-day limit here.

The problem is

that the statute

allows the governor

to extend it

as many times as necessary.

That's the key word here.

As many times as he deems

it necessary

to protect the safety

and welfare of the population.

That's another phrase

that the Michigan court held

is just too amorphous

to provide any

that's under the old statute.

I'm sorry?

That's under the old statute.

The language is still there.

The governor can still extend

this state of emergency

as many times as he wants.

What's different now

is he has to put this

in front of the legislature

every 90 days

whereas before he didn't have to.

Right.

That still does not require

that he seek the legislature's

approval

to make that extension.

It's easier to ask

for forgiveness

than it is to ask

for permission.

So it's very different

than what we've seen

in other statutes.

And these states

function just fine

under these

emergency power statutes

and they provide

more guardrails

so to speak

that constrain

and guide

the governor's action

whereas here

we had...

checks that you're identifying

require legislative approval

before an emergency

can be ordered

or at a certain point

along the way.

No, at a certain point

along the way

if there's an extension.

Like some of them

have hard caps

others have caps

plus legislative approval

for extension.

You would appear to agree

that for 30 days

there's no question

the governor

has the power

to do this

consistent with the Constitution.

Correct.

We did not challenge

the governor's

initial declaration

we challenged

the subsequent renewals

of that declaration.

Thank you.

Thank you council.

Case submitted.
