The matter before the court is state of New Hampshire versus Matthew Gedney. The state of

New Hampshire is represented by Attorney Elizabeth Vélez, and before I introduce you, Ms. Hausman,

I want to have a brief word about Attorney Vélez. This is her second argument before

the court, and I was remiss in not formally welcoming her the other day to her first

argument. So I extend a belated welcome to you, Ms. Vélez. Mr. Gedney is represented by Stephanie C.

Hausman. I'm happy to announce that this is not her first argument for the New Hampshire Supreme

Court, but it's always nice to have you before the court, Ms. Hausman, and you may proceed whenever

you want. Did you reserve any time? I did. I reserved one minute of my time. Thank you very

much. Please proceed when you're ready. Thank you. May it please the court, Stephanie Hausman,

on behalf of Matthew Gedney? On questions of restitution, courts have one primary question.

Did the crime of conviction cause an economic loss? Or, put another way, was an economic loss

the direct result of the crime of conviction? As this court said in Eno, the loss must bear a

significant relationship to the offense and the factual allegations pled in the charging document.

This is required by the plain language of the restitution statute.

The issue here involves interpretation of that statute and its requirement of direct causation.

The court should therefore review the issue de novo. Here, Mr. Gedney was convicted of conspiracy

to commit armed robbery. Although he had been charged with actually committing the robbery,

the jury failed to reach a verdict on that charge and the state did not charge him with

being an accomplice to the robbery. The actus reis of conspiracy is an agreement to commit a crime.

An overt act must also be committed by a co-conspirator. The state here alleged a series

of overt acts ranging from the pretty innocuous such as driving to the victim's town to the

more inculpatory such as arming himself with a gun and entering the residence. However, the

state did not... And uttering threatening words, correct?

Uttering threatening words was not in the indictment, no. However, the state did not

ask for a special verdict, so we don't know which overt acts the jury relied upon in

convicting Mr. Gedney of conspiracy. Can we conclude that the jury landed on the innocuous

acts given that he was acquitted of the actual armed robbery?

Just to clarify, the jury hung on the actual armed robbery, so he was not acquitted.

I'm sorry.

I believe... I'm not sure the record reflects whether the state went forward on that charge or not,

but I think it's fair to... There's a good reason to suspect that because they were unable to

reach a verdict on the actual armed robbery that they did not find the overt acts that

involved committing the robbery. So it would have been driving that?

Yes, I think that's the fairest assumption based on the jury's split verdict.

So can we conclude that as a matter of law, but for Mr. Gedney's participation

in this conspiracy, the robbery would not have occurred?

That might be a fair conclusion, but the test isn't about for a test.

The test is... Is it directly caused by the crime of conviction and the...

And the burden is by a preponderance of the evidence, correct?

That's true. The state bears the burden of proving that direct connection or direct

causation by a preponderance.

The trial court found that that burden was satisfied. In fact,

that a much higher burden was satisfied. How can we get behind that?

The state makes no argument here about how the crime of conspiracy,

in the way it was alleged here, directly caused the rude's need for counseling.

Rather, the trial court and the state focused on other actions that could be imputed to Mr. Gedney.

But under this court's restitution case law, that's not enough.

In penalt the court affirmed that it was not a question of whether any of the

defendants actions caused a loss. Rather, the court focused on the crime of conviction

and concluded that the loss that had been caused by the defendant

was not caused by the crime she was convicted of.

Ms. Hausmann, the fact that the court may have viewed this narrowly and looked at the

sort of retried, as it were, the armed robbery case, and the fact that the state may have

be placing greatest reliance on connecting this with armed robbery,

is that any limitation on us looking at the record and saying that

this was sufficient connection? There was a direct enough result between the conviction of

conspiracy and counseling here? I agree with the court that it's not really a factual dispute,

that Ms. Rude talked about the impact of the robbery on her and how it was connected to the

need for her and her husband to seek counseling. But I don't think that the facts that were testified

to by Ms. Rude establish a direct connection between the crime of conviction and the need for

counseling. She spoke very specifically. In penalt part of that decision rested on the fact that

the conduct after the accident could be could be engaged in by the person who was innocent of

causing the accident. So you had sort of a disconnect. Here we don't have that disconnect

because the conspiracy did result in the robbery. I mean the robbery happened and there is no

innocent activity. Any of the five, I mean while innocent in their own, any of the five

overt acts, while they could appear innocent standing alone, they all contributed to the ultimate

event. So why can't we impute that through any of the five overt acts?

To sort of go back to your observation about penalt, I mean that was an interesting case

because an accident that causes property damage was sort of a necessary precondition to committing

the offense. And yet this court held that the loss caused by the accident wasn't caused by the

actions related to the crime itself. And the same thing. The accident could have been

caused by someone else. I mean theoretically, yes.

I think you're right that there is a temporal issue. But to address how that relates to this case,

a conspiracy conviction maybe had when the when the subject crime never occurs. And again the

court's focus needs to be on the crime of conviction and on the factual allegations that

support it, that we can that to determine whether those directly cause an economic loss.

And Ms. Rude spoke about how the robbery affected her and she stressed certain facts

that weren't included as overt acts in the in the charge here. Her fear and her need for

counseling was totally understandable. But it wasn't a direct result of the crime of conspiracy.

She did not express that her need for counseling was was the result of an agreement to rob her,

which again is the act as race of conspiracy. We're not saying conspiracy can never result

in a finding of economic loss. If my husband were to conspire with a hit man to have me killed,

even if the crime doesn't succeed, a direct result of that crime would probably be that I would

seek counseling. And so there are circumstances where the agreement itself may result in an

economic loss such as the loss here. I also suggest that you consult with Divorce

Council as well. Yes. But here the the counseling was an offshoot frankly of the larger

invasion of personal space and security. So can't it be can it be linked?

Again, she she sort of spoke about very specific acts that occurred during the robbery that caused

her to fear for their lives and that that was then the result that she needed counseling and

couldn't leave her house. So if she had just testified that I just can't believe these

people were in my house and I felt so violated because they were in my house and took things,

would that more generalized testimony allow us to reach back to Mr. Gedney? I think there are

circumstances where if the state charged things differently or if the state had sought a jury

verdict, a special verdict identifying the overt acts that yes, the need for counseling can

properly be ordered as restitution in a conspiracy case such as this. For example, they charged him as

a exacting in concert. Exactly. If they had charged him as an accomplice so that he was acting in

concert with the people who actually committed the armed robbery, then yes under Eno, accomplices

can all be jointly and severely liable for the restitution that is caused by or the economic

loss that's caused by the crime. So why? Good. That does it affect our analysis one way or the other

that Ms. Evans pled here? Well, I don't think it affects the analysis, but it does tell us that

there is somebody who has been convicted of armed rob, the armed robbery of the rude. And so

there is somebody from which restitution can be ordered. Again, the state could choose to

retry Mr. Gedney on the armed robbery. And that also could result in a restitution order that is

proper because it's directly connected to the crime of conviction.

I would just say and I'll direct this to both counsel. Did you all look for out-of-state

precedent on this matter? I didn't see any cases cited. Is there aren't any

dealing with this issue in other states about whether somebody could

pay restitution even though they were convicted only of conspiracy?

I didn't find any cases that related to conspiracy and restitution, but I did look

at some cases that were cited by this court in Eno that held that accomplice or acting in

concert with could result in an order of restitution.

Unless the court has any further questions. I have one. Why can't we just rely on

the statute that says the penalty for conspiracy is the same as that authorized for the crime that

was the object? Why isn't that sort of a straight shot? Sure, because restitution is not mandatory

in all armed robbery offenses. And so because restitution is not mandatory in all offenses,

restitution is a possibility if it is under the restitution statute, if the crime of

conviction directly causes an economic loss. Thank you. Justice Hicks, you're on mute.

Thank you. You still have you one minute. Thank you. Ms. Bellas. Good afternoon,

your honors, and may it please the court. My name is Elizabeth Vales and I represent the

state of New Hampshire in this matter. I welcome your questions at any time. Your honors, the

defendant's arguments urging this court to reverse the trial court's restitution order are

overlooking specific facts that the trial court credited when it ordered the defendant to pay

restitution in addition to the plain language of New Hampshire's conspiracy statute. Here in

the appellate brief, the defendant says that the state didn't introduce any evidence that shows

the defendant's own acts caused the victim's need for restitution. But the specific trial

testimony that the judge credited in ordering restitution established that Gedney was the

one who entered the home. But the judge is not permitted at this stage to retry those facts.

So given that the jury hung, we don't have convicted facts, facts on which the conviction

was based that are established. And so that my understanding that preponderance of the

evidence standard doesn't reach back to retry the evidence. It only looks at the connection

of whether the target of the restitution is directly the result of the crime on which the

person was convicted. So I don't see where the trial judge can retry those facts.

Well, your honors, this court has settled all the way back in 1987 in court that it's, and I'm

quoting, of course, well settled that a trial court may consider evidence of pending charges

as well as charges that have fallen short of a conviction in determining sentencing.

And the United States Supreme Court held in 1997 that a judge can consider even acquitted conduct

in ordering sentencing. So here it's not so much that the trial court is making up facts or

finding new facts. It's saying where there is even no acquittal that there are facts in the record

that show that the defendant's own action caused the harm. And here one of the overt acts that

that's listed was the fact that the defendant had a handgun and Evans had a baseball bat when

they entered the residence. And that's the specific testimony on that fact that the trial

court credited in ordering restitution that the defendant entered the home with a gun. And it

was the gun and the threat that caused the victim's need for restitution. Now,

it's true there isn't a special verdict form. So we don't know what facts the trial court, I'm

sorry, the jury found beyond a doubt. But this court held in Schwartz that restitution isn't

an element, if you will, of the offense. And so a trial court can look at conduct that is in

evidence when deciding whether a victim's economic loss flew directly from the defendant's conduct.

In Schwartz, the defendant was convicted of simple assault, but acquitted of a more severe

second degree assault charge. And the judge ordered restitution. On appeal, the defendant argued

that the trial court aired because the simple assault charge didn't on its face establish

that there was that level of violence. And this court held that because restitution wasn't

an element of the offense, and there was evidence in the record of unprivileged physical

conduct and no evidence that the defendant's, I'm sorry, the victim's injuries came from any other

act that restitution and the amount of $37,000 was appropriate. So they are the more serious charge

for which the defendant was acquitted was likely the one that resulted in the broken

jaw. But the trial court was allowed to reach to that sort of damage, if you will, and

drag it in under the simple assault charge for which he was convicted.

Right. The evidence in a single trial was on both charges and in Schwartz, the trial court convicted,

I'm sorry, the jury convicted of one and acquitted on the other. Here we don't have an acquittal,

but as the United States Supreme Court said in Watson 97, again in the context of acquitted

conduct, is that it's impossible to know why exactly a jury found a defendant not guilty

on a certain charge in the absence of specific findings. But it also said that an acquittal doesn't

establish that the jury rejected any facts or concluded the defendant was innocent of charge

conduct. And it went on to find therefore that when a judge sentences something that requires

a preponderance of an evidence standard, a much lesser standard that the judge may consider

acquitted conduct. How attenuated can the causal relationship be if the defendant

had been pulled over for speeding on the way to the home for the burglary and he's convicted of

only that? And he then have to pay this restitution because causally that's connected? Or is the

fact that this is conspiracy to commit armed robbery make it different?

I think the court poses a really interesting question and one that it doesn't need to answer in

this case to affirm. But there are cases out there, federal and a case out of Arizona, which

cited, you know, that well, let me let me try again. Under federal statute, someone who

starts with conspiracy to commit a crime can be ordered to pay restitution for all of the

economic harm that results from that conspiracy. So the question of nexus is resolved under the

federal statute. We have a very, very different statute in New Hampshire. It is, it is. But

the Arizona court of appeals has held that under their state restitution statute, and I

believe the Connecticut statute as well, that someone who's ordered to pay restitution,

I'm sorry, someone who's convicted of conspiracy can be ordered to pay restitution for the economic

harm that results from that conspiracy. And that could be pretty attenuated. Here, I think it

there's not the link is is much closer because of the evidence via Evan's testimony that the

defendant was the one who entered the home held the gun and threatened Mr. Rude. And it matters

not that the jury rejected that testimony. I don't think it's very honored to say that we know that

they rejected the testimony. We know they didn't find him guilty of armed robbery. But as the U.S.

Supreme Court held in Watts, can't really probe behind that verdict and know what what part of

it, what fact on what basis. So how would we reconcile this argument with Penal where we

reverse the order of restitution because the damage at issue was not the result of the crime

for which the defendant was convicted, leaving the scene rather than she was not convicted of

running over the mailboxes. I read Penal to be that the main challenge there was temporal that

the the economic harm couldn't have been a result of the crime because the crime hadn't occurred

at the time of the economic loss, the hitting of the mailbox. So the as I read Penal, the challenge

there is that it couldn't be a direct result because the damage happened before the crime.

It's not a crime to hit a mailbox or at least that wasn't the charge crime. It was a crime

what what she did afterwards. But certainly the judge there would have had evidence that

she ran over did the property damage, if you will. So is that not but that was not because it

wasn't part of the charge conduct, then it can't be part of a restitution order?

I'm sorry, Your Honor, I think I I'm not quite following that last piece.

So the temporal issue, I mean, the judge still had evidence before him or her that the

accident happened with the mailboxes. Whether she was under the influence or not, she still went

off the road and ran over, you know, white line violation and ran over the mailboxes. So

based on that evidence, why couldn't the judge have sort of added that in

to the criminal conduct? Well, again, Your Honor, I as I read Penal that the challenge

there that the court had with ordering restitution was that the statute says that restitution is

limited to economic loss that occurs as a direct result of the criminal offense. And so I read

Penalt is saying that the economic loss can't be the result if the economic loss occurred

before the charged crime temporally occurred. And so the last question and then I'll leave you

alone on this, assuming she wasn't found to have been guilty of DUI, but the evidence before

the trial judge was that in fact she was driving under the influence. And that court could have

found by a preponderance of the evidence that that crime that criminal conduct occurred

prior to the leading the scene. So under your argument, this defendant wasn't convicted of the

robbery. But you're saying the judge could find that the acts engaged in during the robbery

he committed. So I see them as being kind of the same.

Okay, I see that I think I guess the I still think that the main basis of Penalt was was that kind of

direct result and the temporal a has to happen before B in order for the defendant to be held

accountable for the economic loss. And so I think that's that's how I read Penalt.

Right. But if but Penalt would not have would not be with us if we condone what happened here

that being a trial court reopening in the evidence and having a sentencing hearing where it's

reconsidering all the evidence that was that was presented at trial and making his own

come to his own conclusions on a different standard preponderance of the evidence.

I think if we allowed that kind of if that was something that that was proper

that Penalt decision would have come out very differently.

Well, I mean, your honor, this court held back in in 87 in in code, uncharged conduct or pending

charges are well within those kinds of facts, which are not facts that are a jury has found

are things that it's well settled according to the court that a judge may consider in in

sentencing and the United States Supreme Court in Watts and then the first circuit just in

February and Frederickson 2021 held that a judge may consider again in those cases it was a quitted

conduct. Sorry, in the last two Watson and Frederickson not in code when when ordering sentencing.

So we have to consider restitution and it is part of sentencing, but we have to consider it

identical to sentencing considerations regardless of what the restitution statute says

specifically. I think the restitution statute does I mean it has meaning you can't read that out

it requires that the economic loss be a direct result of of the defendant's criminal conduct.

But here even just looking at the the Crip the conspiracy charge itself

agreement to commit a crime and an overt act committed towards towards that towards that crime

and here there are five overt acts listed. There isn't a special verdict form so it's

true we don't know which fact or facts the jury found it could have found one it could have found

all of them. But even just looking at the conspiracy charge the judge when sentencing that

charge which is what he was sentencing restitution for looks through the evidence and he finds

yes there is at least a preponderance of the evidence I think probably much more but

a preponderance of the evidence that at the very least the defendant entered the home

with a gun and threatened Mr. Roode and that's the specific threat or act that the victim

testified at sentencing was why that she needed counseling and so the judge acted well within

his authority and in fact within his duty when he considered what economic loss the victim had

faced and what caused it. I mean that there's it's a preponderance of an evidence standard

and that is within the restitution statute so I I mean I the restitution statute is definitely

its own. Does it matter should it matter in our analysis at all that Ms. Evans pled guilty to armed

robbery or not does that impact our thinking at all? Your Honors I don't think it was she

it was an an openly as I recall but also that the court in in acting its duty to find

whether or not the victim suffered an economic loss found that the the victim did and then under

the purpose of the restitution statute found the defendant could be held accountable for that

economic loss. The fact that someone else might have also been responsible for that economic

loss is is an interesting point but it doesn't legally affect the court's analysis in terms

of restitution and the defendant definitely didn't I didn't see in their briefing saying that

somehow the amount was too high or it should have been divided that doesn't. So if neither Ms. Evans

nor the defendant here were charged with armed robbery but the only charge was conspiracy

with the trial court's analysis of more probably than not this robbery

happened in this fashion would that have been a proper analysis for the trial court?

I think it would have been your honor if let's just say that both that the only charge was

conspiracy and there was no armed robbery charge the judge the the jury sits through all of the

evidence that's in the record and they hear that the defendant entered Ms. Roode's home and

threatened them with a gun and then finds this defendant guilty and then at sentencing

the judge finds that indeed the victim suffered an economic loss and charges the defendant

with that loss so I think this court would find that there was more than a

preponderance of an evidence that the defendant entered the home and caused the harm

and this court on appeal reviews those factual findings with with deference so

there's a matter here that the analysis that you are asking us to adopt in terms of

damages flowing from the conspiracy charge that's really not the way the trial court thought

about it at all is that does that matter to us should it matter to us? I see that my

red light may I yes you may answer the question please uh your honor I think I just agree that the

judge didn't focus on the individual acts of of the defendant that the judge did cite the part

of the conspiracy statute which says that the sentencing is the same for someone convicted

of conspiracy of as the crime at the object but the the judge didn't rest on that kind of legal

conclusion as to the interaction between the conspiracy and the restitution statute the

judge also named and credited specific testimony in the record that established that the defendant

at least by preponderance of an evidence entered the victim's home and and threatened them

causing their need for counseling and so I I think the court can affirm on either kind of a

statutory basis I think that's somewhat perhaps complicated and something that it doesn't need to

reach in this case but it certainly could or it could rely on the specific factual findings that

the trial court made when it ordered restitution thank you counsel miss houseman I just want to

say um ask the court's permission the the state has mentioned several cases and statutes that

were not cited in their brief so I would just ask for the opportunity to read those and respond

if there is anything that I need to respond with granted how much time do you need 10 days got it thank

you all right case submitted once again it's a delight to have you both in the court the court

is now adjourned good day thank you thank you
