There are two matters before the court this afternoon.

The first is Shiva Lingam versus Francis Newton at all.

The second is Shiva Lingam versus the Town of Ashland Board of Selectment at all.

Mr. Shiva Lingam is represented by Stephen Martin.

The individual defendants are represented by Ann Jenness and Farrelly Bauer.

The town is represented by Attorney Laura Spector Morgan.

And Mr. Martin, you have arranged for the first 13 minutes and reserved two minutes.

We'll then hear from Ms. Spector Morgan for six, Ms. Jenness for six, and Mr. Bauer for

three to be followed by your two minutes, Mr. Martin.

And whenever you are ready, you may proceed.

Thank you, Your Honor.

And may it please the court.

I am Attorney Stephen T. Martin.

I represent the plaintiff and appellant, Tejasinga Shiva Lingam.

I'm happy to answer questions at any time.

This case really comes down to accountability, accountability of public officials to their

oaths of office, and accountability of public bodies to their constituents.

Each of Mr. Shiva Lingam's claims addresses these important issues.

His own appeal asks whether the select women, in this case, violated their oaths of office

contrary to RSA 421A2A by divulging sealed information from a non-public session.

Mr. Martin, did the select women actually divulge any information?

Wasn't that the town administrator that did that?

The town administrator did divulge or talk about information, but that was at the command

and behest of Frances Newton, one of the select women that is a defendant in this case.

And then on June 18th, so at a later meeting, select women sharps also divulged information

that was discussed during that non-public session.

So the answer to the question is, it turns necessarily on whether the board of select

men opined that the circumstances justifying the seal in that case no longer existed.

So first, as a matter of law, they could not have opined as such.

Or alternatively, there is at least a genuine issue of material fact as to whether in

fact they opined as such.

As I understand it, you're taking the position that there's a requirement for a vote to unseal

the minutes. Where can we find that in the statute?

Well, the statute's plain reading, if we look at RSA 91A33, that requires all action

taken in non-public session to be recorded in such a manner that the vote of each member

is easily ascertained and recorded. And so if the select women take the position that the

board reached an opinion during that non-public session to divulge that information or disclose

that information, then forming that opinion, or as the select women suggest, coming to an agreement,

either one is in action. It's something that they did. And so in that case, it would

have to be recorded. But alternatively, even if the opinion or the agreement is not considered

in action, there is obviously a decision made to divulge that information, right?

And under RSA 91A33, all decisions must be recorded. There's simply nothing in the record

showing that the board agreed to divulge, decided to divulge, or opined that the circumstances

justifying the seal no longer existed. But the plain language itself that I just went through

answers that question sufficiently. But the RSA 91A's policy of openness and accountability

gives us that same answer. Both the statute and this court disfavor secret decision making.

As this court previously implied, even if secret votes or decisions were not expressly prohibited

in RSA 91A, they would nevertheless be improper. And furthermore, as time goes on and the

legislature amends 91A, it increases or expands the public's access. It expands accountability to

the public with each amendment. So for example, RSA 91A now requires much more transparency

than it had in the past. And so to interpret it more narrowly would frustrate its policy

and legislative intent. In fact, if we look at the overwhelming broadness of public access provided

by RSA 91A, we'll see that government records constitute any information created by a government

body. Information is defined as or not defined as but includes opinions. And so the question is

how can one access an opinion if that opinion is not recorded?

Well, why isn't it quite transparent that they decided to release that information from the

session? And everybody knows now that that's what they decided to do. So what more does your

client demand in terms of transparency? Well, it's transparent in the sense that,

you know, ultimately people would have seen it because in the public session they talked about

it so it's in the public minutes. But if transparency is the goal, then that doesn't

further that goal. And the reason is because if a public official is accused of wrongdoing,

right, and there's no written record of a decision, then those public officials can go back

and clean up their tracks, so to speak, and come up with a with an explanation as to why it

happened. Is that what you are claiming happened here? A and B, what was the harm and what

happened to your client? Well, the harm is, as the as the complaint explains that after this

information was discussed in public in public session, both in the June 4 public session and

then in the June 18 public session, that information being given to the public then

caused Mr. Shiva Lingam to lose certain friendships. He had a campaign committee that

fell apart as a direct result of that information being released. What happens in the record is

there that these relationships changed as a result of the information that was that was divulged?

Yep, so in Mr. Shiva Lingam's affidavit, and I don't have the paragraph number in front of me,

but in his affidavit that we submitted with the motion for summary judgment did include

testimony that his campaign committee fell apart that he lost friendships as a result,

and that he was otherwise affected by it. This information of course was also reported in the

local newspaper, so it wasn't just a matter of being in the public minutes, it was then broadcast

to the to the town as a whole or the B area as a whole via the media. But the information

comes strictly from your client, not from the people that allegedly disassociated themselves

from him. I guess I don't understand the question, I'm sorry. I'm asking you that the evidence regarding

for your arguing here, whether it comes strictly from your client or from the people that disassociated

themselves from your client? Well the the evidence that we presented is Mr. Shiva Lingam's

own testimony that he no longer has those relationships with those people as a direct

result of it. And help me here, as a direct result of his complaint form being disclosed,

the nature of the complaint filed in the form? No, no. What the information that was divulged,

basically the decision to no longer consider what the board construed as criticisms of the board

in public, and ultimately the decision to eliminate what the town was using, what was called the

citizen's citizen inquiry form. Also if we if we look at the the bigger picture, these comments,

so these decisions basically which are which are basically adverse decisions to other other

citizens in the town, because now they can no longer use the citizen inquiry form,

now they can no longer complain about the board in public, which based on...

The citizen inquiry form was just a voluntary thing that the selectman decided to do there.

There are lots of ways for people in town to complain about a selectman said as a former

selectman, I know that happens. And I don't disagree that there are other mechanisms in which

the town's people could complain. The issue though is tying that adverse decision to Mr.

Shiva Lingam's name to the fact that he filed his own statement. What's the adverse decision?

Decide not to have that form? Well, two decisions really, one to eliminate that form

and also to not allow the public to criticize the board in public or to not...

Or actually to not to decide not to respond to criticisms of the board. Public can still

complain. They just made a decision they would not respond in a public session. Correct, correct.

But nevertheless, they're adverse decisions. It takes that away from those two items away

from the town's people. And that reflects again poorly on Mr. Shiva Lingam because it

based on the representations that were made appears to connect it to him as if he's the

cause of that. Well, doesn't it reflect equally as poorly on the select board to sort of decide

they aren't going to take public criticism? I suppose it could, but based on what transpired

afterwards again, Mr. Shiva Lingam losing these committee members, losing these friendships,

you know, I would say that's not how at least those individuals viewed it. And I don't think

we need a consensus among the town's people as to who's the bad guy here. I think it's just a matter

of was Mr. Shiva Lingam, the person talked about in public, non-public session, was he, was his

reputation adversely affected? So you're relying on a string of inferences between the board's

decision to eliminate the inquiry form and the plaintiff and your client's specific inquiry.

Does that the adverse effect? That's how you reach your adverse effect, these inferences?

Yeah, I wouldn't, I wouldn't call them inferences in so far as I would say that these relationships

broke apart immediately after these disclosures were made. This isn't something that was so far

attenuated that you couldn't relate it back. Well, what's to prevent your client or any other

citizen of the town to go to every selectman's meeting and complain and write a letter every

day to the selectman and complain? That's not been, that right hasn't been in any fashion.

The ability to complain? No, has not been infringed based on, you know, what's happened here,

but the ability to get the board to respond and address it has. And I think that actually is

a nice segue into the issue about whether or not notice should have been provided

before the non-public session informing people that the board intended to discuss

Mr. Shivalingham in non-public session. Because had he had that notice, he could have potentially

asked for an open meeting so he could address some of these things directly to the board.

In fact, this court actually recognized that in the Stoneman case that I cited in my brief,

where the plaintiff there had a disagreement with the board and the ability for him to have an

open meeting could have reduced the possibility of his reputation being distorted. And so from

that perspective, this case is actually controlled by the Johnson's case, talking about the RSA 91A

claim now. It's actually controlled by the Johnson case where the 91A32C requires that

prior notice be given before a public body discusses an individual in non-public session.

And it's put out of time, so unless the court has any further questions, I'll conclude there.

And you have two minutes in rebuttal. Next up, Attorney Specter Morgan, please.

Good afternoon, Your Honor. I may please the court. My name is Laura Specter Morgan.

This court should reverse the decision of the Superior Court in this case, finding that

individualized notice was required to Mr. Shivalingham when the board was going to

discuss a subject that involved him. I'm happy to take questions at any time.

As the court is well aware, your review in this case is de novo,

and you review statutes for their intent as expressed in the words of the statute as

considered as a whole. You look at the plaint in ordinary meetings, and you interpret the

legislative intent from the statute as written. Why are we not bound by Nash?

Why are we not bound by the Johnson decision? Certainly, Your Honor.

Nash is actually not applicable here, and the reason for that is because Nash involved in employment

decisions. And what this court held in both Stoneman and Nash was that a public employee

has a property interest in their continued public employment. That interest does not

attach to one's reputational decision. And if you look at the amendments that were made

by the legislature to... Is their case support for that?

This court has not ruled on that. Whether a reputational interest is

or is not a property interest? There is actually, Your Honor, there's a U.S. Supreme Court case,

Paul v. Davis. And in Paul v. Davis, the U.S. Supreme Court held that reputational loan

without some other sort of tangible implication to one's employment, for example,

does not satisfy the same property interest as employment does.

So, Justice Stoneman, if you look at the amendments that were done to the statute,

while Johnson and Nash was actually pending up at the court, the legislature had a very

extensive discussion about how it was never their intention to create any substantive rights

in RSA 91A. 91A is simply an open notice provision. And as this court has held in the Brown case,

which really is the applicable case here, the only notice that is required by RSA 91A is found in

Section 2. And that is the notice that requires general notice to the public that the board is

going to meet. This is a very generalized notice requirement. The board does not have to

indicate what it's going to discuss, who it's going to discuss, or what possible subjects might come

up. It merely has to provide notice that it's going to meet at a time, date, and location.

So a citizen has no right to being notified that he or she is going to be discussed by the select

board? A citizen has no right under 91A to be notified that the board is going to go into

non-public discussion to discuss a matter that may adversely affect that person's reputation.

We did not limit Johnson v. Nash to those with a property interest expressly. We did not really deal

with the distinction between the employee and some other person with some other interest at stake.

Not in Nash, Your Honor. In Brown, there is a discussion about employees who are currently

employed and who are going to be terminated versus employees who have not yet acquired any sort of

vested interest in their employment. So you've dealt with it in the employment context. You

haven't addressed this section specifically. So the amendments to 91A3 make it very clear

that the legislature never intended 91A to create any sort of substantive rights.

And so the amendments to section A, which limited the situations in which an employee could request

a public hearing, made it clear they were only allowed to do that if they already had a right

to a hearing. Those 2004, or those amendments, not 2004, didn't add a notice provision to 91A3.

All they did was limit this court's holding in Nash. There's never been an individualized

notice provision in RSA 91A. And we know that the legislature could have adopted such an individualized

notice provision if it wanted to have had several opportunities since Johnson v. Nash.

And other states do that. For example, Massachusetts has a requirement that the

individual to be discussed be given at least 48 hours notice. That's a non-public session.

So the legislature could have imposed an individualized notice requirement, but it did

not. And this court should not do that, where the legislature has not done so.

Doing so would not further the general purposes of the rights to no law, which is to provide

access to the public of the government's work. It's not to provide individuals with an opportunity

to battle with the selectmen in a public forum. 91A was an act to provide the public

with access to governmental proceeding. It was not intended to create a substantive right.

And this court should, therefore, reverse the decision of the Superior Court and find that no

individualized notice is required. Thank you very much. Thank you. Moving on now to Attorney

Jenis. Good afternoon, Your Honors. And may it please the court. My name is Ian Jenis.

I'm an attorney with Gallagher, Callaghan, and Gartrell here in Concord. And together

with my co-counsel, Charles Bauer, I represent the town of Ashland Select Women, Francis Newton,

and former Select Woman, Lee Sharps. Your Honors, as we turn back to the plaintiff's petition

for removal from public office of the Select Women, it may be useful to briefly revisit

three fundamental sort of background facts in this matter. And as the court is aware on June

4th, 2018, the entire town of Ashland Select Board voted to go into non-public session.

Two, during that non-public session, there was some discussion. And as part of that discussion,

the board made a determination that it would go back into public session

and put out three sort of buckets of information, one being a reading from

plaintiff's citizen inquiry form, which has been referred to as a complaint at various

stages of this litigation. Bucket number two was a reading from town council's responsive legal

opinion responding to some of the concerns and requests that plaintiff made in his citizen

inquiry form. And three was this broader discussion of the citizen inquiry form itself,

its utility, how it would be named, that sort of thing. Plaintiff now seeks to remove just the two

Select Women from the Select Board based on what I think is fairly characterized as

an extraordinarily technical reading of RSA 91A3 that is at odds with both the express purpose

of RSA 91A, the right to no law, and with the express language of 91A3. Plaintiff seeks removal

under RSA 421A. And for the purposes of this discussion, there are a couple of prongs,

421A, that are most relevant. The first is that in order to achieve removal under 421A,

plaintiff would need to demonstrate that there was a vote of the governing body to withhold

particular information from public disclosure. And the second, and I'll refer to that as the

voting prong for sort of ease of listening. And the second is what I will refer to as the

adverse actions prong. And that requires that plaintiff demonstrate that the disclosure,

if improper, had, and I should call it the adverse effects prong, an adverse effect on

the reputation of someone other than a member of the governing body, in this case,

plaintiff obviously asserts that his reputation was damaged as a result of this disclosure.

Judge McLeod ruled correctly in our motion for summary judgment that plaintiff failed to

provide evidence to support the existence of the first voting prong. In essence, that plaintiff

did not provide evidence that there was a vote to withhold the information about which plaintiff

heard. Attorney Gens, if we agree with you on the summary judgment ruling, do we have to

then evaluate your argument with respect to your motion to dismiss?

Your Honor, respectfully, we would request that the court does rule on our motion to

dismiss. And the reason for that is in part that in an ordinary case, a motion for dismissal would

come in time before a motion for summary judgment and at an early stage of the legal proceedings

that would avoid additional costs and additional expenditure of time in defending a particular

case. In this case, we believe that in our motion for judgment on the pleadings,

we clearly articulated a roundabout that would support judgment on the pleadings.

In so far, as plaintiff failed to set forth adequate factual linkage between any of the

harm that plaintiff perceived to himself, the disclosures made by the select court.

And plaintiff has indicated to this court today that, in fact, he did not supply

any evidence other than his own affidavit sort of generally alleging that he perceived that certain

relationships of his changed or ended in the wake of this disclosure on apparently June 18th,

which I would remind the court is a date on which plaintiff's name was never raised.

His name didn't appear on June 18th. So the situation is so factually attenuated that,

in this case, the motion for judgment on the pleadings would have been appropriate.

So we agree with you there. Then who's responsible for your fees

in litigating that summary judgment motion? Would it be Judge McLeod?

Your Honor, Attorney Bauer is going to speak to our questions on legal fees today, and I will

hand it over to him momentarily. But first, I would just ask if the court doesn't have any

further questions for me that the court affirm the dismissal, at least of this matter, either by

affirming Judge McLeod's grant of summary judgments at the lower court level,

or by determining that our judgment on the pleadings motion would have been properly granted.

Thank the court. Thank you, Anne. My name is Charles Bauer. May it please the court.

I'm going to be speaking about the attorney's fees issue, and I'm going to

narrow my argument with regard to the substantial public benefit theory. I'll rest on the brief

with regard to the other issues of bad faith, as this court is well aware. There are two different

methods of exceptions to the general rule of the American rule. One, both created by judicial

determination, common law. One is the Harkim standard of bad faith, which I'm not going to speak

about, but it's really the second prong. And let me, if I may, start off by reading Judge McLeod's

decision below that is at issue here. He says that an award, and this is on page two of his

decision, quote, an award of attorneys fees to the defendants cannot be sustained under the common

law doctrine or theory of substantial benefit to the community. He goes on to say, quote,

the New Hampshire Supreme Court has, quote, not applied the substantial benefit theory

to support an award in favor of a government unit against a private litigant,

end quote, incites the Bidad case. We ask this court to clarify and frankly expand the law

as it relates to removal issues. Our position is, in this case, over $70,000, and I would

dare to say it's probably at about $100,000 at this point of taxpayers' money from the town of Ashland

have been spent to defend and successfully defend two select women against the petition to remove

them. But Mr. Bauer, it seems to me, I mean, the problem with the argument is that any time

the town prevails in litigation, it will have arguably been substantial public

benefit. And you're asking us to okay that approach, even in the absence of the bad faith.

I agree with part of it of your statements, sir, but I'm not arguing that this court

open the lower court to at least consider, under the substantial benefit theory,

granting attorneys fees in removal petitions in which a town must defend and pay for

boards of select men, planning board members. Otherwise, it's really to level the playing

field. For example, if a petitioner petitions to remove a planning board member or a board of

select person and is successful in that, under the substantial benefit theory, the lower court

could grant attorneys fees recovery to that successful litigant. What we're asking for

is the level that playing field as it relates to the removal attempts, unsuccessful removal attempts.

In this case, Judge McLeod believed that he did not have the tools, he did not have the law

from this court to even consider granting or considering the award of attorneys fees,

the recovery of attorneys fees in this case because

Dr. Bauer, if I understand you correctly, you're saying you're not asking us to open the door wide

open for any case against the town. You're asking us to tell Judge McLeod not that he should order

attorneys fees, but he should, the door is open enough for him to consider these

awarding fees and removal cases. Is that the narrow relief that you're asking for on this issue?

Yes, sir. I'm afraid I have to cut it off. If I may,

late question, but why is that not a consideration for the legislature in the removal statute?

It could be, it could be your honor, but at this point in time, as you know,

this court in silver, 2019-81 case, silver versus botch, this court said that you have

the discretion and authority to create judicially created exceptions to the American rule.

And you have done that in the past. You've created Harkim, bad faith, and you've created,

when I say you, I don't mean the court, the court has created exceptions for this substantial

benefit theory. And I respectfully request that you, just as Judge, Justice Bassett said,

to at least give the lower courts the ability to consider it, not to do it,

carte blanche, not to mandate it, but to at least consider it. Thank you very much.

Thank you, Mr. Bauer. Mr. Martin, you're on mute.

Of course I was. Thank you, Your Honor. I just want to clarify, we're looking at two

standards here. We're looking at a summary judgment standard and we're looking at a

motion to dismiss standard. The defendants in their motion for summary judgment never raised

reputational harm as an issue in the motion for summary judgment. The only issue that the court

considered with respect to summary judgment was whether the board reached an opinion to divulge

information. That's it. Now, Mr. Shiva-Lingham has adequately pleaded reputational harm in his

complaint to survive the motion for judgment on the pleading. So that's the difference

when it comes to discussing the reputational harm aspect of it. He doesn't have, at this

day, at the summary judgment stage, because they didn't raise it as an issue, he didn't have to

introduce evidence of reputational harm because it wasn't at issue there. Secondly, with respect

to the substantial benefit exception, it has never been applied against a private individual.

It's always been applied to a person, private or public, wronged by a public body or a corporation.

It's always involved the use of an unlawful process. It's always involved a situation where,

in context of a public official, that public official was actually removed. We don't have

those facts here. Mr. Shiva-Lingham used a lawful process available to him as a statutory

check against improper public official conduct. That's what he used. If we open the door to allowing

attorney's fees in this situation, it will discourage individuals from pursuing that statutory

check against their public officials. Well, aren't litigants always exposed to an award

of attorney's fees for bad faith litigation in every case? Yes, Your Honor, presuming they

act in bad faith, which is, as stated in my brief, is not the case here. But if we open the door to

the substantial benefit exception, it's going to apply in every single removal case.

And I don't think that sets good precedent. Thank you, Your Honors.

Thank you all very much. Case submitted. The court is adjourned.

Thank you.
