Claire? This is case 2020-0370, Carter Country Club, Inc. versus Carter Community Building Association.

Good afternoon and may it please the Court. My name is Jeremy Egleton with the law firm of OR and Reno on behalf of the Carter Community Building Association, the appellant in this matter, and also the defendant below. I've reserved one minute.

I think this case, to the extent the Court has a deciding condition in this case, is going to turn on the standard of review that the Court employs in looking at the deed here.

The plaintiff appellee would have the Court decide this case on the basis of the Red Hill Outing Club decision in which the Red Hill Court stated that when dealing with a condition subsequent, such as might exist in this case, you have to apply strict scrutiny to the interpretation of that deed in order to ensure that whatever it was that the grantor reserved, he only reserved that which he specifically articulated.

But what this Court said in the later case of Cardone with Justice Bassett writing was that that was a stretch. The strict scrutiny that's supposed to be employed when dealing with a reversionary interest of this kind applies to the triggering facts of the case, and that was expressly stated in the Cardone matter.

You know, I thought the issue in this case, and I could be wrong, was whether a right of the optional reversion nature and the right of, is really just a right of reentry, hence not alienable.

That's right, Your Honor. That is certainly the argument of the Petitioner in this case. But the, I think that if you look at the deeds in their totality, looking at what the intent of the parties were, you can't come to the same conclusion that the trial court did on that question.

Let me just stuff you right there. A party can intend whatever they want, but if it's contrary to the common law or standard rules of construction, it's just, they're just out of luck.

I would agree with that, Your Honor, if, for example, the deed in this case said that the CCBA has a right of reentry or a power of termination in which it can employ to trigger that, to terminate that estate.

But that's not what happened here. Here the language states that upon triggering of the condition, i.e. one year of non-use of the golf course, the property shall revert to grantor or its successors.

That's the grantor's option.

That's correct.

Does that include any ambiguity?

No, Your Honor. I don't think. When you look at the totality of the deed, it's not ambiguous.

Because if the parties believed that they were creating a power of termination, then what is the point of including language stating that it would revert to the grantor's successors or assigns?

Or is it just a covenant?

We make that argument, Your Honor.

So the covenant itself should be enforceable to the grantor's successors and assigns.

Could be careless drafting, too. That's been known to happen in New Hampshire.

It could be careless drafting, but if that is the case, Your Honor, then the solution lies in considering what the totality of the deed tells us.

And that is that there was a manifest requirement that the grantee, in this case, maintain a golf course in perpetuity.

We're not talking about a 10-year condition of some kind. This was intended to be maintained as a golf course in perpetuity.

So to the extent that it is a covenant, then it's enforceable on that basis.

And you can convey a covenant, and everybody agrees on that point.

Now, with respect to the conveyance of a covenant, which was an alternative argument that I made at the trial court level,

you do have to demonstrate that the person who has the benefit of that covenant may have a legitimate interest in enforcing it.

And there's no real dispute in this case that the CCBA, which was vested with the benefit of that covenant by transfer,

has an interest in enforcing the terms of that covenant.

With respect to the question about what the language says, I think one case that neither party actually focused on

that I was thinking about in the context of preparing for this oral argument is the Northampton School District case,

which came up in the Red Hill Outing Club matter.

And in that case, the court found that there was a determinable fee, which is the interest that I would prefer that the court see having been created here,

arising from language, and this is common in the different cases interpreting these issues,

that talks about while, during, until those kinds of words suggest a determinable fee,

i.e. when that condition ceases to exist, the property automatically reverts to the grantor or successors in assigns,

because we all agree that a determinable fee of that nature is a transferable property interest.

But the grantor would still have to initiate some sort of action in order for that to happen.

I mean, as a matter of law, Your Honor, I don't think so.

I think it automatically reverts.

Now, the question might arise whether when that occurs, they would have to show that the triggering event had happened

if there was some dispute over that, so you may need a trial of some kind on that point.

But that seems to be the case.

You'd have to report something.

Right.

Something would have to happen if nobody paid attention to it.

I suppose for years and years, the effect wouldn't be realized, I guess.

But at the option of language, I have to just remind the court that that language in the totality of American jurisprudence

has apparently only been construed to create a power of termination one time,

and that was in the Kentucky case relied upon by the petitioner, the Unknown Heirs,

versus the city of Covington.

So that single time is the only time that at the option of has given rise to a power of termination

as opposed to a determinable fee.

And so in light of the fact that it's a Kentucky case,

and I think the other important point to note about that Covington case

is that really what was going on in that case was the city of Covington wanted to free itself

from some of the more unusual covenants and restrictions that were imposed as part of that deed.

So there were restrictions against how people dressed in certain ways in the city park and so forth,

and there was no intention on the part of the city to actually use the park for anything other than a park.

So the fundamental core of what the grantor intended in the Covington case was being maintained.

So I just don't think it's an applicable case that we should be endorsing as the law of New Hampshire.

I do think that Northampton School District covers this case because in our case,

we use language similar to the while, during, and until.

We say at all times in perpetuity a golf course shall be maintained,

and if at any time it shall not be maintained for more than a year.

Well, here's the problem. I mean, that may very well have been the intention,

but as soon as you give a grantee an option to do whatever, reenter or revert,

you have altered the chain of title and you have created a real uncertainty

as to whether it would ever take effect or expire if someone elected not to.

Well, I think it's a waiver issue, Your Honor. Certainly it shall revert,

but the question is if the person doesn't want the reversion, then they have every right to decline it.

But that's a very different thing than saying that the person who holds that stick, so to speak,

has to act affirmatively, assert the dominance over that fee, and take possession of the property

through a right of reentry. That's a right of reentry.

There's no dispute that the Red Hill Out and Club case concerned a right of reentry

because it said those words in the document itself. In this case, we're talking about

something that everybody clearly wanted to be heritable to the heirs, successors,

and the signs of the original grantor.

Which was an option.

It was a, it was the language of the option exists in this case, Your Honor.

But I disagree that that language of an option does anything other than give that individual

or that entity the right to decline the reversion if it wants to.

And how does that get recorded for future reference? If there were a failure to act

or an actual waiver, no, never mind. But now the language still carries on in the deed.

At that point, the property owner, if my client does not act on that interest in some fashion.

Or if they just specifically waive it, right?

Right. Then they waive it by non-receipt, so to speak.

And as Justice Donovan suggested, even in a case where you have an unambiguous,

determinable fee that reverts automatically, something has to happen.

Somebody has to go to a courthouse or a registry and say, hey, wait a minute,

this condition has been triggered at this point.

And it is perplexing that we would, on the one hand, have a general doctrine

that we should not be interpreting deeds hyper-technically so as to undermine

the intentions of the parties at the same time that the trial court in this case

absolutely did that. It relied on three words in the deed to obviate

the intent and meaning of successors in the signs, in perpetuity,

and this benefit being something that endures to the grantor forever, in essence.

So I think it is for that reason that we need to place our standard of review objective

from the perspective of Cardone as opposed to...

Well, I mean, the alienability of future interest is really it's an issue of first

impression for this Court, is it not?

This is definitely an issue of first impression.

The Court has articulated the distinction before between a power of termination

slash right of reentry and a...

But why don't we disregard the restatement first of property and adopt

the restatement third of property and just do away with all these distinctions

so that normal people who don't practice property law will understand

what everybody else is talking about.

I think it would be an appropriate step to reach that conclusion, Your Honor.

I guess I'm not here to tell you to jettison the first restatement of property.

I think there's probably some material in there that remains relevant to our law these days,

but to the extent that we're talking about the right result in this case,

I actually don't think you even need to get there.

I do think that this can be decided on the plain language of the instrument itself.

Is this an insurable title?

Yes, Your Honor.

It is an insurable title, both a power of termination and a right of reversion

or a determinable fee are cognizable property interests,

and in particular, given the fact that the CCBA is a charitable entity

and so the general disfavor that the legislature has applied

to future interests of this nature doesn't apply to my client in this case.

So I see my yellow light is on.

The only quick point I want to make,

if you look at the restatement 161c comment e,

which I quoted at some length at page 34 of my brief,

it sets forth three relationships

and describes three relationships between the restrictive covenant,

excuse me, between the reversionary right and the power of termination,

two of which would permit the transferability of the power of termination.

I submit that the first two are met in this case,

because if you look at the language shall revert,

there's your reversionary interest.

To the extent at the option of constitutes a power of termination,

there's your power of termination.

We're seeing together in harmony in this case,

and that means both of the conditions described at page 34 in that comment

from the restatement, i.e., that the relationship is so close

that a transfer of the reversionary interest automatically transfers power of termination,

or the relationship is such that the power of termination

is transferable along with the reversionary interest.

The language of this deed affects one or the other of those results.

And so for that reason, I believe that the comment

and the third section of 161, 161c,

is perfectly applicable in this case to preserve the power of termination.

It appeared to me that the director of charitable trust

entered an appearance in this case.

What was his position?

His position, if I recall correctly, Your Honor,

initially was focused on the first argument

made by the plaintiff in this case,

which is that the deed created a property interest

that was barred by the rule against perpetuities.

That was his primary focus at oral argument at the summary judgment stage.

I think he either deferred comment on the second argument,

which is the one that's now in front of the court here,

or alternatively, he endorsed the notion

that a power of termination cannot be transferred.

And I don't have a quibble with that aspect of the law.

I just don't think this is a power of termination.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Can I keep them on stage for a minute?

Absolutely.

Can you just touch on the 91 and 94 quarters briefly?

Yes, Your Honor.

My issue with that aspect of this case is as follows.

The parties litigated a matter back in 1991 and 94

and quieted title to the interests of the original Carter Country Club Inc.

as to all of the remaining shareholders who might possess some interest.

At that time, it was the belief of everybody involved

with the Carter Country Club on the executive and shareholder end anyway

that they had affected the transfer of the reversion to the CCBA.

So if that is the case, then they can't be said to have had a full

and fair opportunity to litigate that question

and, therefore, raised you to kind of doesn't apply.

And it was an error on the part of the trial court to say

that its decision in this case retroactively attenuates those rights

as to those other individuals.

So I think on that question, the trial court's decision that if this is a power

of termination and it was not successfully transferred to the CCBA

that it devolved onto the shareholders remains technically correct.

Was there a consideration paid for those neither party judgment docket markings?

I don't know off the top of my head, Your Honor.

That was many years ago.

But candidly, that particular, the recitation of those earlier cases

only came up in the post-judgment state or the post-summary judgment stage.

It came up in the reconsideration stage of this case,

only when the court issued that order talking about the devolution of those rights,

although that was in response to an argument we had made at summary judgment.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Ms. Elliott.

Good afternoon.

May it please the court, Samantha Elliott from the law firm of Gallagher,

named Gartrell on behalf of the Carter Country Club?

I'd like to start just by addressing the last question that was asked us this.

We vehemently disagree about the context of the 1991 and 1994 orders.

The issue of whether or not the right was effectively transferred to the CCBA

was exactly what was that issue in that case at that time.

In fact, that's why those orders say the right held by the Carter Community

Building Association, if any.

Also, the affidavit of Attorney Barry Schuster, which the CCBA would like you

to take a look at and consider, was created in the context of that case

because these issues were exactly what was being litigated at that time.

And the shareholders of the CCCI, which is what I'll call the original

Carter Country Club Inc. because there's two corporations with the exact same name,

the CCCI was represented by Guardian and Lightham, Bob Baker,

who was paying attention.

And the title was quieted as to all of those people.

And so it didn't come up in the initial petition to quiet title.

Title had already been quieted as to everybody other than the CCBA.

And if you look at the neither party docket marking, it makes it very clear

that the only thing that's left is this particular dispute,

which we then took back up again in 2018, which led to this appeal.

The other thing I'd like to clear up, if I can, is the records a little bit

murky on a few points.

I want to make it very clear that neither party to the original transaction

was a charitable entity.

This was a arms-length transaction between a property developer and a corporate entity.

It was an expensive transaction between two corporate entities.

The restraint is not imposed on a charity.

It's imposed on a private corporation, Carter Country Club Inc.

The restriction, contrary to what Attorney Eggleton will tell you,

does not benefit a charity or the public.

If you look at the language in the deed, all that is required

is that Carter maintained a golf course.

Carter's not required to maintain a public golf course.

Carter's not required to maintain a municipal golf course.

Carter can be well within the four corners of that restriction

and say that the only person who's allowed to play on that golf course is Justice Hicks.

Well, that would be absurd.

So doesn't that create an ambiguity

in which we should really consider the extrinsic evidence?

How does it create an ambiguity? The deed is very clear.

Because nobody wants to see Justice Hicks by God.

But the fact that it doesn't create a municipal or public golf course

is important because the CCBA keeps urging you to consider

that there is a charitable entity here.

Well, there was no charitable entity involved in this transaction

in any way until the right of re-entry,

which cannot be transferred, was transferred to the CCBA.

And when was that?

That was in late May, I have a timeline here.

That was in December of 1986.

So the questions here really are...

So why transfer to a charitable entity if there's no public purpose?

Well, the shareholders wanted there to be a golf course

and they didn't want to deal with it anymore.

So they left it to the CCBA

to determine whether there was going to be a golf course.

And there's been a history of the public utilizing the golf course.

Correct, but it's not required.

And this court isn't in a position, I would say,

I hate to be standing here telling you

what you're not in a position to do.

I'll be very careful about that.

But this deed can't be completely rewritten.

There is nothing in that deed

that requires the maintenance of a public golf course.

It never uses those words at all.

And we maintain that the court should not consider

Attorney Schuster's affidavit.

There are many reasons that argument was waived.

It's irrelevant.

There's no ambiguity in the deed.

But even that affidavit says that this was an arms-like transaction

between very sophisticated people represented by counsel.

It may be that the CCCI wanted there to be something they could pass down

and they wanted a public golf course.

Those terms did not get in that deed.

What was the rationale for the trial court's decision

not to allow the defendant to amend its complaint

with respect to the covenant?

Because that language is there.

And I don't see anything in his order that supports

what is a discretionary ruling.

So, I mean, I can't speak for the trial court,

but I will tell you, we did argue and I think,

I would argue is very clear, there is no separate covenant.

Every right of re-entry has conditions.

You can't have a right of re-entry unless there are conditions

that if you violate them, the right of re-entry can be exercised.

Those are the conditions that lead to the right of re-entry.

Otherwise, you just say you have a right of re-entry.

That would mean that the grantor could re-enter at any time.

Does your argument the same cause of action?

It's just the only right that was reserved in that deed

was a right of re-entry.

And the maintenance of the golf course are the conditions

on which that right of re-entry can be exercised.

And there's nothing in there that suggests otherwise,

I would argue.

Even if it did create a separate covenant,

that covenant was never transferred.

I mean, if you look at the corporate resolution from the CCI,

there's a corporate resolution from the CCCI that says

its title is Authority to Convey Reversionary Interest.

And in it, it gives them authorization to convey

the right of reversion held by the corporation.

There is no mention of a separate covenant

that's either evidence that no one thought there was a separate covenant

or evidence that if there was one, it was never transferred.

If you look at...

This is the authority to undertake the...

execute the deed between two private entities, correct?

Yes.

Now, this is the authority to execute the deed

transferring the right from the CCI to the CCBA.

So either they never transferred it or it never existed.

But there's no evidence that it existed and it was transferred.

And I think if the court looks carefully at the deed language itself,

it is clear that there is a restriction in the deed, certainly.

But the violation of that...

The remedy for the violation of that restriction

is the right of re-entry.

There is no separate thing.

And that's what I would point out is that Attorney Eggleton said,

you know, if he's correct that the only difference

between a reverber and a right of re-entry

is the words right of re-entry.

Or even more frighteningly is correct that this is both

a right of re-entry and a reverber.

And that you read that phrase at the option of the grantor separately.

If that's true, then there's no such thing as a right of re-entry.

There just isn't, because at the option of the grantor

it's always going to create both.

And the case law and the restatement is very clear

that that's not what happens.

In this case, as soon as there is an option,

as soon as there's discretion from the grantor,

that creates a right of re-entry.

And it doesn't matter what language is used.

And it might be that at the option of the grantor

could only be found, that exact phrase

could only be found in the Kentucky case.

But what this Court has already said is

this is not about magic words.

This is about what is the right that was created.

Let's look at what the right is.

And this right includes discretion.

And because it includes discretion,

it's a right of re-entry and cannot be transferred.

And the CCBA acknowledges that if it's a right of re-entry,

it cannot be transferred unless it fits into one of the exceptions.

And in its brief, it argues that that exception

is the separate covenant, which we've already discussed

and I don't believe exists.

Today for the first time, Attorney Eggleton argued

that that separate thing that it transferred with

was a separate re-verter.

Now, I don't know why you'd need a separate re-verter

to say it was transferred with it.

If you had a separate re-verter,

it doesn't matter what happens with the right of re-entry

because we would have already had a re-verter.

And all of this would be moved.

So if you look at the deed, it's quite clear

that you have, at the option of the grantor,

that creates discretion, which creates a right of re-verter.

Rights of re-verter cannot be transferred

except under certain exceptions.

None of those exceptions apply here.

And the only people, as of 1994,

the only people who could have held any right in this property

are Carter and the CCBA

because title has been quieted as to everybody else.

And since nothing could be transferred to the CCBA,

their deed was void ab initio.

The Court didn't need to consider

whether or not there was a separate covenant,

unless the Court has any other questions.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Eggleton, do you need your two minutes?

Oh, you're one minute. I'm sorry.

One minute, Your Honor.

Very briefly.

Justice Donovan, with respect to your question

about the covenant and why the trial court

elected not to grant the motion to amend,

I can only surmise from the order

that the court, the trial court believed

that its decision wrapped everything up.

But I think that was incorrect.

If you look at the language itself,

it talks about, in the deed, it says,

this restriction and the right of reversion

shall be binding upon and a near to the benefit of.

And the language at the top is hard to see it

as anything other than a restrictive covenant.

It says, to the following,

reservation conditions and restrictions

which shall run with the land.

So, in my humble opinion,

I definitely believe that that is a restrictive covenant,

which my client should be able to enforce.

And then with respect to the question of authority,

if you look at page 36 of the appendix,

the deed itself contains an attestation from Robert English,

who was an officer of the Carter Country Club, Inc.,

a New Hampshire corporation,

and that he, being authorized to do so,

executed the foregoing instrument

on behalf of the corporation.

So certainly there is authority in the deed itself

for the transfer of whatever was transferred in that deed,

and that included the right of reversion

and the restrictive covenant.

So I think both of those are.

Does it really make sense

to have both the right of reverter

and the right of reentry?

Well, according to the restatement

and 161c, it seems like an unusual premise,

but it's definitely one contemplated by the common law

and by that restatement,

because it talks about a right of reversion

being conveyed with the power of termination

and those relationships.

And really it does make sense.

The right of reversion can happen.

The power of termination is the stick

to make sure it does happen when it happens,

but you don't need them both.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you both for a well briefed and well argued case.
