Go. Good afternoon, counsel. Thank you. The matter before the court is SK versus JM.

SK is represented by attorney Diana Blunder or Bolander. JM is represented by attorney

Christine C. List. I understand, Ms. List, that you have reserved two minutes. I want to

explain for the record before we get started that Justice Bassett also had, not Justice,

impersonally, but his computer also had some technical difficulties, and you see him, but

he's labeled Tim Goudis. I assure you he is not Tim Goudis. That is Justice Bassett.

Having said that, Ms. List, whenever you are ready. Thank you, Your Honor. May

please the court Christine List on behalf of JM. As you've noted, I have reserved two minutes.

The family court aired by issuing orders regarding personal property and custody,

in this case, for three reasons. They are affirmative orders that require personal jurisdiction.

The court did not have subject matter jurisdiction pursuant to the UCCJEA,

and the orders deprived JM of constitutional protection without due process.

I intend to focus on those three themes within the two categories of orders from

the trial court. We are dealing with the overall framework of a domestic violence restraining order,

and as everyone's aware, in that context and under the framework of Hem and Way,

the state lacking personal jurisdiction can issue orders of protection,

but cannot, but not ones that require affirmative action by the defendant.

Since Hem and Way adopted this framework and this distinction in 2010, our court has not

analyzed what it means under affirmative action, but other courts have.

And the distinction comes very clearly down to defining the status of a person within a state

versus using the coercive power of the court to order a defendant

over which the court did not have personal jurisdiction to do something, that affirmative

action. So with that framework, I turn to the first.

If the trial court had ordered SK not to abuse the family pets,

would that be an affirmative order for which the court had jurisdiction or not?

So I'm sorry, do you mean JM rather than SK or SK who was who they had personal jurisdiction?

JM. Your client.

I think it's the prohibition, it's the status. Well, two things. I think that the

property is important to know that that property that those pets are in Texas.

And so I think that there's an overall theme here as well of the court has jurisdiction for

prohibitory orders over things and property in the state. That that's the court's jurisdiction

and that falls under personal jurisdiction and also subject matter jurisdiction.

There is kind of an end run there, right? If the property had been in New Hampshire,

I think that the court could have ordered those prohibitory issues.

But when we're talking about defining.

JM. Along those lines, could the court restrict your client from carrying a weapon in New Hampshire?

JM. Exactly that question would come up.

That when we're talking about if the property is then in New Hampshire, I think that's a

different analysis. If he is then in New Hampshire, he has ties to the state,

they can do that. However, I think under our due process analysis, that changes a little bit.

And so as you can see from my brief, I'm arguing not only that the affirmative

orders were unfair and unconstitutional, but also the actual existence of the order itself

given the current legal framework regarding the possession of firearms.

So on the firearms and family pet, those two kind of personal property orders.

Again, they're in Texas. They were in JM's possession and the court ordered him to

turn them over to a third party. If that affirmative action, if that is not classified

as affirmative action, ordering a person to take their own property and give it to another

as K or JM, it's difficult to see what would be affirmative action.

And of course that has analyzed this issue, turning over personal property under the

domestic violence restraining order framework is the New Jersey Supreme Court in Shaw,

which Hemingway both cited and relied on. Many courts look to Shaw as this kind of

initial distinction between the two. And in Shaw, the New Jersey Supreme Court said that

ordering the defendant to give the plaintiff her personal property back, immigration card,

social security information went too far under the status exception of personal jurisdiction,

that that was an affirmative order would have required personal jurisdiction.

And yet here, part of the order was prohibiting your client from disposing of, for example,

the family pets. So it wasn't a turnover. It was a prohibition. Is that also affirmative behavior?

I think we have to look at what this court's order required these parties under these facts

and what's on the record to do. It's clear from the record that the pets were in Mr.

J.M.'s possession, it's clear that they were in Texas and the order required the care and custody

to be awarded to S.K. And so the implication of that order and the reality of that order

is requiring J.M. to take affirmative action. In contrast to Shaw's analysis and kind of this

distinction, S.K. cites no case that analyzes this and says the turning over property is

permitted under the status exception. Instead, S.K. relies on the language of 173B. There's no

question that this personal jurisdiction, this would be a proper order under 173B,

but we don't have that whole menu in this case of option. We don't have the whole

legislative intent to allow these parameters under domestic violence restraining order.

We only have a prefix menu within those that don't require affirmative action.

So also important to note here, I think is that S.K. was not without remedy. This is not

leaving this out in the wind for nothing, no one to deal with.

There was an ongoing case in Texas, the place where this property was located,

the place that has personal jurisdiction over J.M. that can address this. So we're talking about

just New Hampshire and certainly there's other remedy available to S.K.

Turning now to the jurisdiction of this discussion under custody. New Hampshire again

has not addressed whether custody qualifies as affirmative action under this framework. The

Kentucky Supreme Court has an inspector, which is also a case that Hemingway relied on and

cited. The court found that a custody order was not appropriate under this affirmative action,

affirmative order distinction in a restraining order case. I think the big issue here is whether

the UCCJEA saves these provisions. And so the court, there is obviously an exception when the

court can take emergency jurisdiction over children who the subject matter is not properly

within that court. So baseline, there's no question in this case that the appropriate

jurisdiction for purposes of the UCCJEA was in Texas. No question that there were ongoing

proceedings existing in Texas. So the only way the New Hampshire family court could have proper

subject matter jurisdiction over the custody of the children was to invoke the UCCJEA emergency

provision. Wasn't that successfully done here? I submit that it was not. And for three reasons,

this is an extraordinary circumstance based on compelling reasons and a necessity to protect

the children. And all the court in its order makes reference to some treatment of the children

and some factual allegations of the children. The court makes absolutely no findings that

the language, the analysis that's required under the emergency provision.

The court also did not follow the statute's requirement. Aren't those factual, excuse me,

aren't those factual findings fairly inferred from the rulings that the court made?

Submit that it's not. And the reason is that the case law in New Hampshire,

recent case law, even says that because this is such an extraordinary provision,

the UCCJEA emergency provision, that without indication that the court did invoke this,

this court will not go back and look at the record and say these findings support invocation.

The court needs to actually make findings required by the statute. I think the

case law supports that the court won't go back and infer that that was done.

Secondly, the court did not follow the statutory requirement of a timeframe.

The second part, there's two requirements that there's an ongoing proceeding that has already

commenced. The ongoing proceeding in Texas was known to the court. It was very obvious from

the UCCJEA that was established. It was part of the record. The court needed to determine

a timeframe in which the plaintiff could retain relief in the court with proper jurisdiction.

What the court did instead was just issue a blanket until the Texas orders

trump this, until the Texas orders over my order.

Isn't that a recognition of a timeframe and also a recognition of the emergency

nature of this order, and wasn't the trial court aware that there had been no orders

issued in the Texas court at that point? Compound question.

That isn't enough. The statute requires a timeframe because if you look to the purpose

of the UCCJEA, it's to make sure that the right court does the right analysis

that has that jurisdiction is stepped in and does that. This order was completely open

ended. The statute says that it's a timeframe necessary for the plaintiff to seek the relief

in Texas. I submit that the open-endedness, for an order that still exists today,

is not what the statute was intended to require. Second, this court did not follow up

with the Texas court and follow the procedure of the UCCJEA. In summary, the UCCJEA does not

save. Jose, I'm sorry to break up your summary, but does the UCCJEA always require a domestic

violence trial court to make that phone call? Or is it only when they're competing, I'll say,

family court proceedings outside of the realm of domestic violence?

The court addressing a domestic violence petition is aware that there is an ongoing

proceeding regarding custody. That court is required to communicate with the court who has

the ongoing proceeding. That's spelled out in the emergency provision statute.

Obviously, this argument based on the fact that the UCCJEA does not save these provisions,

I'll speak very briefly on the due process because I see my time is running out.

Turning to the due process analysis, the bottom line is that the court's orders

effectively, expressly, deny JN constitutional protections without due process. The idea that

due process, which requires personal jurisdiction, is necessary before a constitutional right can

be deprived is hundreds of years old. That point is not saved by the fact that we have

some status exceptions because those status exceptions qualify under other provisions

such as the UCCJEA emergency provision. When we look at just was there due process given to

this person who is no longer allowed to possess firearms, no longer allowed to have visitation

with his children, we're talking about a court doing that without the very basic notions of

due process. That brings me to the point of I am asking the court to find that the existence

of the order itself violates that due process notion because of the legal framework that currently

exists in the federal law, in the statute, in the state that requires relinquishment of firearms

regardless of the basis of the statute. I don't think the court could have just crossed out

the firearms language in the order because the order by any of itself denies him that

constitutional due process. Well, Ms. List, the touchstone of due process is notice. It seems to

me he has noticed. The other touchstone is opportunity to be heard. It strikes me that he's

being heard now and or will be soon in Austin, Texas. Yes, and that court certainly has the

ability to hear the issues with regard to custody. The final order from New Hampshire

will remain regardless of the orders from Texas, resulting in Mr. J.M.'s deprivation of

his Second Amendment right. Thank you. Thank you. Your red flag is on. Ms. Bollander.

Thank you, Honors. May it please the court, Diana Bollander, on behalf of the appellee.

We are here to hear whether or not the protective orders in this case

under RSA 173B, in fact, can hold, based on not having a personal jurisdiction over

the appellate. In fact, they are. The orders, as you've heard, are permissible within the

borders of our state. That's allowed. It's been allowed for 143 years under the Supreme

Court case. The issue comes down to was there due process, what they can't order,

and whether or not under that order, there was a credible order, credible threat that still exists.

And the first thing I'd like to argue is that, in fact, these orders are, in fact,

prohibitive. They're allowed to be prohibitive. And we can do it within our state borders.

We do not have to wait until somebody comes in here and actually beats somebody or,

heaven forbid, murder somebody before we can act. We can do protective orders ahead of time.

And he is prohibited. He's prohibited from having firearms. He's prohibited from

visiting the children. He's prohibited from seeing, being within so many yards of my client.

These are things that the legislative has the right, the legislative branch,

to determine what is to be prohibited. And they have within that particular statute.

The part of the order, sorry, the part of the order that awards

custody or ownership of the family pets. Is that a breach too far or is that

contained within the, what, borders of New Hampshire?

In this case, I think with these facts and circumstances that they, in fact,

is prohibitive because it's not his sole property. It is also property of my client

and the children. And he had stated that he's going to take those animals to the pound.

And I think because of the actions he threatened and the fact that he is not the exclusive owner,

that we can prohibit him from owning somebody else's property and someone can get that property.

In addition, what I wish to add is you're talking about the firearms with the Constitution.

And I would ask you to look at part one, article three of the New Hampshire Constitution,

which basically says that when we enter into a society, we surrender some of our natural rights

in order to assure protection of others. And that is what we're doing here.

We're balancing rights. No right is absolute. District of Columbia versus Heller said that.

And what we're doing here is saying, if you're into New Hampshire, you cannot have a gun.

And we can get that gun if you have it. That is not something that

is outside of what a prohibitive order is allowed. Now, I don't know what's happening in Texas.

And if they're doing things in Texas based on the New Hampshire order, then his form is not

before you, but his form is before Texas to say, why are you doing this under this New

Hampshire law? Because they didn't have personal jurisdiction. And I have Texas explain that.

But here in New Hampshire, if he's within our borders, that that order is very good

and is within the prohibitive provisions of the statute before it has two sections.

So the husband remains in Texas, Ms. Bowland, and the husband remains in Texas

and doesn't comply with the court's order. He's not in violation of it. Is that your argument?

What I'm saying to the weapons of arms, what I'm saying is the part, if they're,

if the argument is they cannot take his firearms because that's not prohibitive.

And Texas takes his firearms, then that's between him and Texas interpreting New Hampshire law in

Texas. However, if he picks up the phone and calls my client and threatens her,

obviously that's a violation of the effective order because the jurisdiction is within New

Hampshire when he does that. So as to the child custody of the children, I believe,

and I think it's clear from the order that the circuit court abided by the UCCJEA.

She found that there was an emergency. She found that there was abuse of not only the

mother, but of the children. And she determined that this order was limited to

until the Texas court could make its own decision concerning custody and visitation.

The order open ended for years and years. How long can it be in effect under the

UCCJEA? It's open until, well, the statute, your honor, does not specifically say it has to have

a limited time, give me a date, give me a time period of so many months or whatever.

It says a time period. And a time period can be described as when the Texas court makes a decision.

Our court knew that they had a divorce pending in Texas. Our court knew that a hearing was

coming up to determine, preliminary, temporarily rather, what to do concerning custody, etc.

And the court didn't want to say, I'm not going to guess when they're going to have that hearing.

I know it's coming up. I believe it's a reasonable order with a time limit of when

you make that decision, New Hampshire order on that no longer is in existence.

But doesn't the trial court require to communicate with the Texas court under the

statute under section four? Your honor, we don't have any facts that they didn't.

That's, I believe I stated in my brief, is there was nothing ever raised as to

the clerk's office not contacting the Texas court to be perfectly honest with you.

I cannot tell you today whether they did or did not, because the court has contacts with

other courts and don't always tell the parties. So I don't think either party knows whether

not that occurred. I have to assume that they follow the statute. Well, certainly the

order that was issued doesn't reference any contact with the Texas court, does it?

The order itself does not say we're sending this to Texas. That's correct.

But I don't believe it has to. I don't believe it has to be within the order.

I believe it's just you need to contact Texas. I assume by sending them this order

so that they are aware. This order is your standard restraining order with a one-year

time limit. Brecht, your honor. And I also agree with the fact that the

appellant did receive due process. He had a trial. He presented a case. He had an attorney.

He cross-examined my client. He had all the protections necessary in order to get his

facts across concerning an order from the court. As for the subject matter jurisdiction,

we all know that the circuit court jurisdiction is defined by statute.

The statute for the JCCJEA as well as 173B gives subject matter jurisdiction to the circuit court.

So they had it at that time. The other issue that was raised by the appellant in the brief was

whether or not there was a present incredible threat to my client. And there was, your honors.

You yourself have said that while time is a factor to be considered, the serious nature of

the incident and the long history of abuse also is to be considered. I think the judge

laid out in her facts and findings years of abuse by the appellant against my client and the children

and pretty serious holding a gun to her head, choking one of the children, causing injury to

my client. All of this is very serious nature for a long period of time. I believe that the

judge was correct when she said she didn't believe that he would not come to New Hampshire

minus an order for him not to do but not to be limited in what he could do and getting

close to her, etc. And that in fact there was a present incredible danger and threat to her at this

time. Should we distinguish, if I can, should we distinguish in the order about family pets?

Is there a distinction between the awarding of custody slash ownership of the pets to your

client versus the prohibition on the appellant from doing anything harmful to the pets? Is there

a distinction there that we should pay attention to? I think the distinction, Your Honor, is

exclusive ownership. If he alone owned the pets for the children like to them,

I think there may be an issue since they are in Texas. However, because it's not his

exclusive ownership, if I own something with somebody else, am I prohibited from using what's

available under the law to obtain what is my private interest? And I think under this,

especially since what he was basically saying is I'm going to get rid of it so that you,

whether you own it or not, you're not going to have it anymore, I think that was necessary

in order to prohibit him from being able to do anything with those animals and to

put them in a protective area where he would not cause them harm. In addition, Your Honors,

I'm not going to be laboring this, I did raise in my brief some issues that I thought were not

preserved and I would just ask you to review those. And further, Your Honor, finally there was

some discussion regarding whether or not the firearms and the rights to custody are protected

by other constitutional provisions and therefore due process is required, including personal

jurisdiction. I didn't see any exception in the Supreme Court case saying that if there was some

constitutional right that was on the other side of this, that personal jurisdiction wins out,

you have to have it every time. I don't think that is what it is, especially if there's a

statute that the appellant himself says applies, you don't need personal jurisdiction for

concerning the children. I also think, and I believe you are aware, there's a balancing of

rights. No right is absolute and that includes due process. And I think when there's a balancing

and you're talking about protection and you're talking about within our borders,

I certainly believe that there is the right for the court to find that what she has done

is appropriate within her jurisdiction and her authority without the personal jurisdiction.

I thank you and I welcome any questions.

Colleagues? All right. Well, thank you. Ms. List, you have two minutes. You're on mute.

You're muted. I knew that was going to happen. Thank you, Your Honor, just briefly. First,

with regard to the language of the emergency provisions, the exact language is that the

court must specify in the order A period that the court considers adequate to allow

the plaintiff to obtain an order from the state. I submit that the plain language of that does

require more than an open-ended order. Second, ownership of the property is not the relevant

consideration for whether there's an affirmative order. For example, the court found that the

joint marital property of the home, that it didn't have jurisdiction over that. It

specifically noted that in the section. And then we look at the Shaw case, that was a case

where the defendant didn't own any of the property. He was ordered to give over to

the plaintiff. It was all of her property. And the court still found that that was improper.

And finally, with regard to the exceptions for due process, they're extremely limited. And

one of them is this idea of a status exception. So if we're talking about the

exceptions for due process and the exceptions for personal jurisdiction,

the court in Hemingway decided that only those orders that do not require affirmative

action are appropriate. So they did set apart an exception for that issue. And so now when

we're being asked to apply the framework of Hemingway, we have to look at what that really

means and what that existence of an order requires the defendant to do. And if it's

relinquishing constitutional rights, personal jurisdiction should be required. Thank you.

Thank you both for your excellent presentations. Case is submitted and the court is adjourned.

Thank you.
