Thank you. The matter before the court is in the matter of James Britain and Patricia Britain.

It is actually two case numbers 2020-0029 and 2020-03-03. Mr.

Britain is represented by Attorney Jonathan M. Flagg. Mrs. Britain is represented by

Attorney Pamela A. Peterson. And when you are ready, you may begin.

Good morning, Your Honours. It's John Flagg. I appreciate the opportunity to be here today.

I have waved my three minutes because I think me explaining the right answers to your questions

is better than you listening to me say what's already in my brief.

So here's my question if you don't mind. How do we assess the impact of the

stipulation that was approved by the court in 2016? What does that do to our analysis?

It's meaningless. And the reason it's meaningless is because the statute in 1985 said

alimony ends in 1988. So you can't then have a stipulation

of which the foundation is in order that the Supreme Court and the legislature has already said

is over. Can the parties make an agreement not withstanding that the statute says alimony

ends in three years? Can the parties agree to continue it and turn that into a court order?

Two answers to that. And the book, no. The first one is that the stipulation, if you were going to

enter into a stipulation, that would imply that it was an informed stipulation, that it was an

informed decision. And so you would say in the stipulation, you know, Mr. Britain, you don't

have to pay alimony since 1988. However, having said that, you agreed to pay alimony going forward.

So doesn't the deposition testimony establish that he had that understanding?

It doesn't matter what he had for an understanding. The Supreme Court has already said in the Henry

case, you made an agreement. You made an agreement that was contrary to the law. We're not

going to enforce it. Now in that particular case, they sought to renew or modify before the time ran

out. So it's a completely different situation. But it doesn't matter what his belief was. It didn't

matter what Mr. and Mrs. Henry had for a belief or an agreement. Well, why did it matter that

the time had run out? I mean, the statute in the 1980s gave the court the power to review,

modify, or extend as justice may require. There's no statement that it has to be

before the end of a three year period. So forget about the last 40 years. Couldn't

the divorce having occurred back in the 80s? Why doesn't the court's ability to

approve articulation? Why can't it be based on that language?

Also a good question. And my response to that is why don't we go back to 1875 and see what the law

was on alimony? Why don't we go to 1950 and see what the alimony law was? Because they got

divorced in 1985. Exactly. So you got divorced in 1985 and you got to as far as the alimony

decision itself. You've got to go with the law in 1985, which said limited to three years. Now,

fast forward, this divorce decree was entered seven presidents ago. It was entered during the

Reagan administration. In 1990, they could have filed a motion under the current statute

at the time. If it's 2019 and I want to do something with alimony, I want to renew it,

I want to extend it, I've got to modify it. Whatever the story is in 2019, which was August of

2019 when this first came up, you don't look at the statute from the 1800s. You don't look at the

statute in 1885. In 1985, you look at the statute now because the statute changes. And the statute

for renewal modification or extension of alimony changed over the years, just like the statute

changed on whether or not you could require that people pay for college as part of a divorce decree.

That changed over the years. So when you go to try to do something like that, you've got to look at

the law at the time. The law in 1985 controlled the three year limitation. The law in 2019

controls what you want in 2019, which is a modification extension of renewal. So go to

RSA 45819 and see what the deal is for alimony, for modification renewal or extension. Well,

guess what? And they would have under subsection A of section 19, they would have had to request

alimony, could not have requested alimony after 1990, which would have been five years from the

decree. That's when George Bush, the first was president. Unless, unless not to stop the train

here, but unless that three year stipulated renewal counts for something. The three year

stipulate, you mean the 2016? Right. Right. Which, which is based on nothing. So you have

it's interesting, you raise college, and this is my other thought. When the statute changed on

requiring being able to require parents to pay for college, there were various agreements,

stipulations that had been approved by the court that were then challenged saying, well, this

should be terminated. And this court said, no, no, even though that you're entered into under

a backdrop of the law as it was, we're going to enforce those agreements. So how does that

sort of marry up with this situation where although you can't waive alimony, it seems like you can

a party can agree to alimony and make it again a court order.

If you're talking about 2016, that was a motion for contempt action. That was not a petition

to renew modify or extend. That was a contempt. You can't be in contempt of an order that

died in 1988. That's over. That's done. If they wanted to bring a new action, they bring a new

action. And then we deal with that under the law as it currently stands. But you can't again,

you can't enter into a stipulation that's based on nothing. And you can't it's not as if Mr.

flag is not as if your client was exactly under represented when all this occurred. And it

smacks to me that he might have been acting as a volunteer and waving any statutory protections

intentionally. He was absolutely not represented in 2016. And he was not represented when this

current action started in 2018. He was represented back in 1985 when he agreed to lifetime alimony

when Joe Millimet, who represented Mrs. Britain, made the mistake of saying, okay, we're going to put

lifetime alimony in here. He could have waited three months until January 1, 1986. He didn't. He

made that mistake. Mrs. Britain now is 93 years old. She's she's continued to get alimony,

which is supposed to be rehabilitative for 35 years. Right? She could have gone she's got a

recourse now she feels like you know what 35 years of alimony is not enough. It never gave

me a chance to get back on my feet. She could have a recourse there and that's malpractice.

If she should have had lifetime alimony, but the law didn't allow it, she's got a recourse.

It's not like she's out there, you know, along attorney flag, let's assume that the stipulation

was entered into prior to the marriage and a prenuptial agreement. Wouldn't that be enforceable?

And isn't this really just an anti nuptial agreement? That's that by which your client

waived his statutory rights? If it was an anti nuptial agreement, it would say at the top

anti nuptial agreement. It's a Supreme Court. It's a it's a court order that that's the legislature

has said you can't do. Now, if they entered into some kind of anti nuptial agreement, then that's

a different thing. But that's never been blood that's never been provided. There is no such

thing. It just was never done. So you really had we had we gotten an appeal of a contempt

finding in that 2016 action. We might have flipped that under the governing case law that

there was no agreement for him to have violated. Sure, sure, you might have. So a guy who's pro

say enters into an agreement that isn't enforceable anyway, regardless of what he wanted to do.

He wanted to have problem I have with that argument is it doesn't matter whether he was

represented or not in 2016. To me the 2016 agreement is very important. And the arguments that you're

making now, whatever their marriage should have been made back then, arguably, and he sort of

made the deal back then. And now he has to live with the 2016 deal that was approved by the

court. This shouldn't be a problem to you. And here's why the 2016 to say the 2016 stipulation

is enforceable is to say that they the hell with the 1985 statute, it doesn't matter.

Either it matters or it doesn't either the legislature said you can't have alimony from

wooden three years, or it didn't. Well, the court found that it did. People forego arguments all

the time in order to make deals for whatever reason they want. And why should we look behind that?

Because you did that and Henry versus Henry, you said the parties made a deal for lifetime

alimony. We're not going to enforce that even though they made a deal. Why? Because the

legislature says you can't. And the legislature trumps. So you can't tag on and say well 2016

is a stipulation. It's just like the original divorce decree. It's just as good. No, it isn't.

You can't have it both ways. You can't say that the as the lower court said 2000, the 1985 version

of the statute applies. I agree you can't have it both ways. But it seems to me in some way

you're fine. It wants to have it both ways because you got a beneficial property settlement arguably

back in 1985 because of this lifetime alimony. So if we say oh no, you shouldn't have been

able to get lifetime alimony. Shouldn't it all go back and shouldn't the property

division also be opened up because those are interrelated matters. How much property

someone gets allocated by the court and alimony. So we're going to open up to say that the court

couldn't do it. We have to open up alimony. Why shouldn't the property settlement for resolution

also be opened up? Because property settlements as the court knows are final. The lower court

recognize that as you know, divorce law 101. You can't mess around with a property settlement

that's final. If Mrs. Britton wanted to do anything with alimony, she's had 35 years to do it

and she didn't. And that's the problem. So if she wasn't getting proper advice,

then she's got an avenue for recovery. But it's not to go back and open up a property settlement

that was final 35 years ago. Well, I was six years back into court. She was getting the

monthly payments. So she didn't have a problem until 2016. Okay, she was getting the monthly

payments under false pretence. She was not supposed to be getting them. She should have

come before the court. In fact, you know, the Henry case came out in 1987. This divorce decree

was entered into in 1985. I got to believe that the folks up at Devine must have been saying,

whoa, wait a minute, we just did a deal like this exact same thing. We should go to our client and

say, Hey, we got to fix this right now in 1987. Because this case just came out. It's exactly

what we did. We screwed up. And I can't help it. That's what the law is. And the equity is

that this guy has paid $360,800 more than he should have paid over all of these years.

And this court says, you know what, I'm going to let them even though they didn't bring a petition

to renew modify or that was allowed under this current statute, even though they didn't do that,

I'm going to let him have alimony going forward with no credit for the $360,800 that the court

knew he shouldn't have paid. It's unbelievable to me. And then they say the court says

he took $250,000 and gave it to his new wife, new wife who he's been married to for now 34 years,

took that $360,000, $250,000 gave it to his new wife to take care of

because when he gets all these going to need some caring. And he already does. He's been in another

hospital and he's 92 years old. She took $300,000, gave it to her lawyer son to put in an irrevocable

trust with the sons of the beneficiaries to protect it from in case she needs nursing care.

And they use that to support her. It's her own money. And the court was all over Mr.

Britton for taking $250,000 and giving it to his wife to care for him and had no problem

with her taking $300,000 dumping it in her son's irrevocable trust. And suddenly she needs

alimony. But you've got to decide that he's got the ability to pay and she's got the need.

He's got Social Security, $1,118 a month. She doesn't have the need because she

took her money away to take care of her. But the court just ignored one,

accepted the other just like it did with the statue. Found the statue.

I am so happy that my light is on.

That's the first time I've heard that. Well, Justice Souter made me stay on after my light

was on. And I said, you know, my light. All right. Thank you, sir. Ms. Peterson.

Good morning, Your Honors. I have a brief introduction as acknowledged by attorney

flag, this is a 39 year marriage. And now after a 35 year post divorce period, James

Britton is seeking not just the termination of his alimony from the 2018 date he filed

this motion, but a 33 year retroactive termination. And he's seeking reimbursement of $360,000 in

alimony paid to his former wife. So essentially he's seeking a forfeiture, a penalty against

Patricia Britton for the alimony that he paid. This was only briefly raised a trial

because the issue of the 1985 alimony issue was only raised a trial. And his counsel had said

he should be getting this alimony back. He didn't ask for it in testimony,

didn't raise it in his findings, didn't raise it in a proposed order, and only brought up this issue

really the numbers in his motion for reconsideration. You'll note in his notice of appeal,

he asked for $96,000. And that number was raised in his brief to the $360,000.

It's our position. The renewal of alimony granted by the trial court is just confirmation of what

the parties were doing pursuant to their divorce agreement, a payment of the lifetime alimony

that was agreed to by the parties and that it was confirmed and renewed in 2016.

So here's my question. We know that a party can't wave alimony. It's not allowed by statute.

In this situation, the parties agreed to an alimony arrangement that was not permitted

by the statute. So how do we swear that circle that you're seeking to enforce one

agreement that is prohibited by statute? And yet we know had there been some attempt in the

intervening years for your client to wave alimony, for example, in exchange for some

property or something after the fact, we wouldn't enforce that.

Your Honor, provision in the parties permit stipulation that notes that the alimony provision

was not going to be a final provision until January 1, 1986. So therefore that was not

going to be final until the law changed and removed that three year provision.

So the rest of the agreement was final and therefore the alimony was not going to be final

until January 1 when the three year piece was removed. So that was in there. So the parties

fully contemplated that the alimony would go past the three years and would be lifetime

and that would be acceptable. And that was granted by the trial court. The parties lived

by that agreement going forward. It was never argued by Mr. Britton going forward and in fact

your argument is the stipulation in 2016, regardless of what Mr. Britton may or may not

have understood, that did not renew alimony. That simply acknowledged the continuation of the

in your view lawful agreement. Your Honor, I think it does both. It was a renewal if the

court finds that, Your Honor, the Henry case was not out at the time that the parties

drafted the stipulation. So they would not have known that the Henry case said it applies to

the statute is going to apply to cases finalized after January 1. So they put that provision in

an acknowledgement that it needed to get away from that three year waiver. And the parties

acted in conformance with that. Mr. Britton acknowledged at his deposition that I waived

any three year provision. He specifically had the party's sons present at the signing of the party's

divorce agreement because he wanted to state how fair he was being to their mother.

He received the bulk of the party's property in the divorce. Through his testimony, he

acknowledged he received $2.2 million from the mobile home parks. He received another $200,000.

My client received $450,000 and now there's an expectation she has to repay $360,000.

That is a completely inequitable result. What about the extension? Forget for a moment the

return of prior payments. But what about the extension going forward? Is there sufficient

evidence that Mr. Britton has the ability to pay? Yes, Your Honor. There is sufficient

evidence because he settled a lawsuit with his sons over the business. And he settled that

in May of 2018 and received a lump sum payment of $250,000. That was more than enough money

to continue to pay my client $200 a week going forward. In addition, there was evidence to

the court that from July 14, and it's finding number 48 from July 14 of 2017 until June 21,

2018, right at the filing of his petition, he transferred joint assets of $1.1 million

to his wife. So there was this ability, as the trial court said, to show that he did not have

the financial ability to pay. And the trial court found that that wasn't proper. He sold a fishing

boat. Are we allowed to look at those asset sales? That's his property. So is the lawsuit.

Are we allowed to look at those in terms of his income and ability to pay?

Yes, Your Honor. I believe we are able to look at those assets in terms of goes to his financial

ability. Because, Your Honor, there was also testimony and findings that show that he had

ongoing monthly expenses for fishing alone that exceeded his alimony obligation.

Finding number 43 was that he was spending over $900 a month prior at trial for fishing. For someone

who is asking his wife to put money away to care for him, all the money that he'd be paying alimony

with, he's spending over $900 a month for boat expenses. Well, it'd be the lion's share of his

$1,100 a month, right? The alimony. Right. But the difficulty was we had ongoing discovery disputes.

So trying to get information was this fight. There was pending motions to compel at the time of

trial. And finally, my last question. Did the trial court take into account the income

received by your client from the irrevocable trust controlled by your sons? Yes, Your Honor.

It is mentioned in the findings that the trust would spin off $900 a year. Her sons were providing

much more to her in terms of financial assistance. And that was put on her financial affidavit. And

even with that financial assistance, she was still short financially every month. So she still needed

this $200 a week in the lifetime alimony. So, Your Honor, from our position, Mr. Britain is not

entitled to reimbursement over the $360,000. Wait, I'm sorry. One more question. I lied.

The statutory change that affects alimony post-retirement, does that factor in here at all?

Your Honor, no. That statute, the statute that was effective January 1 of 2019 specifically

said that applies to divorces filed after January 1, 2019. And the trial court went

through the order painstakingly talking about how that would apply to this case. Additionally,

we know that statutes that impact substantive rights, much like my client's substantive right to receive

alimony apply prospectively. So that would not apply in this case. So we're back to that prior

alimony statute. So in addition, Your Honor, even if it were to apply, I know that there's

provisions in this new alimony statute which talk about can be payments after retirement age

if justice requires. So, Your Honor, the court found my client still had a need after all these years

and Mr. Britain had the ability to pay. We had her social security statement as an exhibit,

which showed at most she earned $16,000. She worked as a clerk at Fine Leans and then Macy's

until she was 82 years old. Additionally, Mr. Britain retired at age 60. He worked off his yacht.

He was paid by the sons for the business. Was she able to claim under his social security record?

Ma'am, Your Honor, I do not know that, whether she was able to claim under her record. They have

differing social security amounts on their financial affidavit, so I'm not sure of that.

So I think she claims a higher amount, which makes me think she claims under

her own about $700 a month. So, Your Honor, my client, she worked very hard,

but she wasn't going to earn the amount that he earned. He had the lion's share of the property

and the divorce. And additionally, she received the marital home. That was the largest asset

she received. And again, here I go again, but what were the circumstances around the transfer

of the additional lot? Your Honor, so they own this home and sale a mass on one lot. There was

a lot next door to it, which at one point they owned jointly and then was transferred at some

point in the marriage to Mr. Britain in his own name. That lot was not listed in the list

of property and the divorce. But because it wasn't specifically listed, it was awarded to Mr.

Britain as all other property, much like there was other property. He got Bahamas land, you got all

other things that we talked about in the transcript that wasn't listed. She then was

approached by a builder wanting to build some lots who need some frontage. And so she always

believed it was part of the house lot because it was right attached. And so he did get back

to her at no point did he say, I want a credit toward my future alimony. He didn't say that

they can sign anything in effect under cross examination. He said, well, I just wanted to

have it in case in the future if I needed needed something from her. It was something to that

effect. She took the money money she got meant she put it back in the house at that

point and needed a new roof and needed windows, all of that. And then when she sold the

house in 2010, that's the money that went into her irrevocable trust. So attorney flag is

comparing apples and oranges when he says money is given to other people in this situation.

She put into her trust long before there was this post divorce litigation, unlike Mr.

Britain who was transferring money in the year prior to filing his motion to terminate alimony.

And that's what reopened this case in 2018 was his motion to terminate alimony based on

ability to pay. It had nothing to do with 1985 statute. That was raised on the morning of trial

as a reason to go back in and ask to essentially recreate the wheel. That was not raised at all.

He was saying he did not have the financial ability to pay. And it's our position that

the trial court was well within their discretion to deny his motion to terminate

and grant my client's motion to renew. We made a verbal motion then at trial

because this issue was just raised. I followed it up with a written motion later because an argument

kept being made that we didn't have a written motion to renew. And the court then offered

Mr. Britain the opportunity to have a further hearing, which at first he was going to take.

And then he decided not to have a hearing. He had a full and fair opportunity to argue

about that. And then the court went when he decided he didn't want a hearing,

the court went forward and issued that further order. And that's the second appeal that's in front

of you. The court ordered the alimony at 200 a week. And that's what's been going on at this time,

Your Honor. So it's our position that the court was well within the discretion.

The same thing that the court properly found Mr. Britain in contempt for his failure to pay

pursuant to the 2016 stipulation in order to attorney's fees. The attorney's fees

are reasonable. We provided an affidavit at times when the work overlapped, we discounted it. It was

more than just filing a motion and making one point and asking one point at trial. As I mentioned,

Mr. Britain originally filed this action on an inability to pay. We had to then research his

ability to pay that included discovery, that included testimony at trial. So on the contempt,

are you relying on the enforceability of the 85 slash 86 alimony order going forward or relying

on the enforceability of the stipulation? It was both, Your Honor. We noted that not only did he

agree at the time of the divorce for the lifetime alimony, it was reaffirmed in that 2016

stipulation. He agreed that he would go forward and pay, and he timely paid from 2016 to 2018

when he stopped paying. Both of times when he stopped paying was at times when he was having

arguments with his sons. And that's what happened. He stopped paying the alimony.

And he noted it in his own motion for relief that it was an intra-family dispute.

And so then my client knew that she needed to bring the matter forward and ask for relief herself.

And we believe that, Your Honor, it was appropriate. Additionally, that 2016 for the purposes of

the contempt, Your Honor, is an order in that we have RSA 45851 that states when any proceeding

where a party alleges that the court finds that the other party has failed without just

causing the ban order, the court can order fees and sanctions. And that's what we've done.

It has to be an enforceable order, though. Under Henry and the other cases, yes.

Right. And under Henry, Your Honor, we believe it's distinguishable because the Henry case didn't

simply say that the stipulation was unenforceable. The court said the stipulation is one of

the things that the court must consider back on remit. And so we don't know what happened.

The case did not come back up, but it was one of the things that the court was to consider.

What this court must also consider was the fact that Mr. Britton paid for 30 years without complaint.

And all the other cases which come up under this statute, either a recipient came back after

three years or four years for renewal or a payor stopped paying after three or four years.

That didn't happen here. It's not a situation where my client didn't get paid for 30 years

and now she's seeking a renewal after that time. She relied on the fact that he paid the

trial court blessed and approved that 1985 divorce. They approved the 2016 and he paid.

I see that I'm out of time. I thank you for today. Thank you, both counsel.
