Good morning. Good morning. Thank you, sir.

This is case 2020-0034, New Hampshire Alpha of SAE trust versus town of Hanover.

You may proceed. Good morning. May it please the court.

I'm Carol McColl of Coll Associates representing New Hampshire Alpha of SAE trust.

And I understand you reserved two minutes for rebuttal.

Two minutes for rebuttal. Thank you.

I would like to make three brief points before fielding questions.

First, in February 2016, Hanover zoning administrator was exercising her police power when she accused my client of violating the ordinance and ordered it to cease all use of its property.

The exercise of police power is enforcement.

Once accused, my client was entitled to the rights of the accused.

The police can charge, but only the courts can have original jurisdiction to hear the alleged violation.

We are asking this court to prohibit Hanover's board from adjudicating the merits of its own police action.

Second, Hanover's argument is actions were not enforcement, but an inconsequential warning is just not believable.

However, even if for argument's sake, the violation notice was merely a warning of what the town may do in the future.

The ZBA still lacks jurisdiction to hear the appeal, because this court ruled in Blevinsby Boe and Toddy B. Grantham that warnings of future legal action are not decision subject to appeal since no substantive right is impacted.

Thus, whether the violation notice is enforcement or whether it is merely a warning, the zoning board had no jurisdiction to hear the matter.

Your Honour, it has been 43 years since Simonson was decided and the parties have opposing views of its relevance today.

In our view, Simonson is still good law that was codified in the 1980s by the criminalization of land use violations and the explicit removal of enforcement from the ambit of the ZBA.

In Hanover's view, Simonson was abrogated and the powers of the zoning boards were vastly expanded to include the adjudication of alleged violations.

We asked this court to reverse the Superior Court's ruling and reaffirm the holding of Simonson that the ZBA does not have nor has ever had subject matter jurisdiction to hear and adjudicate whether appellant is in violation of the ordinance.

I'd be happy to take your questions.

So is your client subject to fines since the date of the notice when the notice was issued?

I'm sorry Justice Donovan, I didn't understand you.

Is your client subject to daily fines from the date that the notice was issued?

That is what violation notice says and that is what the statute says.

That's a penalty obviously.

That is a penalty, Your Honor.

What role does the ZBA play in determining or interpreting the assertion there is a violation of the ordinance?

So what role, if any, does the ZBA play in reviewing that interpretation by the enforcement officer?

Thank you, Justice Hans-Marconi.

The ZBA, as I said in the beginning, the zoning administrator is acting in a police power capacity.

The ZBA only stands in the shoes of the zoning administrator, so it is acting as a police capacity.

The zoning administrator pursuant to the exclusionary language of 676-52B excludes the ability for the zoning board to second guess the decision of the zoning administrator to enforce the ordinance.

So it plays no role whatsoever in determining whether or not the zoning administrator was correct in issuing a violation notice or incorrect in issuing a violation notice.

So there is no embedded interpretation of the ordinance that the ZBA can review?

Hypothetically, every single violation notice includes an interpretation of the zoning ordinance.

The zoning administrator would in fact have to open up and look at what section is being imputed.

But to claim as Hanover does that every violation notice involves an active interpretation and therefore the zoning board has the power to hear the interpretation of that would render the exclusionary language of 676-52B meaningless

because in that sense the zoning board would have jurisdiction to hear everything.

Or the zoning board's determination could be limited to being either advisory or sort of a declaratory judgment but without enforcement effect?

Your Honor, the zoning board lacks the power to render advisory judgments, advisory opinions, so it can't do that either.

Isn't this going to come as quite a surprise to real estate development practitioners and town council?

Your Honor, I think the statute is quite clear on the matter and we have a very clear statutory framework which gives real estate developers predictability.

The fact of the matter is that the legislature knows how to grant and meticulously defines the powers to courts, to superior courts.

It grants and defines the powers of district courts, probate courts, family courts.

Hanover would like us to think that in spite of the fact that the legislature removed the power to hear and adjudicate zoning violations from the ZBA that in fact it expanded it.

If the real estate developers were looking at the statutory scheme it would be perfectly clear that the zoning board doesn't have the ability to hear zoning violations.

Wouldn't that lead to an absurd result? Does the legislature really intend to send to the superior courts every contested ordinance violation in the state?

Wouldn't that flood our courts and we wouldn't be able to handle that kind of volume?

That's a great question, Justice Donovan. Let's look at the legislative history here.

When we were looking at Simonson we were asking this court to reaffirm.

The governing statute was 3166 which didn't limit any powers of the zoning board to hear and adjudicate zoning violations and yet this court still found that they were unable to do that and lack the subject matter jurisdiction.

About a decade later the legislature criminalized the zoning violations, did several things.

It criminalized zoning violations. It removed the power in 676-5-2-B of the zoning board to hear and adjudicate violations.

Subsequently adapted 676-17-5 which instructed the zoning board to go to the superior court or the circuit court and simultaneously enacted 502A11A which also simultaneously granted concurrent jurisdiction with the superior court to the district court to hear all alleged zoning violations.

Now that is consistent with our jurisprudence and it is consistent with the constitution because as we know 676-17 makes any violation of a zoning ordinance a crime.

And we don't grant our lay boards the jurisdiction to hear and adjudicate crimes that implicate the substantive rights of property owners.

We grant those to the courts for the simple reason is that they are entitled to constitutional protections.

So we agree with you that this has been an enforcement action from the very beginning and you get your day in superior court.

If Hanover prevails I assume you will agree then that you'll be responsible for all of their attorneys fees.

I'm not agreeing to this but I don't know what they're going to do.

Hanover is certainly within its right and was for the very beginning to take this either to the superior or the circuit court and fulfill its enforcement action.

But it did begin the enforcement action and that is what the operative word here is.

And even if it were not an enforcement action as they seem to assert now then it's simply a warning.

And a warning doesn't implicate the substantive rights.

It's merely a warning.

If it's only a warning then the landowner is no longer aggrieved.

And 676-5 requires that the only permits the zoning board to hear appeals of aggrieved landowners.

If there's no agreement then there's no appeal.

Well aren't they aggrieved by the interpretation of the zoning ordinance?

You can't be aggrieved by an interpretation your honor.

You're aggrieved by an enforcement action.

Oh I'm not so sure about that.

How would they get financing?

I beg your pardon?

How would they get a mortgage on the premises?

How would they get a mortgage on the premises?

How would they get title insurance?

Okay let's back.

I'm looking at my light your honor.

You've reserved two minutes but go ahead.

If it is a zoning violation that is would be a problem.

If this were just an interpretation such as a jurisdictional wetlands issue that requires a special exception

that may or may not implicate any type of penalty that would prohibit a mortgage.

So how are you saying this has to play out?

Your client has to be charged with a crime in Superior Court or Circuit Court

and then the matter is adjudicated there?

That's an excellent question your honor.

The statute doesn't use the word conviction.

It doesn't use the word prosecution.

It uses the word formal or informal enforcement.

And we know from the New Hampshire Municipal Association, the Bar Association

and all the authority that I've provided to you in our brief that a formal enforcement is a written notice of violation.

So what is an informal enforcement?

It might be best asked to my sister when she comes up

but what we do know from the authorities is that an informal enforcement could be a simple phone call from the zoning administrator.

That may be informal enforcement.

There may be a whole panoply of things which could be informal enforcement

but the statute does not say conviction, does not say prosecution.

It says the zoning board shall not hear any discretionary decision of the zoning administrator

to commence formal or informal enforcement proceedings.

But it does.

I'm still hung up on this.

The next clause but does include any construction interpretation or application of the terms of the ordinance

which is implemented in such enforcement proceedings.

Implicated your honor that is correct.

So what is the ZBA's role?

Okay so theoretically the ZBA might have been asked to look at a term implicated in such proceedings

but that's not what happened.

In fact the notice of decision clearly states that this is an appeal of a decision that the appellant is in violation of the zoning ordinance.

And what did the ZBA do?

It ruled on constitutional issues, selective enforcement in takings.

It ruled on statutory issues of non-conforming uses.

It ruled on equitable actions such as gloss, such as stop-all.

It ruled on factual issues.

It never interpreted the ordinance.

In fact in five pages of this decision the word interpretation or any interpretation of a term implicated in the zoning violation is not in this document.

So who takes the interpretation question to the ZBA?

The appellant.

The appellant has the ability to appeal through the processes of an interpretation.

If the ZBA decided suesponte that it was going to usurp the powers of a court and rule on all these issues that it clearly pursuant to the case law is not committed to rule on such as constitutional issues such as a stop-all issues.

It is not permitted to do that.

Finally, 67617 does time the fines.

It can either be daily from after the conviction date.

So it does use the word conviction date or after the date on which the violator receives written notice.

So that contemplates written notice and then enforcement action in court.

Yes, I mean.

And then the trial court can decide whether it goes back to the date of the notice or the conviction date.

I think that's correct, Your Honor.

But it starts with a written notice of violation.

That is how enforcement begins.

Your red light is on.

Thank you, Your Honor.

You have two minutes afterward.

Counsel.

Good morning, Your Honors.

I may please the court.

I am Laura Specter-Morgan from the Mitchell-Munison Group on behalf of the town of Hanover.

My name today is Robert Hausman, who is the director of planning, zoning, and codes.

I'm happy to take your questions at any time.

The issue before this court is very simply phrased.

Was the zoning administrative letter dated February 12, 2016, properly appealable to the ZBA?

This court should affirm the holding of the trial court that the answer to that question is an equivocal yes

and should reverse the decision of the trial court to deny their town's request for attorney's fees.

As always, we start with the plain statutory language.

And here there are two statutes at issue.

674-331A, which provides that the ZBA has the power to hear and decide appeals if it is alleged there is error in any order.

Requirement decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of any zoning ordinance.

But how does that align with the enforcement statute?

So you've got these parallel tracks.

Yes.

And so you end up with an interpretation decision.

What force does that have as opposed to an enforcement decision that confirms that a violation has occurred?

Sure.

So when the town issues a notice of violation, the property owner has a couple of options.

They can do nothing.

And that happens a fair amount.

And in that case, the town would bring in enforcement action, usually under 676-17, seeking an injunction, civil penalties, and attorney's fees.

Or the property owner can appeal that decision to the ZBA under 676-5.

And the ZBA acting in its quasi-judicial capacity, which it is given by state law and this court, makes factual findings in interpreting the zoning ordinance.

It looks at what the zoning ordinance says, what the facts on the grounds are, and then it applies them.

And then if the ZBA finds that there is a violation, and that works its way through the courts and it's affirmed, and SAE, for example, then doesn't vacate the premises,

then the town may very well bring an enforcement action.

And the SAE will be bound by the decision of the ZBA and the courts as to the interpretation of the zoning ordinance.

But they will be able to defend that enforcement action just as they would if no appeal had been filed.

What if the property owner has a constitutional challenge to the ordinance itself?

And that is brought directly to Superior Courtyard.

In this case, those claims were made by SAE to the Hanover zoning board.

And as I'm sure you all know, the Hanover zoning board is a unique body, which had on it not only Bernie Wah, who experienced Lange's attorney,

but Arthur Gardner, who is an attorney, and other very, very well educated people.

So in this case, the ZBA did in fact opine on those legal arguments that SAE raised.

But it didn't have to. It chose to.

And attempting to fault the ZBA for addressing the issues that SAE raised is simply a red hurt.

Is there still another step in this case, if you will, has Hanover actually brought an enforcement action?

No, Your Honor.

So SAE can bring their constitutional claims to the Superior Court when you initiate that enforcement action?

I haven't fully analyzed that.

But I think in this case, where they were brought to the ZBA and where they have then been addressed by the Superior Court and this court.

But under a different standard of review.

So you go in under the enforcement provisions.

The town has the version of proof.

And you have discovery.

And you have cross-examination.

And you have all the due process protections.

Absolutely.

In the interpretation administrative appeal, the applicant bears the burden of showing that the interpretation is unreasonable or unlawful.

The trial court owes deference to the ZBA's determination.

And there is no cross-examination.

There is no discovery.

There's nothing.

Correct.

How do you sort of reconcile the very different standards of review?

There are two separate actions, Your Honor.

SAE is so-

So in the enforcement action, does the applicant get to challenge the interpretation anew with those due process protections?

That would be a Ray Straducata analysis, which I haven't done.

And frankly, I've never been faced with that situation, Your Honor.

I may be now.

I may be now.

And if I am, we will bring an enforcement action if we're required to do so.

And we will deal with all of these issues in the enforcement action.

That doesn't mean that the zoning administrator's decision embedded in its notice of violation was not appealable.

Because the plain language of the statute says you can't appeal a decision to commence an enforcement action.

But you absolutely can appeal any construction interpretation or application of the terms of the ordinance, which is implicated in the enforcement proceedings.

So the applicant can appeal that interpretation, hoping that the ZBA will see the light.

Which it did the first time here, yes.

If the ZBA doesn't see the light and the Superior Court doesn't either, then that's just a dead-end remedy.

Yes.

For the applicant.

Yes.

And the town can't rely on that interpretation in its enforcement action.

I don't know.

So you don't know whether the rest of you to kind of apply?

I haven't done the analysis, Your Honor.

And I think it's a complicated question.

I think it would apply.

But I could certainly be incorrect in that.

I think that in this appeal, SAE has had every opportunity to litigate the interpretation of this ordinance.

But the question is whether it had that opportunity before form with jurisdiction.

It absolutely did, Your Honor.

And more importantly, SAE could have, at the trial court level in the first phase of the appeal, asked to submit additional evidence.

It could have asked for discovery.

It could have asked for witnesses.

None of that happened.

Yeah, but the ZBA was not required to grant that request.

Absolutely not.

And they would be in a criminal matter.

Absolutely.

But, Your Honor, in fairness, yes, the statute does say there's criminal penalties.

However, I have never actually seen anyone convicted of a criminal offense in an enforcement action.

My towns, when I bring these actions, and I've been doing this for 20 some odd years now, we bring a request for an injunction, civil penalties, and attorney's fees.

We have never sought to convict anyone of a criminal offense.

You might want to advise some other towns.

I might.

I'm sure she'd like to advise all the towns.

No, that would keep me way too busy.

So is the notice formal or informal enforcement action?

I'm sorry?

Is the notice, as Attorney Cole pointed out, I'll ask the question, was the notice of violation here a formal or informal enforcement action?

It was not, Your Honor.

And I've explained that in my brief, and the trial court found that as well.

At the end of the day, it doesn't matter whether it was or not.

Because if you keep reading the statute, even if it is an informal or formal enforcement action, to the extent it contains an interpretation of the zoning ordinance, that interpretation is still appeal to the ZBA.

So tell me an instance in which any action by an officer would not involve the interpretation construction or an ordinance?

I can't think of one.

I think every notice of violation is appealable to the ZBA.

And the legislature set it up that way on purpose.

The legislature set it up so that courts would have the benefits of the ZBA's interpretation of the ordinance that it deals with every day, with facts it is familiar with, and with findings for those facts, applying it to the zoning ordinance.

So are we looking at a two-step process?

The interpretation goes up.

Now you have a final word.

Now you start the enforcement action, but you can't relate that back to the very first notice.

What kind of due process or fairness is that?

Sure, Your Honor.

That's what the statute says.

I will tell you from a practical point of view, in this case, if, and I suspect there's a third appeal coming.

If at the end of that third appeal, we find that the courts have concluded that SAEs continue residential occupancy of the property if the violation of the zoning ordinance handover would set a new notice of violation.

And we would seek fines from that last notice of violation after the courts have concluded on the legal issues.

So is that starting a new enforcement action?

Or are these notices simply administrative notices, not part of the enforcement action?

It depends on which path to enforcement the time chooses.

Under 676.17, it's not part of the enforcement action because 676.17 does not require a written notice before you bring that enforcement action.

It only requires that written notice if you want to collect retroactive civil penalties.

If you proceed under the various other enforcement mechanisms, they are set up so you do have to issue that formal written notice of violation or cease and desist order, whatever the statute calls it.

But it depends on which path you choose.

Good question.

Which was this?

Notice of violation, cease and desist, or both?

This was a notice of violation.

Okay.

And the notice itself indicated the path to the ZBA for the applicant.

What the notice said is that this is an administrative decision that you have the right to appeal to the ZBA.

Yes.

It didn't talk about further enforcement proceedings.

I don't have it in front of me.

It's certainly in the record.

I'm not sure exactly what it's about.

But it did alert the property owner that they were subject to daily fines.

And that's because the ZBA jurisdiction here is so clear from not only the statutory language, but also from subsequent cases in this case,

from this court, including 47 residents of Deering, New Hampshire versus Town of Deering, in which this court held in 2005,

a zoning board of adjustment has the power to hear and decide appeals.

It is alleged that a board of selection aired in its interpretation, construction, or application of a zoning ordinance when making a decision involving the enforcement of the ordinance.

Brittany Cole will no doubt point out that that was not an enforcement case.

So I went and did some more research yesterday and I found several times where this court has addressed cases where there is an administrative appeal of a notice of violation.

For example, Lone Pine Hunters Club, Inc. versus Town of Hollis, 149, New Hampshire, 668 from 2003.

KSC Realty Trust versus Town of Freedom, 146, New Hampshire, 271 from 2001.

Might we have fallen into the same trap on those cases by proceeding through an administrative appeal to an enforcement conclusion?

Those were not enforcement cases, Your Honor.

Those were strictly appeals.

They were strictly administrative appeals.

No fines or attorney's fees were awarded.

Correct, Your Honor.

You may not have done this, but all the cases that result in fines and attorney's fees that have come up here, were those all enforcement actions?

They should have been.

Maybe not the attorney's fees.

The attorney's fees, of course, is a broader question, but civil penalties to the extent they've come here can only be authorized by statute.

And those would only have been authorized under 670, 617.

Your Honor, because the law is so clear, this appeal was completely unnecessary.

It resulted literally in the filing of pounds of paper.

The certified record in this case was 1,600 pages with the court and added a burden and expense to the town that was simply unnecessary.

The town sought its attorney's fees from the trial court.

But the trial court denied that without explanation.

There is ample evidence in the record to support the town's request for attorney's fees.

And although it is a difficult standard to overcome an abuse of discretion standard, this court should reverse the decision of the trial court to deny the town's attorney's fees.

And exercise its judgment under superior court rules to award the town its attorney's fees incurred in this proceeding as well.

What's the status of the remand?

The remand has stayed, depending on the outcome of this decision.

So the ball is moving very slowly?

Very slowly, as if COVID hadn't slowed things down enough.

It's moving even more slowly.

If you have no other questions, Your Honor, thank you very much for your time.

Thank you, counsel.

Ms. Cole?

Thank you. I'll try to be quick because there's a lot on pack here.

First, Your Honor, while Attorney Specter Morgan refers to the fact that the superior court can later take the interpretation of the zoning ordinance and take it down the road with it,

what happened here was that the ZBA found a violation.

It didn't find an interpretation.

And that finding of a violation is what Attorney Specter Morgan has just said here in the school.

She wishes to make a race-judicata issue.

While she points out the fact that the statute doesn't require a violation notice, that proves our point.

That shows that it is a discretionary decision to commence formal or informal enforcement proceedings.

And so the question for you today is really very simple.

Is that violation notice the commencement of formal or informal enforcement proceedings?

Because if it is, that's the end of the story.

They do not have the right to determine whether a violation exists or they don't, doesn't exist.

While 62433 gives the right to the appellant to appeal a decision that is aggrieved by it,

it has to be a decision as that term is defined in the statute.

And that term, decision of the administrative officer, excludes decisions to commence formal or informal enforcement proceedings quickly.

Even if we went to the ZBA and asked them, please adjudicate our constitutional issues.

Please adjudicate our statutory issues.

Please adjudicate our factual issues, our OSTOPL issues.

They still can't because they do not have sub-matter jurisdiction to do it, even if we ask them.

And even if they granted us the relief that the zoning administrator was wrong in issuing a zoning violation, they can't do that.

Whether they grant the relief or whether they don't grant the relief,

they don't have the subject matter jurisdiction to do either of those things.

We went to the ZBA because the violation notice instructed us to do so.

And that was the sole reason that we do that.

Any normal person receiving a notice from the government that in order to protect your rights, you have to go to this body.

That's what you do.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you, Councilor.

Sorry, just a question.

Sorry.

So in 676-5-2-B, might that contemplate, if you will, a referral from the trial court to the ZBA if an interpretation issue arises in the context of an enforcement action?

I think that is speculative.

I think that is a possibility.

Perhaps the trial court doesn't know what a certain word means and refers it back to the ZBA to define it.

But that would not include any factual discovery of the applicant.

It would be across the board of what the term meant for everybody.

Anne.

Anne.

So something you just said in your last point.

Oh, well, I'll listen to it and figure it out myself.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you, Council.

Court's in recess.
