You know when we are. I have a special announcement. We are? Good. Thank you. Good morning, Mr. Krupski. Good morning, Mr. Galdieri. How are you both? Very good, sir. It's a pleasure to have you in the court as always in the matter of Doe versus Attorney General. But before we begin today with your indulgence, Mr. Krupski, we have an announcement to make. I have an announcement to make. It's me personally. That esteemed counsel attorney Anthony Galdieri has been

confirmed as the new Solicitor General of the State of New Hampshire. And having watched Mr. Galdieri, and you too watched him grow up here as an oral advocate, we wanted to extend our congratulations. And we know that we expect nothing but your continued excellence in your appearances before us. You're welcome. Mr. Krupski, we're dying to hear from you. Oh, no.

This is case 2020-0447. John Doe versus Attorney General.

May it please the court. I would like to reserve two minutes for rebuttal, if that's okay. I've also... May it please the court. My name is John Krupski, and I'm here today. I have the privilege and honor of representing Officer Doe in this appeal.

I've placed in front of you with agreement of opposing counsel, a copy of House Bill 471, and at pages 1-3 and pages 4-6 is the new statute that has been enacted, 105.13-D, as in David.

Why? Well, the reason being is that the enactment of this statute, between the time when we were at court, arguing this case at the trial court, to today, makes this matter moot.

This is a statute that has been enacted with an effective date of September 24th, 2021.

And the law of the land provides that a challenge asking for only declaratory or prospective relief, which is what this action is about, becomes moot.

And if there's intervening legislation that addresses the issue, 105.13-D is an answer to the court's request since 2015 for the legislature to provide individuals with an avenue for placement on the EES, the exculpatory evidence schedule, and how to be taken off.

And if you look at the statutes in there, it provides that three groups of individuals with three categories.

Sorry, did you mean 106?

It's 105.13-D.

All right, I haven't read it yet.

And if you look, Your Honor, and that would be at pages 4 and 5. It begins on page 4.

Mr. Krupsky, has your client received a written notice from the Department of Justice?

Not at this point in time.

But that may be remedied today.

I'm sure it's gone out.

Does this statute address all phases, i.e., the initial investigation, the placement on the list, and then the post-placement opportunity to get off the list?

Well, yes, Your Honor, it does.

And let me explain.

So if there's three categories, those who were placed on the list, the EES list, or formerly known as the Lori list, prior to April 30th, 2018, have, once they received notice, they have 180 days to seek relief and challenge their placement on that list in the Superior Court.

Is your client waiving any challenge or constitutional or otherwise to that statute?

No.

No.

Okay.

For those group of employees or individuals who are placed on that list, between April 30th, 2018 and September 24th, 2021, they have 90 days to seek a way off the list.

And then there's the other group of people or people who are placed on the list after September 24th.

This is important because it offers a cause of action for the first time for individuals to go to court, not in equity, but in law.

And it allows the court, and it allows the court, the trial court, to, number one, find that the information is not potentially exculpatory in any case.

That's at 10513D, Roman numeral 2, D1.

One, two, it can find that the agency recommending the individual for the EES aired and be taken off.

Three, that they should be in the recommendation to be placed on the EES.

What's the reason for an officer to challenge the original discipline investigation?

Does he go to his chief and say, he or she goes, go to his chief and challenge the finding of whether there's sustained misconduct?

Yeah, they still can, but in this particular matter, there never was any discipline.

It was merely a verbal counseling, which doesn't rise to the level of discipline.

And therefore, in this particular matter, there was no ability to, shall I say, at the labor employment level at the time that it was made, to appeal that decision.

Let me just make sure we're on the same page here.

So you, your client, on behalf of them, no longer maintain that the current RSA 105 provides any remedy to police officers, rightfully or wrongfully, placed on the exculpatory evidence list.

Is that correct?

So that issue is no longer before us?

It's now mooted because 105.13.D now provides that remedy.

So what do we do with your argument, your very fine argument, about 105?

105.13.B, as in boy?

Sure.

The old 105.

What?

The old 105, the one that brought you here.

Right.

Well, our argument, our argument in regards to that is that prior to the enactment of 105.13.D, it wasn't, it was a framework, which allowed, back to the microphone.

Sure.

It was a framework that allowed for the court in equity to review and do an in-camera review of the underlying matter.

It didn't in itself give a cause of action, but it provided a framework, as Duchesne teaches us.

All right.

So evidently, I'm wasting everyone's time.

Why don't you proceed?

Mr. Krupsky, let me just ask you, you're making an argument that seems to depend on our interpretation of the new statute, but that hasn't been presented in the arguments at all to us.

Or the trial court.

Or the trial court.

So wouldn't our normal procedure under those circumstances be to send it back to the trial court for you all to develop those legal arguments?

Well, you could remand it.

Yes, I believe that would be the proper procedure, that the matter be stayed and that it be remanded down to the superior court for a determination of those issues.

It seems to me one interpretation of this is that this gives your client a right, perhaps, to have the hearings that he arguably had and the determinations of the trial court already made about due process.

Yeah.

And, well, the court, as you know, we've argued that the court erred in regards to that or exercised unsustainable discretion.

But their due process was based on the fact that they were saying you don't have any more process in law or in equity, and now we have a process in law.

So it sort of moots that argument also.

Going forward, in answer to Justice Marconi's question, going forward, it actually provides a standard that has to be met by the agency

in recommending the individual to the exculpatory evidence schedule.

And that requires the name and mailing address of the individual officer, a description of the hearing that took place to allow the officer pre-deprivation due process,

and a description of the actual offense for them to determine whether or not this is an exculpatory evidence schedule matter.

So it's too prone.

So even if the offense, there's no dispute, it happened, the officer has the opportunity to argue that it doesn't rise to the level for referral to the EES.

Correct, Your Honor.

But what if there is no hearing?

There was no hearing here.

There's a waiver argument there, I suppose, for the state.

Right.

Well, if there's no hearing, you know, they're going to have to put that down and send to the AG saying,

we gave them no hearing.

We gave the individual no hearing, and I would assume that would kick the AG, the AG would kick it back saying,

you've got to give them a pre-deprivation hearing.

So what is the Attorney General supposed to do in these upcoming hearings or matters?

Is it supposed to defend the placement on the lorry list?

What if the Attorney General doesn't have a position?

Well, actually, it lays it out quite clearly in the legislation, Your Honor.

The legislation provides that if you're going to challenge, and this is on the two groups of individuals who are already on the list,

if you're going to challenge, you name the agency that put you or recommended you for the list,

and also, if you want to be removed from the list, you have to name the AG.

And even if you don't name the AG, you have to provide them with the timelines of what you're doing,

where you filed it, and keep them notified so that they can intervene at any point in time

when they feel it is necessary for the administration of justice.

If we disagree with you that this legislation moots your argument and affirms, what's the difference?

Is there anything that prevents your client from refiling the Superior Court?

No, I don't believe so, but I think that it's important, if I might,

that there were substantial mistakes made in this particular case that the matter should be remanded.

For example, one of the issues that we brought forth is the court, trial court, excuse me,

completely disregarded the facts as presented to them.

This was on a motion to dismiss, limited to the review of the facts, only to the facts that they were given.

But that was based upon there being no right to relief under the then provision of RSA 105,

which is highly sustainable in my view.

Well, Your Honor, I would argue that in regards to post-deprivation remedy,

and this court has said that there is a post-deprivation remedy through both Gantard and Duchesne,

I also point the court out to, on a federal level, Matthew V. Eldridge and Gilbert V. Omar.

All that the pre-deprivation is, it's not a waiver of anything else, it's just a gatekeeper.

It's, is there sufficient evidence to move this forward?

And then you get a more thorough post-deprivation remedy through allocation of law, etc.

Most of the time, it's...

Not under the statute, but under the Constitution.

Well, under the Constitution.

State, Constitution, federal, both.

State, federal, both.

State, federal, both.

State, federal, Constitution.

New Hampshire Constitution provides greater benefits, but not in the federal Constitution.

But, uh, the standards basically mimic each other, although there are some greater advantages

in the New Hampshire statute.

The state argues that, uh, you are not advancing on appeal, uh, an argument under the federal

Constitution, and, in fact, you didn't preserve or make an argument under the state Constitution.

It wasn't part of the original pleading, so there is no constitutional claim before us.

What's your response to that?

Well, there is a constitutional claim under the state, under the state Constitution.

Constitution, which was addressed...

How did you raise it?

What's that?

How did you raise it?

It was raised, um, both in the pleadings and in the decision by the, uh, trial judge.

He said that he incorporated, saying, yes, they, uh, they raised the 14th Amendment.

And we also raised it during the, uh, argument, um, on the motion to dismiss.

So...

And there is no appeal on the federal claim, right?

Uh, no, but the federal, as the trial judge said, the federal claims mimic the state claims.

But you're not appealing that.

I'm not appealing the federal claims.

So, because of this, the introduction of this legislation, it moots out these questions as merely

being academic.

There is now a cause of action.

For my client to go forward, it says who to name as a party, including the, uh, the locality

and going forward.

However, so we believe this matter is moved, should be remanded back to the, um, Superior

Court.

However, we also believe that the trial court erred and exercised unsustainable, um, exercise

of discretion, um, in failing to recognize the facts as were presented to them.

This court has...

What do we do with that?

Can we remand and say, court, trial judge, you erred because you didn't look at the facts?

Yes.

It's an unusual remand.

Well, yeah, but, but that's what happened in this case.

Because in this case, um, and it's interesting how we got there, because in this case, it

was undisputed, okay, based on the pleadings, et cetera, that the whole issue that occurred

in 2016 was a misunderstanding.

It never rose to the level of discipline.

It was a verbal counseling.

And the police chief, or the head of the agency at the time, said this was never an integrity

issue.

It was about damage to property and said, I never put it on the EES list and I don't

think he should be on it.

There's no question he can raise those claims under HB 471.

Yes, I can, but they've already been raised, and for judicial economy, the, this, the remand

down can say, you, you need to recognize these facts, um, as the facts of the case.

And why I say that is because when you look at the exculpatory evidence schedule and the

protocols in regards to them, damage to property is not a issue that is exculpatory in these

particular circumstances.

Well, you're arguing for a case that's not yet before us, but, uh, and your light is on,

so would you wrap up, please?

Sure.

A few minutes later.

Sure.

I just would like to wrap up with one point.

Um, the judge in this case, the trial judge, made an insurmountable barrier for, uh, these

clients and for, uh, Mr. Doe in that he said, when you come to court, you need to come to

court with an order saying that the, the matter has been overturned in a different facility.

That's not what this court said in Ganter or Duchesne.

It simply said, if you show that the evidence as they thought it was back then is different,

you have a fundamental due process right to bring it in front of the court and the court

should address it.

Here, the facts as they relate do provide that they, that he should not be on the list and

that he should be removed.

Thank you.

I'm going to cut you off there, but add to the record that you just referenced the

other two Rondo cases that were on today, which I think, uh, are important to incorporate

into this argument.

It's, uh, 2020-0448, uh, and 2020-0501, and those were referenced.

I'm sure Mr. Galliari will not object to that.

So, thank you.

You still have your two minutes.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you.

Mr. Galliari, after all that hyperbole, can you humble yourself?

Would you humble yourself to speak to us today?

Thank you, Your Honor.

May it please the court.

My name is Anthony Galliari, and I represent the New Hampshire Attorney General.

Uh, after hearing, uh, Attorney Krupsky's argument, I would ask you to rule in this case in this way.

This case presents essentially two legal issues that are not mooted by HB 470, and that's whether RSA 10513B creates a cause of action,

or it could be used as a framework by a superior court to determine whether certain personnel information is in fact exculpatory.

Why should we decide it if there's no opposition or no, no other side to your argument today?

They have not withdrawn this appeal.

Are we deciding it in a vacuum, though?

No, Your Honor.

I think they are, if they are withdrawing their appeal, then they are, then it would be decided in a vacuum.

But I don't understand them to be withdrawing their appeal.

Hard to tell what they're saying, isn't it?

Uh, yes, it is.

I think they are agreeing, perhaps, that there is no cause of action under 10513B, which would be very helpful moving forward to the jurisprudence.

So we don't have...

Well, that's the question.

Under the new statute, then what framework does the trial court apply?

Well, there'll be contested issues as to, um, what the statute does, but the standard reference in the statute seems to be whether the evidence is potentially exculpatory.

What I understand the petitioners to be asking for is an in-camera review to determine whether the information is, in fact, exculpatory in any and all future criminal cases.

That is a very different standard than the standard that appears in RSA 10513D.

To the extent there are new legal theories, and that statute has arisen while this appeal is pending,

I think you could very well affirm the trial court in all respects and remand it.

So that they could amend into the plea.

Mr. Gallieri, you appear to agree that, um, if Mr. Krupsky's client withdraws his appeal, the case is over.

The case is over.

I, I, one of the things, uh, I think, uh, they, Mr. Krupsky might want to, might have to think about is whether or not he has preclusion issues if, if that happens as opposed to a remand.

Um, certainly he, he might be able to argue for new causes of action, but if he's attempting to bring a similar due process claim that he attempted to bring, um, there could be...

We could bail him out of that dilemma, and I, I agree with you that it's significant, but we could bail him out by saying something to the effect that we declined to rule, given, uh, on the issues and remand, uh, for further review of the case in light of the new statute, couldn't we?

Well, Your Honor, you, you could do that. I think we would ask for, uh, with respect to efficiency and judicial economy that the court rule on the two legal issues that are presented to the court that are ripe for review, that 105.13b does not create a cause of action which will provide significant clarity moving forward, uh, and that this petition fails to state a claim, that they have not...

Fails to state a due process claim.

Fails to state a due process claim, yes.

So, the state appears to argue that participation in the earliest review of whatever conduct is at issue is sufficient without there being a secondary review on the referral. Is that the state's position?

That is the state's position where the officer has foregone any subsequent process available.

Not foregone, but the way I read the state's brief is as long as you participated in the underlying review by your superior, and maybe you disagree or didn't disagree, but that's the finding.

Then someone else refers that to the EES. Is there a second level of review available, or does due process only require participation in the first?

So, the way we read this court's decision in Gantard is that that initial due process is sufficient to place an officer on the list, and the way we read Duchenne and Gantard...

So, like, for example, with DOE 447, where the finding, if you will, was not intended to represent conduct that would place the officer on the list, yet later there's a different interpretation or

determination made, no more due process at that phase.

No, you're right. That officer may have due process remedies available to him or her that she could pursue at that time to seek review.

Including, perhaps, taking or read a certiorari to the court to review it. But if you don't pursue that process...

In Duchenne and Gantard, the officers pursued the process all the way through. They were initially placed on the list and received orders at the end of that process.

Right. But here, DOE, I think it's 448, never knew he was referred to the list in the companion case in front of us.

And we would suggest that this court's decision in Gantard says as long as you have, as long as the underlying misconduct is what resulted in you being placed on the list and you had pre-deprivation due process on the underlying misconduct, that you don't get a second opportunity to come in and sort of rewrite history, so to speak.

That has ended. Or to reinterpret whether that conduct arises to the level of placement on the list.

Correct. There are standards for placement on the list and some disciplinary conduct doesn't meet those standards.

Correct. Because what the court was looking at in Duchenne is the sustained findings were overturned.

To have sustained findings that were accepted, and three years later, to ask some other tribunal to issue, perhaps, a conflicting order, I'm not sure that order overturns those initial findings.

Well, this new statute would allow for that. There's certainly no raised judicata or any other type of issue foreclosure arising out of the statute. Everything's game. All issues are in the open and unblemished.

Well, we would have to brief below what the scope and impact of the statute is. I'm not sure the intent of the statute is to have a factual retrial of the underlying misconduct for which a process, maybe a full process, already occurred.

I don't see how you avoid it, but you're right. It would have to be done in the first instance by a trial court.

Mr. Galdi, if we affirm on your constitutional argument, are Mr. Krupsky's clients available? Are they able to bring back the due process claims in a subsequent lawsuit?

I think if the court, well, in a subsequent lawsuit, I think they could. I would think the court would want to, if the case was just affirmed and not remanded, I would think the court would want to specify that the resolution would be without prejudice to their due process claim.

We don't even need to reach the constitutional issues, Mr. Galdiari. It's a matter of, as you say, judicial economy. Do we?

No, I think the complaint, the provision manifestly fails to state a state constitutional claim.

Under the statute, has it existed?

Under the statute?

105.

No, no. 105.13 is sort of one theory of relief that they're asking for, and that fails to state a claim because legally it does not provide a theory for relief or a framework that the Superior Court can use.

And on the due process cause of action that they're raising, that the complaint does not state a state due process.

But we don't have to reach it. We can respectfully decline it and let the new statute kick in and determine at that point, drop court or this court, what due process means in the context of the exculpatory evidence list.

Kim?

I suppose the court could do that. I don't know that the court should defer review of the argument under 105.13.

No, I meant your second issue.

I suppose the court could defer review to that. I think the petition suffers from the same defects and would need to go back and be amended. I think the legal issue is whether the petition advances sufficient facts to even state a due process.

Can you help me with that? Why wasn't an amendment allowed as a matter of fact?

Well, I think an amendment could have been allowed at any point in time. We raised in our reply that we moved to dismiss on the face of the complaint that there's a 14th Amendment claim and a 105.13.

Counsel objected and brought in Part 1, Article 15 of the New Hampshire Constitution.

Duchesne and Pientert, we pointed out in reply, it did not contain, the petition does not contain that material. The judge recognized the petition doesn't contain that material.

And the distinction between the state constitutional argument is the protected reputation interest of the officer as opposed to under the 14th Amendment federal constitutional provision which only protects the employment right. Is that essentially the distinction?

Correct. And does the state agree that perhaps a diminution in employment responsibilities affects that employment right under the federal constitution or does it have to be a total cessation of employment in order to raise that point?

Does the trial court address both and said these folks are still employed so nothing to see here?

I think there might be a scale there for the federal jurisprudence. I think the operative problem is that the petition doesn't provide any details as to what might be.

One of the does, at least in the record, there is evidence that his duties were reassigned due to his placement on the list.

And there may be a question as to whether that is an impact sufficient under the case law.

But the state constitution is more protective. It's a different analysis. It's not in the operative petition.

I think they'd have to go back and amend the petition and the court were to remand it with an amount of time necessary.

But the trial court did deal with it. It cited the cases that Mr. Krupsky had cited and went on to deal with the merits of the state constitutional claim.

I mean, that's what we want to see in terms of preservation. The issue was joined below. It was argued. It was decided by the trial court.

I think, Your Honor, one of the things to think about is that the defense is entitled to know the theories upon which they're proceeding.

That a claim that's not in the operative petition, there may be preclusion problems later on.

If somebody can come back and say, well, that cause of action was never in the case.

It's great that the judge ruled upon it, but it was advisory, and we're not precluded later on.

So the petition is a very important document. It needs to contain the legal theories that they're proceeding on that authorize the judge to make rulings.

But if we remanded with a right to file a normal amendment, which a petitioner would have, we've just spun our wheels, theoretically speaking, correct?

We haven't advanced the issue at all.

I think the court advances the issue by affirming the Superior Court's order and allowing a remand to add any new causes of action or legal theories that the plaintiffs think they can advance through amendment.

I think it would advance us, the law, to know that individuals in these circumstances cannot bring a claim under 105.13.

That would certainly advance the law in this area.

And that is a position that I think is worth reiterating is that the petitioner hasn't advocated in this case for a standard that mirrors either placement on the EES,

which is whether the information is potentially exculpatory, or the recognized removal standard under Duchenne and Gander, which is whether the officer's placement on the list has clearly been shown to be without basis.

But that gets back to the original finding.

Yes.

Or incorporates both. Conduct happened, but it doesn't rise to the level for placement on the list.

Yes.

So there are sort of two avenues of attack.

Yes.

What the appellant is trying to do in this case, essentially in the Superior Court, is to invent a new procedure for the Superior Court to decide whether personnel information is in fact exculpatory in any future criminal case.

Under 105, you're saying?

Under 105.13.

Right.

That's equivalent of asking the Superior Court for an advisory opinion on exculpatory evidence questions that may never come to fruition in an actual criminal case.

And that has significant consequences to criminal defendants in the cases if that judicial decision is incorrect.

Because the prosecution and the Superior Court may very well be bound by that determination, but that determination may not prevent a criminal defendant from challenging the failure to disclose that evidence under Brady in the federal constitution.

And it will begin to present complicated questions as to what is the effect of such a definitive jurisprudence that's not reviewing what someone did to place somebody on the list or reviewing an order or some material that somebody claims clearly shows that they have a basis for removal.

But tries to come in and, in a vacuum outside a criminal case, say, this information will never be exculpatory.

And yet the placement on the list exists in a vacuum outside of an individual criminal prosecution.

It exists and has repercussions on the officers.

Well, the list is a prosecutorial tool that's used to fulfill a constitutional duty.

Right.

I mean, its purpose is not to stigmatize.

Its purpose is to.

Right.

But it has the practical effect in job placement, et cetera.

So there needs to be some balance, doesn't there?

I think with review mechanisms on the front end and the back end that there is a balance.

And with the due process protections that this court has put in place, there is a balance.

Which is sort of where the due process argument in this case was going.

If there is no review under 105, then there has to be some sort of due process protection existing outside of the statute.

And we would argue in this case that that due process protection existed and was robust enough in the case.

Mr. Galdieri, can I just ask you, it seems that you agree that if we were to affirm this case, there would be nothing that would prejudice or interfere with Mr. Krupski's client proceeding under 471, the procedures in 471.

Is that right?

No prejudice to him moving forward under that statutory scheme?

I don't know if there would be any prejudice if you solely affirmed his clients.

I don't believe we, if they were to bring causes of action under 105.13 and claim that they could, that we would raise a claim preclusion argument.

That if they might try to bring a due, a due process claim outside the context of what they would purport to be a new cause of action, that we may have arguments that.

Right, and I understand that.

But if they were to proceed solely under the procedures set forth in House Bill 471, nothing that would be decided, if we affirmed, would preclude them from doing that, right?

That's correct, Your Honor.

That's correct, Your Honor.

I don't think anything would preclude them from refiling what causes of action they think they might have under 105.13.

I can't say that we might not take the position below as to whether or not that statute supplies a cause of action or what that review looks like in the contours of that review.

I can't really say that today.

I would like to.

Sure, but if we affirmed without prejudice, there would be no.

Correct.

There would be no argument to that.

Yes, Your Honor.

Thank you.

I ask that you affirm the trial court.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Mr. Krupski, you have a couple of minutes.

Yeah, just very briefly, Your Honor.

Two things I would like to address.

Number one is that the court underneath agreed that they were using the standard test for whether it was proper due process.

Used the standard test, there was a significant interest, that interest was significant enough, and then went to the standard of whether there was risk of erroneous deprivation through the procedures that were provided.

And I remind the court that that analysis is guided by notions of fundamental fairness, decency, and fair play in our society.

In this particular circumstance, there was no post-deprivation review.

I disagree.

I disagree that in, excuse me, in both Gantert and Duchesne, there were post-post mechanisms due process rights.

They went through a full hearing before an arbitrator and the facts were determined.

And Gantert went through a full hearing before an arbitrator, post-deprivation.

And that's what Duffley says, Duffley v. Scholastic, says it has to be meaningful.

That's why you have your entry level and then a post-review.

There was no post-review in this particular circumstance.

And the appellants are entitled to that post-deprivation review.

The other aspect that I would like to address very briefly and quickly is the concept that you cannot get off the list unless you go to the court with an order already.

If you have no processes by which to go to get off the list, then you can't go to the court with an order.

The trial court in this issue added an additional element that this court has never recognized saying,

well, yeah, I understand that, you know, everyone says this isn't the way it was supposed to be and there was no integrity issue.

But you haven't brought me a court order or an administrative order, you know, overturning that.

What that would do if that was accepted as the law of the land, everyone on the list for 2018 or even for the enactment of the statute could never come forward and get off the list.

But nobody says that's the law of the land.

The attorney general is saying that's the protocol of the attorney general's office.

Right.

And what I'm saying is that's a circular argument.

You can't tell me to go to court that I can't get off the list unless I have a court order.

And when I go to court, you tell me I don't have a right to be at the court.

And in fact, I would point the court to, you know, the statement made at the trial court by the AG's office.

And it reads as follows at page 63 of the appendix.

This is the attorney general's office.

If the petitioner contends that he got it wrong, it's never happened.

This isn't the way it happened.

Those findings were wrong.

The adverse party is the police department.

And that is the party who would oppose the issue.

It is the party that would litigate against the determination.

We don't believe that a cause of action exists to do that.

But that would be the opposing.

So, bring me an order, but you can't get an order.

You're done.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Thank you both, counsel, for an excellent presentation.

The matter is taken under advisement, and we will now proceed.
