This is case 2020-0333, state of New Hampshire versus Kevin Herrington.

Good morning, may it please the court.

But before you begin, counsel, I just need to put on the record, sorry for the interruption,

that Justice Hans Marconi is participating. She's viewing the argument online, and she

will be conferring the case and voting on it. Go ahead.

Thank you, Justice Sicks. Good morning, may it please the court. Thomas Barnard on

behalf of Kevin Herrington. I have reserved one minute for rebuttal. I focused in my opening

brief on self-authentication. The state and its brief does not dispute, concedes that State's

Exhibit 7 was not self-authenticated, so I don't plan to discuss that this morning,

although I am happy to take the court's questions on that. I do plan to address,

to make three points. First, Herrington did not waive his objection to State's Exhibit

7. Second, State's Exhibit 7 was not authenticated under the General Authentication Rule. And

third, the error here was not harmless. Can we start with, in your order, the waiver?

Why wasn't the absence of objections during the course of the testimony an effective waiver?

In the course of the accuser's testimony? Yeah. Well, the State didn't seek to

introduce State's Exhibit 7 until the detective's testimony.

What about the victim testified to the contents of the text? She didn't testify to the contents

of the text. She said that Herrington texted me and it was repeated and I told him to stop

and he didn't stop. But she didn't testify that Herrington sent her any specific text.

Well, it wasn't as graphic as the actual text, but there was an extensive back and

forth. Everybody discussed that she could review Exhibit 7 to refresh her recollection.

And then it was like, oh, you can't read from it, but you can review your recollection and

then there are pages of testimony about the substance of what was exchanged.

Right. But my recollection is she never testified that Herrington, oh, Herrington

sent me this text. He sent me this text or he sent me this text.

She can check the record. So you don't think that's a waiver, number one. Was it published

to the jury at any point? Do you know? I don't know if it was published, but it was admitted

when the detective testified. And I presume the jury had it during jury deliberations.

All right. Thank you. As far as the accuser's testimony, the Exhibit was used to refresh

the accuser's recollection, but there would be no grants to object to using the Exhibit

to refresh her recollection. Anything can be used to refresh a witness's recollection.

Exactly. So why wouldn't any error here be harmless? Because the substance of the

testimony already came in and it's all in regards to pre-incident communications,

right? Threatening communication.

So my recollection is that the witness didn't... Her recollection was refreshed that Herrington

in general had sent a lot of texts, but that she didn't specifically testify Herrington

sent this text or this text or this text. And particularly with respect to the most

harmful texts, the most damaging text to Herrington's case, the text where he's being overtly

threatening to her. It could be argued that some of the texts that he sent afterwards were

really the most damaging texts. The text apologizing for his conduct, that sort of thing.

Yeah. You know, Herrington testified though and he had plausible explanations for those

texts. I mean, he agreed that there was an argument he testified...

The jury didn't buy it, obviously. The jury didn't buy it, but we don't know how the

jury would have evaluated the case if the court had properly excluded States Exhibit 7.

It could have been the case that the jury said, look, this is a close case, but we've

got all these text messages from Verizon before the event. And these text messages

really cooperate what the accuser is. So how do we take the fact that the defendant

didn't challenge this evidence prior to trial strategy?

He didn't challenge it prior to the state's admission?

Yes.

Yeah. There is no obligation for a litigant to raise evidentiary issues before the evidence

is offered into evidence.

Even when the judge says, hey, this isn't going to be an issue, right? I mean, it

seems like in theory, I agree with you, but when there's that type of exchange with

a judge and you make a representation to the judge, doesn't that change things?

Well, I don't think Harrington, Harrington's lawyer never represented that there

would be no objection to this. He simply said, we'll cross that bridge when we get

to it. You know, when the time comes, if the state seeks to introduce this, you

know, we may object, but Harrington's lawyer never said, you know, States

Exhibit 7, if the state moves to introduce that, we won't object.

And he had that exhibit for weeks, if not months before trial, right?

He did. He did. But evidentiary rulings have traditionally been made

when the exhibit is offered into evidence. There is no rule or statute that

requires a litigant to raise evidentiary issues prior to that moment.

But when the judge asks you specifically, isn't it a matter of trial management

that we should allow the judge to have discretion and be able to rely on either

statements or pregnant pauses and no response? Can't the judge rely on that?

I think if a court anticipates an evidentiary issue and a court wants to rule

on that evidentiary issue on a preliminary basis, I think it's incumbent

upon the court to issue an order to say the party shall, you know, address

whether States Exhibit 7 is admissible or not by the state, and the court will

issue a ruling on that. But I think there has to be a formality to that

type of request that wasn't present here. The state also argues that Harrington

waived his objection by events that occurred after the court made its

ruling admitting States Exhibit 7. But the case law is clear that this

court, when it considers a trial court's evidentiary rulings, only

considers the information available to the trial court at the time it made

its ruling. States Exhibit 7 was not authenticated under the general

authentication rule. The first point I would make about this is that this is

an alternative ground for affirmance. And it would have been discretionary.

So when an alternative ground for affirmance would have been discretionary,

this court can only affirm on that alternative ground if the lower court

would have been required as a matter of law to reach the same result.

In other words, if there was only one answer. It's like an unreasonable handcuff

of the trial court. It seems like an unreasonable handcuffing of the trial

court and of this court, doesn't it? It's not. I mean, it's not a handcuffing

of the trial court because the trial court never made a ruling on the

issue. How about this court? It's denferential to the trial court

because we're not presuming that the trial court would have ruled a

particular way when we don't have a ruling for the trial court. It's

not a handcuff on this court because this court is appropriately saying if

the trial court doesn't rule on an issue, we don't know how the trial

court would have ruled. So it would be inappropriate for this court to

presume that the trial court would have ruled a certain way. We can

still affirm, but it has to be the type of case where the trial court

as a matter of law would have had to have ruled in that particular

manner.

Well, can't you say here, given the ruling that it did make and all

of the statements that it made, that it would have made that

general ruling?

No. I mean, the issue of whether an exhibit is self-authenticating is

distinct from the issue of whether an exhibit is authenticated under the

general authentication rule. It's rule 901 versus rule 902. And the

requirements under rule 902 are very technical and specific, and the

requirements under rule 901 are much more vague and judgment-based. So I

don't think we can presume because the trial court made one ruling in favor of

a party that it would have ruled in favor of that same party if it had

ruled under the separate rule of evidence.

And here, I mean, deference or not, this exhibit was not authenticated

under rule 901. All we have is a detective's testimony that, well, I

sent a subpoena to Verizon and I got this envelope back in the mail.

That's not enough to authenticate that an item of evidence is what it

purports to.

Under 901?

Under 901, yes. If it were, we'd have no reason to even have rule 902

governing self-authentication. A party would never have to call a custodian

of records or introduce a certificate from a custodian of records. The

party could just call its own investigator to say, well, I sent a

request to this entity or this organization, and this is what I

got back in the mail.

Let's spend some time on why it's not harmless. There's a quantum of

evidence here without exhibit 7, including but not limited to the

discussion of the victim and the investigating officer of the

content of exhibit 7 and a lot of physical, some physical evidence

and a lot of peripheral witnesses. Why doesn't that

enough?

Well, this was essentially a he said, she said case. States

exhibit 7 purported to cooperate several crucial aspects of KG's

testimony that Harrington texted her repeatedly and ignored her

request to stop.

He was on the stand. He didn't deny that.

He didn't, but we don't know whether he would have testified

if the trial court had made a different ruling.

And she said that he texted her repeatedly based on her

refreshing of her recollection.

She did.

So how can that, so she, it's independently admissible.

Well, this is right. This is, this is the harm of it is that she

said it, but this document corroborates it.

Right. Without, without states exhibit 7 being admitted, there

would be no cooperation for her testimony that he, that he

texted her repeatedly.

Before the incident.

Because there's plenty of text after the, after the incident.

There are texts that the state obtained from her phone after

the incident. We don't dispute their admissibility.

So you want to address your, your dispute with reset?

Yeah, absolutely. So the purpose of the harmless error

doctrine is to promote public respect for the criminal

process by focusing on the fairness of the trial.

So the focus is on fairness.

The focus is on the process.

And that's traditionally what appellate courts do.

They focus on the process, not the result.

The harmless error inquiry ensures that that focus on process

has perspective.

It's not a myopic focus on, you know, obtaining a perfect

trial with 100% correct rulings.

If there's an error, the court puts that error in perspective

and considers that in the context of the trial as a

whole. The problem with the reset formulation is that it

takes the focus off of the process, off of the fairness

and allows a firmance, allows a finding of harmlessness

just based on the result.

And that is fundamentally at odds with the traditional role

that appellate courts take.

It damages...

In your view, unless there's overwhelming evidence, there

can be no harmless error.

Regardless of how inconsequential an error might be.

That is the, that is this court's traditional

formulation of the harmless error test.

Let's move beyond tradition.

Okay, so if, here's my argument.

I understand the view that some modification of that

test is necessary because there are some errors that

can, that should be deemed harmless even though the

evidence of guilt is not overwhelming, even though

it's a close case.

But we go from one extreme to the other if we say

that there are some errors that can be deemed harmless

no matter how prejudicial or significant they are

because an appellate court viewing a cold record

says the evidence of guilt was overwhelming.

My argument is that this court should always

consider the effect of the error.

And it should always weigh the effect of the error

against the strength of evidence of guilt.

The strength of evidence of guilt alone should

never be either necessary nor sufficient to

establish harmless error.

The reset formulation damages public

respect for the criminal process because it

allows judges to ignore an error no matter how

significant merely because they agree with the

result.

Will you agree that in reset the state didn't

argue that the evidence was overwhelming and yet

there was no arguments from the defense that

the state was not entitled to a harmless error

analysis?

I'm not familiar with the arguments that the

party has made in reset.

I know that there wasn't, the parties didn't

address whether the standard should be modified

or if so how.

And ultimately this court ruled that the error

was not harmless because the evidence of guilt

was not overwhelming and because the error

was not cumulative or inconstant.

The state didn't even argue that the error

of guilt was overwhelming.

So that's why it wasn't an issue in the case.

The defense didn't say, hey, there's no

harmless, this error can't be harmless because

the state acknowledges that the evidence

wasn't overwhelming.

The issue then that's left that was resolved

in reset doesn't include this proper

evaluation of the harmless error standard.

To the extent that reset said that an error

can be harmless solely based on the evidence

of guilt being overwhelming without

considering the effect of the error that was

dicta because that issue was not presented

in reset.

This court has never addressed that issue

and what this court should do is hold that

in all harmless error inquiries the court

is weighing the effect of the error and

the strength of the evidence.

The second prong, and I hate to badger you on this,

the second prong properly framed is whether

the excluded evidence was cumulative

or inconsequential in relation to the

strength of the state's case.

Doesn't that sort of take care of that analysis

at your...

That's what I'm saying, the second prong

includes both aspects.

It includes whether the error was cumulative

or inconsequential and it includes the

strength of the evidence of the state's case.

Essentially the harmless error inquiry

should be that second prong.

The first prong the court should

just abandon because the strength

of the evidence of the case is already

included as a component of that

balancing in the second prong.

Such are the frailties of human language.

Thank you, Mr. Barnard.

Your red light is on, you still have one minute.

Thank you.

Ms. McCoola, did I say your name correctly?

You did, Your Honor, thank you.

Good morning and may it please the court,

Adriana McCoola for the state.

I'm harkening back to a point you made, Justice Hicks.

In this case,

the defense did handcuff the trial court

based on the timing and the type

of objection it made.

And I'll explain what I mean by that.

So to start, on day one,

at the end of day one of trial,

Judge McNamara asked the parties

if there were any evidentiary issues

or any issues that would arise.

And the state specifically brought up Exhibit 7

and talked about how it would admit

that exhibit the next day and in response

they'll make their pitch, we'll make ours.

But then when we're at trial,

before Exhibit 7 is ever offered

as an exhibit, before the state

ever moves to strike that idea

and admit it as full, the defense

asks to approach and begins

to discuss records from Verizon.

Before Exhibit 7 has ever

been shown to the detective.

And so from there,

a close reading of the record

can really be instructive to the court

in determining the type of objection

this is trying to make.

So again, the defendant does not identify

that he's objecting to Exhibit 7.

He does not identify what...

He didn't use the word authentication, Your Honor?

Not at that point, no.

When he asks to approach, he says he has two objections

and his first objection is

to a lack of a report, but what he means

is a police report about how the detective

collected these records from Verizon.

And in response,

the trial court says, well, you must have gotten

the search warrant and the supporting affidavit

of the detective would testify.

She hadn't had a chance to yet about how she received

those records from Verizon.

And then his second objection was

to a proper certification.

And even though he never says Exhibit 11,

what he's really talking about in that moment

is Exhibit 11, because that's the certification.

The one-page letter from

Verizon that is completely

separate from Exhibit 7

and at no point ever admitted a trial

and it's not even attached to Exhibit 7.

And that was not admitted to trial?

Correct. It was ID there, obviously,

because they were discussing it, but it was never admitted.

And that's the state's position.

That exhibit is what the judge

ruled was admissible at the end of this

long exchange in the record, is Exhibit 11.

That the state then never moved

to admit, because no one

mentions Exhibit 7 at all during this

discussion. Then

the defense raises a third objection

that he did not receive proper notice

that this document, presumably

Exhibit 11, was what the state

would rely on to admit records.

But he never says

Exhibit 11 is attached to Exhibit 7

and I'm objecting to Exhibit 11

authenticating Exhibit 7. That's

never said. And no one says

Exhibit 11, frankly, until the state says it.

I think on page 302

or towards the end of that discussion.

Exhibit 11.

The state references Exhibit 11

as that letter. But again, no one

then talks about Exhibit 7.

Right. Okay.

And then obviously that exchange ends

and the state continues with

its direct examination of the detective.

And the state moves into

showing her Exhibit, asking her how

she got the records. She explained she

issued a warrant. She received records

back via email from Verizon. She explains

that because she had the defendant's

phone number and the victim's phone

number from the victim, she was

able to search through all of the records

that she obtained from the defendant's phone

to find the relevant text messages on the

day. And then she copy and pasted

those messages into a

separate document. And then at that point

she has shown Exhibit 7. And she's

asked those basic foundation

questions we would expect. So is this

a true and accurate copy

of the copy and paste job that you

did from the records into this document?

What about Mr. Barnard's argument that if

we go with the state's view

here, then there's never any need

to bring anybody in from Verizon

or have a

self-authenticating affidavit

because the investigating

officer can always just look at it

and come in and testify

about some cut and paste

job that they've done. So there would be

a difference in this case if

the state was

moving to admit the entire

records from Verizon. Then you

would need a keeper of records. And I say that because

if you showed Exhibit 7 to a keeper

of records from Verizon, they could not authenticate

it at trial. Because it is not

the document that they produced in response

to that search warrant. It is a portion or

summary of that document, but it is not

the full records. And they would say that

because they'd have in their file

the warrant that would show the date range

and what they were looking for. And then they would see

Exhibit 7 and see that it's not

what they sent. And so they may

be able to say it looks like it, but it's not exact.

And then you would need the detective's testimony

to explain how that exhibit was

created for the court to be able to authenticate

it and admit it at trial. But it would seem

that you would need both.

Both the underlying testimony

from Verizon saying, yeah, this is

this is our stuff, but

gee, that doesn't look the same.

And then you need the testimony

from the detective. Sorry.

So I don't agree with that only because

901A should be

a low bar for admission.

Because 901A

as I forget which case is what rule,

but one case says the test for 901A

is admissibility is a rational basis.

And then the other one is prima facie.

I know they're in my brief. I just don't remember.

What about Mr. Barnard's argument that, well,

it has to be

clear as a matter of law that the

court

had to admit it as a matter of law

and that, therefore,

because this is discretionary and we don't know

what the trial court would have done, we can't affirm

on that basis.

So Attorney Barnard cited that rule from

Kavanaugh case.

But when you read the Kavanaugh case

in the beginning part of that sentence says

when the court has exercised no discretion

then this court will uphold or deny

if the only way the court

could have ruled as a matter of law was to admit

or deny whatever the item is.

So in Kavanaugh was the decision not

to provide self-defense instruction.

So this court said

in Kavanaugh the court did not

exercise any discretion by not giving

that instruction and we rule

as a matter of law the only way the court

could have sustainably exercised its discretion

was to give that instruction.

Here the court did exercise discretion.

It did admit that exhibit

11 and then ultimately exhibit

7 when there was no objection from

defense on some other grounds at that time

just for the wrong rule

and frankly that wrong rule was

the wrong rule was because the defense

made the incorrect objection.

They were not objecting to exhibit 7

and its admission under 901A

or any other rule of evidence.

They were objecting to 902.11

Exhibit 11's

compliance with rule 902.11

We disagree with you. State waving

its argument as to self-authentication

under rule 902.11.

I did concede in my brief that this letter

does not comply with that rule so, yes.

But if you disagree with me and

I think the state still wins under

the harmless error doctrine under

either test whether it's

the other evidence of an overwhelming nature

quantity or weight or because this evidence

is cumulative or in consequence.

How could it be harmless, Your Honor?

Because well under the first part

of this test there is overwhelming evidence

of the defendant's guilt. So to start

and I know that you already referenced

this Justice Donovan there were many

texts that came in without objection

after the assault in which the

defendant is apologizing numerous

times and referencing

parts of the assault that occurred such as

the wrestling. They would appear to be

damning but doesn't that require an

appellate court to weigh how damning

in order to decide whether it's harmless

or not? I'm just struggling.

Sure. So I think you can look at

the entire record when you're looking at

the harmless error doctrine. So you can

look at all of the testimony that came

in a trial including the defendant's

testimony as well as all the evidence

the state put in. So the victim also

offered direct incredible testimony

of the assault itself.

She talked about how before she had

gone to sleep and I know that these

texts are in Exhibit 7 but

she that the defendant would text her

numerous times before the assault

and that she told the defendant not to

text her numerous times and she told the

defendant numerous times not to come into her

home. What about Mr. Barnard's argument

though that she testified to that

having had her recollection

refreshed but this is

corroborating evidence so it's

important and the jury would have taken

that into account. So

while some of these texts

in Exhibit 7 do corroborate that

51 of the texts in Exhibit 7 were

already in Exhibit 6 as full

exhibits and I can't remember

which texts are what but I believe there was a

motion to transfer all the exhibits up to this court.

Right we have Exhibit 6

but the

ballgame here is the pre-incident

texts right? Sure. There's no

issue about the post-incident texts.

Right and my memory of the record

is that before she was refreshed with

a specific text she was able to say

that she had texted him to stop

texting her and not to come over before her

memory was refreshed. I think the state's

attempt in refreshing her memory

was to get the specific word she used

because obviously it would be relevant

to the charges since there was an AFSA

and a burglary charge involved and a false

imprisonment. So there was no objection

to Exhibit 6 coming in? Correct

it was admitted it was

offered as ID and then the ID was struck

without objection. Same with Exhibit 5

which was the defendant's contact

information in the victim's phone so

it showed how she had saved

his name as Kevin Burrow which Kevin

first name street they lived on

and then his phone number so

that was all in without

objection.

Going back to harmless error and the

overwhelming evidence in this case

there were three what I call outcry

witnesses so she called her sister

her ex-boyfriend and her boss

and all of them testified a trial about

her demeanor and how it was unlike anything

they'd seen before. Her ex-boyfriend

testified that he saw some sort of

red mark or abrasion on her eyelid

which corroborated her testimony that

the defendant had roughly wiped the

mascara off of her face after he dumped

water on her.

The detective also corroborated

her testimony one by collecting the

shorts and the shirt that the victim

testified was ripped off of her when

the defendant assaulted her. The

detective also took pictures of

the wet mark in the closet from

where the victim says the defendant

put her on him on her and

while the defendant did

testify and explain sort of

some of these things his story basically

was I went in there to collect the money

she was holding for me while she was on her

trip and we were wrestling from behind

and that's how her shirt was ripped and

that's how water fell on her but

frankly the jury did not believe that

story given all of the other

corroborating evidence that had come in

at that point including the victim's

direct testimony matching the evidence

that the detective had collected that

the detective then testified about

and then turning to the second portion

of harmless error the state's

position is that this evidence is inconsequential

not only because other

text messages had been admitted

and arguably the text in exhibit 7

from the state's perspective are more damning

because why would anyone apologize

for a consensual act

or why would anybody apologize

for what the defendant is talking about

just going to collect his money.

We send one text that says extremely

s followed immediately by

another text that says I am so so

so so so sorry.

That's exhibit 6. Yes and those

messages are all in exhibit 6

and then he's referencing

we were just wrestling and I thought you needed

a firm man none of that

those are the damning texts and those

are what came in without objection at trial.

Moreover because the defendant

testified. Was he

apologized when he testified?

I'm sure he was I can't remember to be honest

I would imagine though given

his direct and his redirect

Moreover because the defendant

testified he very well could have been

impeached with the text in exhibit 7

in the same way that the victim's memory could have been

refreshed without those texts becoming full exhibits

for the jury and if

the defendant adopted the text

exhibit 7 didn't come in perhaps the defendant

would not have testified.

That may be true but there is no assertion of that

in the brief and frankly the first time that's been

mentioned was when attorney Barnard

said it today in his words were we don't

know if the defendant would have testified

but as he also said this is a he said she

said case and so it's very

plausible that the defendant testified

so he could provide his version of the night

of the assault. But do you agree that our

assessment of whether the court aired

or not is based on the information

that the court had

at the time and what had happened up to that

point in the trial which did not

include the testimony of the defendant.

I do your honor and in fact

the court had much evidence

that would support 901A

in admitting of exhibit 7

at the point that the state moved to admit it.

The court knew

the victim and the defendant's cell phone number

from the victim's testimony at trial.

The court

knew the defendant's contact log on the victim's

phone. The court knew that

the texts in exhibit 6 were sent

after the assaults and that there were numerous

texts which corroborated the victim's testimony

that there were nonstop text

messages before the assault.

The

court also knew the content of the text

messages from the victim's

testimony before she was refreshed with the document

so that she had told him not to come over

and to stop texting. The court

also knew that the reason

exhibit 7 came from records

was because the victim had deleted

those text messages because she did not

want to...she didn't care

about anything the defendant said is how she testified

at trial.

The court also heard before the state moved

to admit exhibit 7 that the detective applied

for the search warrant and that these records

were provided to the detective via

email from Verizon

and then the court also heard how the detective

went about gathering these text messages

so how she searched for the defendant

and the victim's phone number. She found

these text messages on the relevant days

of the trial and then she copied and pasted them

onto the separate document. So under

901A that's

frankly plenty of knowledge that this

document is what the witnesses are testifying

it is before the court moves

allows it to be admitted at trial.

I see my yellow light is on but if there are no further

questions I will yield. Thank you.

Thank you, council. Mr. Bari.

Just one point of clarification.

There are

some texts or at least one text

that is included in states exhibit 7

and states exhibit 6 that occurred

after the incident in question. It's a reference

to impudence. And why is that material

to the issue? So it's

a reference that Harrington

purportedly makes in this text

to impudence where he says I couldn't get

hard and part of the accuser's

testimony was that Harrington attempted

to have intercourse with her but

could not get an erection. So that

corroborates that testimony for that reason

that's prejudicial.

Thank you. Case submitted.

Thank you.
