Three, two, one.

The matter before the court is BNC management versus State of New Hampshire Division of Emergency

Services. It is case number 2020-0052. BNC management is represented by Attorney Heather

Ward. The State of New Hampshire Division of Emergency Services is represented by

Attorney Matthew Broadhead. Ms. Ward, you have reserved one minute and you may begin

whenever you are ready. Thank you. May it please the court, Heather Ward, for BNC

management. There are two issues before the court. One, whether 911 calls, the audio recording,

are categorically precluded from disclosure under the right to no law. And two, whether

potential defendant has the same benefit as a potentially injured plaintiff to the

trial court's equitable powers under 498-1. I will address the two issues in order but

I'll take questions at any time. 911 calls contain a variety of information. It can include

an individual calling to say that there is a vehicle all over the road and potentially a DWI.

They can include a neighbor calling to say that a house is on fire and there's smoke

everywhere and there needs to be a firefighter there. It could be a call saying that somebody

has had a seizure and they need an ambulance there. Because 911 audio recordings contain

a variety of information, they are also a variety of privacy interests at stake. Some 911 audio

recordings include no privacy interests. That telephone call where somebody calls to say,

I've observed somebody on the side of the road, their car is broken down. Very little

privacy interests articulated in that scenario. Other scenarios may include somebody saying that

I have a medical condition and a seizure. I need an ambulance. There may be privacy

interests at stake in that phone call. What all of these phone calls have in common though

is that there is a public interest into what the government is up to in terms of

personnel response, emergency personnel response to these telephone calls.

In this case, listen to the 911 call? No. The record states that the court below

did not listen to it, that the 911 call is in the possession of the state. There is no

evidence indicating that the state has listened to it or that anybody has listened to the call.

So, Attorney Ward, why are we not bound by the plain language of RSA 106H when it says

any information compiled under this chapter? In so many words, shall not be disclosed?

You are bound by the information in RSA 106H. The issue is what is the information and what

is compiled under this chapter mean? Because the state chooses to retain or record the 911

audio does not mean that it is compiled under the chapter. What is compiled under the chapter is

what the legislature intended to compile under that statute. You have to look at all of the

language. There are several references within RSA 106H referencing confidential information.

You have Section 9 talking about how there is a surcharge on telephone bills. On your

cell phone bill, you see that surcharge at the bottom talking about how much it is going

to cost to pay for this system. At Section 12, it talks about the telephone calls and the addresses

that are retained through this system. That is confidential. It talks about in Section 16.

Let me interrupt. Some of this information is it retained or compiled and retained

longer than six months as opposed to the recording itself?

I do not know how long that is retained. I know that the regulations state that the

recording is retained for six months pursuant to the regulations. The only reference

within the only reference to recordings is the regulations stating recordings. There is

no reference to recordings within RSA 106H which is very important. It could be that

a geographic information or this other data in terms of cost might be retained longer than

six months. We do not know. It is possible. They can retain it for whatever amount of time

they need. The point of the system based on the purpose of the statute is to be able to have

all of this information so that they can run the system so that when somebody picks up their

phone, even if I am in my office, I press 9 to get a number out. I press 1 to do a long

distance call and I accidentally press 1 and then I hang up. The police are going to show

up in my office regardless of the fact that I have said nothing. That is what the system

is in place for. All the separate sections talk about that. It is a very narrow statute.

It is narrow intended because it is essentially collecting private information. It is collecting

the ability to be able to find people, to be able to locate where they are, to locate,

to call them up. Although some of that information may not have enough privacy

interests based on this case, this court's precedent, the legislature is determined that

there is no reason to be providing this information to the public except in limited

circumstances. The exceptions to 106-14 are very limited for the same reason that the

statute is very limited. Section 14 addresses all of this confidential information that

they are retaining. Like I mentioned, section 9, there is the funding issue. There is the

telephone calls and the addresses. There is the wireless communication. There is cooperation

by the municipality to provide addresses and provide this information so that the system

can run the way it is supposed to run. Then, in section 14, the legislature comes together

to say, this information that is compiled that we have been talking about is

precluded from disclosure onto the right to no law, which makes perfect sense within the

entire reading of the statute. The limitations make sense as well. If a law enforcement officer

wants to have that specific pinpoint location, say for some sort of investigation, that has to

be a case by case analysis. Not every officer is going to get it. They have to prove why they

get that pinpoint location that is established through this system. They have to prove why they get

the funding surcharge information. Same thing with the well location. They're read in conjunction in an

entire reading of the statute, which is also... Isn't the fact that the legislature bothered to

set out those two exceptions and then it has the expansive language at the beginning? Any

information or records, doesn't that cut against you? They did not do what you're

asking us to do and why shouldn't you be making this argument to the legislature rather than us?

They actually did exactly what I'm asking this court to do. The beginning of the

statute states that this information that's compiled under the statute, the telephone

numbers, the records, the funding is not subject to 91A, it's disclosure. Then the notwithstanding

language is saying that it's not entitled to disclosure even under any other circumstances

except these two specific limited circumstances. The legislature is making it very clear that

under no circumstances the information compiled under this statute to be provided to the public

or to any other state agency or any other entity or person under any circumstances except

a specific circumstance where the law enforcement agency needs it or when there's well location.

You're talking specifically about let me call it data versus the content of the 911 call

as reflected in the administrative rule that allows that content of the call to be

disseminated to the caller? Under the regulations in effect at this time,

then the regulations read in effect at the time of this original hearing, not the new ones,

were read consistent with the RSA 106H and any discrepancy between that regulation and the

legislation intent goes to the legislative intent rules and so the regulations to the

extent that they expand the ruling of RSA 106H or is not included. So whether or not the court

order aspect of it is in line with the 106H. The law enforcement officer needs to go to the

court to say it's important and they need to have it. In terms of whether or not an individual can

get their own 911 call is a separate issue and I would say arguably under the interpretation

of 106H they should not be able to unless it falls into one of the two exceptions that are

listed and if it's not. Would you address the 498 colon one issue? Why isn't a

Robbins versus Cowell like petition more efficacious here? The issue here is that the lower court said

that the defendant because they're a potential defendant and they have no injury at this time

isn't entitled to this information. The problem is is the 911 audio call is retained for six

months and then can be destroyed and the ability to retain it for six months is in the state's

discretion. They don't have to keep it and they don't have to record it. The statute of limitation

runs after three years. Oftentimes in civil litigation we have a complaint filed or petition

filed close to the eve of the statute running. At that point the 911 call would have been

destroyed and so that puts the defendants in a position where their only remedy occurs

at after the point that they've been injured and there's no remedy after that and so

where in the in the limited circumstances and we're not talking about every single case but

in the limited circumstances where a defendant has been put on notice the 911 call exists

and that call says something completely different. The alleged statements within the 911 call

dispel any liability on the part of the defendant. Then the the court's equity powers

shouldn't vote to allow that defendant to have the 911 call. Does it matter? Does it matter

that your client already possesses this information from its employee? I assume you took the

employee's statement so you have that information. The important thing about a 911 call is the same

thing this court has talked about with the 911 call. It's it's a contemporary NES statement by

that individual. An employee three years down the line may not be an employee any longer.

That employee may not be a favorable employee. There's many things that happen prior to

litigation starting. That employee may not remember the information within in that

within that 911 call. Where there is a 911 call and under the specific facts of these allegations

the 911 call dispels any liability as to the defendant and so under these specific facts

a defendant is entitled to the equitable relief by the trial judge. It is prejudice when the

trial judge says no they're not entitled to it and then therefore that 911 call

could be destroyed anywhere between now and when the statute of limitation runs and then it would

be the destruction of probative evidence and admissible evidence at trial. It would be.

Assuming the husband recants that statement. Assuming that the 911 call and like I've said

I haven't reviewed the 911 call. The court didn't review that call provided that the

husband on the 911 call says that his wife tripped on his foot and fell in the hallway. Initially

that would include no privileged information if he said that the wife tripped on his foot and then

had a seizure. Maybe the seizure would be information that is redacted but what's important

is that that information is subject to this court's precedent which is very strong and has

been established over the last year as well that there is a balancing test. Other jurisdictions

have addressed 911 audio recordings and there isn't a case that I have found that has said that

these aren't disclosed pursuant to the public's right. Let me go back to 91A where the identity

neither the identity nor the purpose of the requester are supposed to be relevant to the

analysis. So you're laying forth why it's reasonable for your client to get this information

but it seems if we adopt your interpretation why would I not be able to set up a blog and every

day post all the transcripts from 911 calls. I just put in a request I want every 911 call

and then I just get them as a matter of course. It seems problematic and then it's forcing

people to go in and defend their privacy. You wouldn't automatically get them if the court

applies its precedent it would be each individual 911 call would need to be listened to by the state

and then the state would need to provide either say that there is a privacy interest at stake and

then therefore here is the privacy interest and that balancing test would have to be done. So for

example in Asbury Park as stated in the state's brief addressed somebody who was on his deathbed

who was determined to be murdered calling 911. That was a privacy interest at stake

and therefore that was not disclosed. In Connecticut the school shooting there was no

that those 911 calls were disclosed. It has to be on a case by case basis. I see my time is up.

Yes. Thank you. Thank you counsel. You still have one minute. Mr. Broadhead.

Thank you. May it please the court. My name is Matthew Broadhead. I appear today on behalf of the

state. I'm happy to take questions at any time. The issue before this is a question that's been

nagging me. If under 106H these are deemed not public records yet they're records held

by a public agency. What are they? I think part two is can the legislature given the constitutional

recent constitutional amendment can the legislature just deem an entire

category of public records not to be public records? The simple answer is yes your honor.

This isn't a constitutional challenge. So if there was a constitutional challenge to such a

prohibition under a part one article eight that answer may be different whether those

restrictions are constitutional or not. But absent a constitutional challenge the

legislature absolutely can set what records are exempt and what records are public.

The definition of public records are maybe splitting hairs but they didn't set these

records as exempt. What they said was they are not considered to be a public record. So

again if they're not a public record what are they? And you see these exemptions worded differently

in different places and I think that the sentiment is the same is that they are either

records that are not exempt that are not public records by definition. They are exempted

from the statute of the public records statute or that they're expressly are government

records but are not public. So I think that that it is splitting hairs and I think it's a

difference without a distinction without a difference. The what a governmental record is

is any record that's created in furtherance of that agency's official function and here the

official function is to receive 911 calls and to transfer them and I want to be

very clear that that ability to operate a public safety answer point as defined by the statute

exists only in RSA 106H. So any records but for 106H there's no call no 911 call.

There's no call that's received or transferred and there's no recording of that call.

But does the statute expressly provide for the recording of those calls?

No and it doesn't need to. Statutes confer broad authority to the executive branch

to implement the law. They aren't so rigid that every single detail of an agency's

operations need to be spelled out in statute. There is play in the joint. So for instance

the Attorney General's office has statutory authority to represent agencies before the

Supreme Court. It doesn't expressly say in what instances we can intervene in cases or

file briefs on behalf of state agencies that that's the statute silent but it's an inherent

function of representing state agencies. Here there is plenty of evidence of this

delegation of authority and if I can this is an important point just walk through

those statutory provisions. One is that the definition of a public safety answering point

which authorizes the department to as I said receive and transfer 911 calls. There's a specific

reference to 911 calls. Section 6 paragraph 3 and 106 age has this broad authority to the

division to do such things as may be necessary and incidental to the administration of the

provisions of this chapter. So it is certainly recording the call is incidental to operating

the public safety answering point and in that manner they are operating no differently than any

other dispatch center in any law enforcement or emergency agency that's a local agency. They

record calls. It is a standard practice in the industry. Sorry but why is it not within the

agency's discretion to adopt a rule that would disclose the call transcript to the caller?

It certainly is within the agency's rulemaking authority to record the call when in 2018 there

was a case that the Shavak case which was it which is in the appendix at page 39 and the

pertinent language is 43 to 44 and it's a superior court case that Judge Dickelosi held that the

prior rule which did permit disclosure to the person making the call was ultra virus

meaning it exceeded the scope of this very statute of after reviewing it we decided not

to appeal that decision and we agree that that that the legislature just didn't provide for that

exception based on the plain language of this statute which is very very broad. It says that

there is only that notwithstanding any other provision of law that they can that the bureau

can only make the information or records available to enter two scenarios and that's on a case-by-case

basis to law enforcement agencies in furtherance of their investigation and to the Department of

Environmental Services. This may be my last question but what interest does the Department

of Environmental Services have in the content of the call the word spoken by the caller as

opposed to the perhaps geographic information? That's correct your Honor the whole paragraph

does say under paragraph two that information shared shall be limited to the geographic information

systems data that infers that paragraph one more information can be shared and more broadly that

there that it captures more information than just location data because there is no such limitation

in the investigative services and the investigative purposes. Would you let me butt in for just a

second why and in my experience as a trial judge many years ago did every 911 call come into evidence

without objection I gather? I don't have there's nothing in the record that would show prior

practice and I don't know what the statute had the statutory history would reveal or

whether the rule the prior rule was enacted under a prior version of the statute I don't have that

information here and there's no information in the record that that was a standard practice but I

can say that since 2018 this is this has been the the the department's position the Attorney

General's position and that the rule has since been amended as you can see in the in the

state's brief appendix I'm sorry go ahead what I was going to ask what what is the relevance in our

analysis to the change that was made last summer? I don't think there's any relevance I think it's a

I think it the you can rule just plain on the plain meaning of the statute the statute

hasn't changed and the rule now conforms with the statute to the extent that there was any ambiguity

in the statute prior to that court's ruling in the Superior Court I think that has been erased

because there is an express finding that that that rule was ultra-viaries so I don't think that

I think it's not bound by that ruling of the Superior Court correct? No here no your honor

that that is but it was a decision the conscious decision that was made to that that our duty to uphold

the legislature's laws that we in furtherance of that duty we have to give honor to to the

statute and if a rule does not conform to statute we need to say so and we need to

seek amendment and Judge McNamara is ruling on that that administrative rule is not really before

us is it? The the ruling on the well he ruled consistent with the statute that that is before

you the yes you're correct the the the the the rule that we did not in the hearing below we

our position in our and you can see it in the transcript was that that rule was not in

force and effect because it was ultra-viaries that was our position at the hearing and so

you're basically saying if if the statute if if this information is going to be disclosed

the legislature needs to amend the statute that's correct your honor this is I agreed with the prior

justices I think it was just Bassett who said isn't this an issue that that should be an

argument that should be made to the legislature and my response to that question is yes absolutely

why shouldn't the court have afforded equitable relief in the form of preserving

preservation of evidence? It certainly could have been explored to that point every time that

there's a request that's for a 9-1-1 record the the record is is preserved so there is no

prejudice once the six-month rule retention period only applies to when to those records

that are not retained in furtherance of a litigation and I mean it's our ethical duty

to preserve evidence and constitutional duty to preserve evidence so any time a request will come

in it certainly would be preserved and exempted from that six months so you're telling us Mr.

Broadhead that this particular call is being preserved it's not going to be destroyed okay

it is preserved it's it's not going to be destroyed we retain it through the the

limitations period and certainly we reach out to counsel before it's destroyed if

if there is a litigation hold but that onus is on the litigants to know what type of evidence

potentially out there and to put us on notice and so there is no prejudice to this recording is

going to remain and hold for three years and if for actual litigation this issue would be raised

again and the answer would be different the answer would not be different because there is

still an open question as to whether section 14 provides a statutory exemption from evidence

whether it creates a statutory privilege New Hampshire is very protective of the privacy

of our citizens and you'll see examples of this statutory privileges and voter databases in

surveillance highway statutes there's there's plenty of restrictions on the use of personal

data in the government pants there's even a constitutional amendment that was recently passed

creating a right but sure but is there any argument that as opposing counsel presented

someone calling and saying I see a car all over the road that that is some sort of privacy interest

or would somehow defer people from calling the privacy interest and public interest analysis

really only comes to end the play if there's no statutory exemption what the legislature has

established here is that there is a generalized interest in protecting the confidentiality of

these records and they codified that generalized interest in statute so you only get to the

balancing test under 91 a is if this court concludes that section 14 doesn't exempt

the the records from from disclosure and that's because 91 a 4 says you are either

any governmental records are public except as otherwise exempted by statute and if that's

that it's exempted by statute then that ends the analysis there's no balancing test there's no

public interest Mr. Broadhead I understand what you're saying but you you acknowledged earlier

that one could make a constitutional challenge to the categorical exclusion made by the legislature

but that's not this case is that your position that's correct that's correct there was no

there were only two complaints uh two uh uh counts that were filed in the in this case um

and it's one of the statutory argument under 91 a that they're entitled to to the records

under 91 a and two whether they're entitled to presuit discovery um and uh we think the answer

is no in both instances and and just to finish my point on um the whether what our stance would be

if litigation was filed and if the state received a subpoena well that question needs to

be resolved by the trial judge because there are the statutory exemption or statutory privileges

are not absolute they may be pierced but you need to prove under our case law under Marceau

and and uh and Mersky that um that the the evidence is essential and only the trial court

judge can make that determination because it's going to be based on the facts and the law and

what's available from other sources um here you know they have a witness um that overheard

the conversation so is the is the record even essential in in that instance i think that's a

that's a question for another day um if and when so again is the state prepared to accept a request

to hold a 911 call transcript for the duration of the statute of limitations and so that it

is still available should that issue arise absolutely and that's consistent with our

practice since 2018 and um and yes absolutely that that's our duty as officers of the court to direct

our clients to preserve that evidence not to to engage in spoliation in potential suits if some

potential litigant is it quick on the draw then the six months goes and if you don't have that

hold the thing evaporates that's correct that's correct and and part of that is that

you know that there is some duty i mean we the system is such that we can't retain every call

because of the sheer volume of data and so there is there needs to be a regular data management

system but we can in those instances where there are holds we our system does support

that so and just just sticking with the equitable relief argument goopier is directly

i see that my time is up no go ahead i'd like to hear it so goopier is directly on point it says

that if a litigant potentially it has an avenue under the normal litigation then that is the

avenue to request the record presuit discovery is a very extraordinary relief and is only

offered when somebody needs the information in order to bring a lawsuit and that is not the

case here thank you now that being said once suit is filed and our quest is issued or court is

issued in order you're still not going to provide the information if the court after

after a subpoena uh in the litigation issues the uh in order finding that there's no

statutory privilege that applies uh and that the information is essential then we'd have no

no option but to comply with that court order absent in appeal thank thank you council

miss ward you have one minute thank you your honor briefly the state chose to add

requirements to 106 h that is what they've said that with their regulations they've chosen

to record these audio recordings 911 audio recordings they've chosen to retain them by doing

that they're then putting them under 106 h they cannot do that the legislature did not include

that language the state cannot does not have the authority and cannot do that to then prevent

the public from having access to this information the public is entitled to this information

it would create an outlier case among other jurisdictions that this court

was it was to rule differently this court's precedent should apply in terms of the balancing

test in terms of the concerns as to whether there's a floodgate of 911 calls out there

each call would need to be reviewed individually they would not they would be determined whether

or not per call there was a privacy interest at stake and whether or not the that privacy

interests outweighed the public's right to know thank you attorney ward would you agree that

Judge McNamara addressed your balancing argument in in at the footnote i would not agree it uh Judge

McNamara said that these 911 calls are generally um categorically precluded because they may contain

sensitive information that is against this court's precedent this court has said that um it needs

to be you need to determine what the privacy interest is at stake and as i mentioned um it's

some um some 911 calls have a privacy interest some do not some have a very uh substantial

privacy interest and others have a moderate one that might be outweighed by the public's right

to know thank you thank you thank you counsel case submitted court
