Thank you, sir. This is case 2020-0234, state of New Hampshire versus Carly Williams.

Ms. Hausman? May I please the Court? Stephanie Hausman, on behalf of Carly Williams, I reserved one minute of my time. I intend to address both issues starting with the first.

In order for a person of ordinary intelligence to give for them to have notice of what the crime of identity fraud criminalizes, this Court must interpret the phrase,

confidential information not available to the general public, to mean information that is confidential by law, rule, or judgment, and not as information that a person just might prefer to keep secret.

To adopt the state's interpretation would make it unclear whether a person is committing a class A felony offense until they ask for the information. It would depend on whether the person asked, wanted to keep it secret, or not.

In New Hampshire, appending arrest warrant is not confidential by law, rule, or judgment. The state points to RSA 106B, which governs both public and confidential criminal history record information.

Ms. Hausman, so this issue came up in the context of the motion to impose a suspended sentence. Yes. Were there good behavior requirements associated with that as well? Yes.

Because there was a good behavior requirement, the state had to prove just by a preponderance of the evidence that she had committed a crime.

But they had to prove in your view that she committed a crime, as opposed to it not behaving properly. Exactly. Exactly. So it was a change in the burden of proof, but not in whether her actions constituted a crime or not.

And so that's why the burden of proof, even though lower in this context, isn't really an issue in this case.

But why do we have to abandon common sense in terms of what's confidential information? I think we have a sense of personal information, financial information.

A lot of information that I have probably isn't laid out in a statute, but I consider it, and most people would consider it confidential.

Most of that information that we consider confidential is confidential because of the law or a rule. So financial information, medical information, those are governed by statute or court rule.

And that's why this court should use that definition in determining what that phrase, confidential information, not available to the general public.

So if this warrant were subject to a motion to seal and was sealed by court order, then it would be confidential.

It would be confidential if sealed by a court order, yes. That's why I include judgment.

In this case, an officer in a prior hearing had testified that Ms. Perry had a pending warrant in open court and nobody asked the court to seal the proceeding because that information was confidential.

When did that occur in time wise in terms of when she was charged for the offense?

It occurred, I think in the February hearing, there were two evidentiary hearings, and I believe it occurred in the first hearing because the second hearing then, in between the first and second hearing, the state filed a motion, a renewed second motion to impose based on this.

It was clearly after that public disclosure of the warrant.

The state filed the motion after the act occurred before it was revealed in open court, but I think the officer revealed it in open court before the state filed a motion to impose based on the event.

To get back to RS106B, that governs public and confidential criminal history record information.

And public criminal history record information is all criminal history record information, including information about pending warrants except that that's governed by the confidentiality provisions.

Those few exceptions in the confidentiality provision don't include pending warrants.

That's certainly consistent with community practice. Many municipalities in New Hampshire publish lists of their pending warrants.

That the town of Milford chooses not to do so is of no real import here.

Rather, what is important is what the legislature meant and what a person of ordinary intelligence would understand about whether pending warrants are confidential information not available to the general public.

The court have thought, well, she must have thought it was confidential or else she would have just called up on using her own identity.

Why did she have to use someone else's identity if it wasn't confidential?

I think a fair inference is that she was trying to get the police to go arrest the person.

And so I think that's the reason why she pretended to be that person.

But again, it should be based on what the person knows the law is before they ask for the information.

So it's a subjective test?

No, it's an objective test and that's why adopting the definition of the phrase confidential information not available to the general public as meaning information that's confidential by law, rule, or judgment makes it an objective test.

So there is a law or a statute or a court order out there?

And they don't have to know of it.

It's irrelevant what their state of mind is or understanding about whether it's truly under a statute confidential or not.

Yes, and it's also irrelevant what the person being asked whether they want to keep the information secret or not because there's an objective definition of whether the information is confidential and also not available to the general public.

Here, regardless of the lower burden approval we talked about, the court aired in finding that pending grants are confidential based solely on Norford Police's preference not to share them with the public.

This court must reverse the lower courts finding that Ms. Williams committed identity fraud.

As to the second issue, Ms. Williams has a due process right to be physically present at a sentencing hearing.

Due process requires a weighing of competing interests.

Certainly in the first few weeks of a global pandemic, the safety of courtroom participants is a compelling interest.

But as between delaying the sentencing hearing or holding it telephonically, the interests here favor delay.

Ms. Williams has a compelling interest to be present at the time a sentence is imposed.

As the judge in the District Court for the District of Maine aptly put it, there is an unmistakable difference between the solemnity of sentencing another human being standing before you and of sentencing a face on a screen.

Is there any reason to think there would have been a different result?

Well, I would say that the judge started the hearing by saying, I don't think it needs to be in person because I've already decided what the sentence will be.

But I ended the hearing by saying I've amended my thought about what the sentence should be based on the arguments and Ms. Williams' allocution.

So I think there is a reason to believe that an in-person sentencing hearing might have made a difference because even having those arguments and that allocution over the phone made some difference in this judge's decision.

And if we agree with you, we simply remand for an in-person hearing?

That's correct. That's the relief we're asking for on this issue.

Do I understand correctly that there were two evidentiary hearings that were in-person and then there was this last sentencing hearing?

Yes. There were two in-person evidentiary hearings on the question of whether the sentence could be imposed or not.

And then the final hearing that was held after the pandemic broke out was telephonic.

And the only issue in that hearing was what amount of the sentence should be imposed.

And you say, well, look, the trial court said that these arguments and allocution made a difference.

And therefore we should conclude that there might have been more difference had it been in person.

Couldn't we also conclude that while it made a difference?

So how could it not have been effectual?

The court said it was. So what's the harm?

I really take my cues from that case from Maine.

And I actually did a search for COVID-era cases dealing with in-person versus not-in-person hearings.

And that is the only case cited by either party that is a COVID-era case.

And I take my cue from that case because I've never sentenced anybody.

But as the judge put it, there is a difference in being able to see a human being in front of you

as opposed to just seeing a face on screen or, as was the case in this instance,

a voice emanating from a telephone.

On the other side of the coin, the state's interest in a speedy sentencing hearing was minimal.

And that's evidenced by the judge's decision to delay her incarceration because of the pandemic

and the state's acquiescence in that decision.

Thus, the interest in sentencing and holding the sentencing hearing telephonically is outweighed by the value

of merely delaying the sentencing hearing for as long as it as need be so that it could be held safely in person.

Can I just ask this was a telephonic, not by video?

That's correct.

And would that matter if it was video rather than telephonic?

I certainly think it would be a closer case.

I don't think anyone brought up the possibility of video because I don't believe this early in the pandemic.

All of the circuit courts had video capabilities.

So I don't, that case will probably come before you at some point.

And maybe it's a closer argument, but here the only issue was telephonic or delay and have it in person.

Unless there are other questions.

Thank you.

Thank you, counsel.

You still have your one minute if you'd like.

Mr. Hyam.

Thank you.

May it please the court.

I'm from the state of New Hampshire.

The state asked that you affirm the lower court's decision to impose Miss Williams sentence.

I'll address both issues in turn, but I'm happy to take questions on either issue at any time.

Just to begin with this issue of confidentiality.

The defendant has argued fairly consistently on this point that this is a legal determination for this court to make.

But confidentiality and whether something is confidential should be in the first instance a factual determination made by the lower court.

Confidentiality.

Using what kind of parameters?

Go ahead.

Yes, absolutely.

My concern, we'll skip to it, my concern is that this could, your view or the state view could encompass virtually any information

if it was deemed by somebody on an objective basis to be confidential.

Could you just address that, please?

Absolutely, your honor.

So the reason that confidentiality is such a thorny topic is that the same information can be confidential and non-confidential simultaneously.

For example, my name as pertains to these proceedings today, my name is not confidential.

It is on all of the pleadings and I announced it just a moment ago in open court.

But my name as it's attached to my medical records, absolutely confidential.

A medical provider couldn't provide a third party with my name in virtually any context without my consent or a very limited number of exceptions.

So the difference here, and this is particularly important in this case, is the source of the information.

Whether it's coming from, whether my name is coming from this court or from a medical provider, it's the source that determines whether it's confidential.

But where some police departments routinely post records of arrest, where's confidentiality in this particular arrest warrant?

So the issue here is less about what police departments do and pertains more to the specific source that the defendant sought this information.

The defendant didn't walk into the PD and ask for this information. She called dispatch.

Dispatch according to… Dispatch is part of the PD.

Yes, absolutely. But as the dispatcher testified, or one of the dispatchers testified, they draw their information from spots from the state police records.

I believe it was the first hearing, or page 71 of the hearing, where the dispatcher says that all of their information comes from spots and all of the information that is held in spots is considered to be confidential writ large.

Even if it's not confidential, writ small. Even if the fragment of information that goes into spots is not confidential.

Which again is getting into this issue of the source of the information.

So my name, or the defendant's name, may not be confidential in a phone book, but as pertains to spots, that information is considered confidential because it is in spots.

So for this reason, the trial court is really in the best position to look at and develop the record as to how is this information held, why was it held, and is it considered to be confidential?

Well how is this held, why was it held, why does anyone think it's confidential under the facts of this case?

Well as the only facts in this case that talk about this piece of information were the police and the dispatcher, all of whom testified that this information is held to be confidential.

In Milford?

In Milford, and well in spots specifically. The concern here is the state police database and its confidentiality.

And so the issue really becomes what evidence was given to the court to make this factual determination?

So even if this arrest warrant and the details thereof were published in the union leader, once it's in spots it becomes confidential?

It's confidential as to spots. Someone can't go to spots and get it. Now the defendant would be well within her rights to read the union leader and see that information in the union leader.

Or call the Milford Police Department and ask?

Again that brings us back to where is Milford getting this information? Are they having to go into spots?

Well if they generate it and put it in spots and take it back out, are we just moving sort of the cups on the table?

And I think that's where we get into the reason why confidentiality has to be a fact-based determination.

Because there could be a situation where she could get this information in a non-confidential forum.

But that's not what happened in this case. She didn't go to a non-confidential forum to get this information.

She went to one that is specifically held to be confidential.

And how does the normal human being out there figure out what source they're getting the information from?

They make a phone call.

Well I think in this case, I mean the fact that she shielded her identity.

And she, you know, posed as someone else to get this, shows that at the very least she had some notion that this information was not readily available to her.

That she couldn't simply get this information just because she wanted to.

But the other person on the phone, presumably a police officer, disclosed the information without no objection and no difficulty.

I'm not sure I follow you.

What wasn't the information disclosed?

The information was later disclosed in court. But it wasn't disclosed to her.

Not during the phone call?

No, they did not disclose the information. They said, we don't give out this information that is confidential.

You're not getting this information.

I may have paraphrased exactly what the dispatcher said, but he did not give her the information, is my understanding.

The information, and as the defense has pointed out, came out later in a hearing.

But that once again gets us into a different forum, a non-confidential forum.

And a forum under which someone is obligated under oath to give the information.

And so that's why we have to look at confidentiality as a factual determination and what the record was developed on this.

So when you say it's a factual determination, what follows from that is that we should give deference to the trial court's factual determination conclusion as to whether this is confidential or not?

Yes, Your Honor.

Isn't that a mixed question of fact and law, really? I mean, a lot of your brief is about statutory interpretation.

Yes, absolutely.

So it seems to me I went into this thinking this is more of a legal issue than a factual determination by the trial court.

Why is that not the right way to think about it?

Well, I think sort of for the reasons that I've kind of explained that if we make this a hard-line legal definition conclusion that it's true as a matter of law,

then we're going to have these sort of borderline cases that are very, very problematic in defining whether or not something is confidential.

And I think this case pretty effectively exemplifies that.

But it may turn on facts, but the facts really aren't in dispute.

So it's really a legal conclusion drawn from disputed facts, right?

In this case, the facts weren't particularly well-disputed.

I mean, there's some debate in the record, particularly when they're discussing, well, someone announced this in open court.

So I think there's going to have to be a weighing of facts in that regard.

Depending on what facts are developed at the trial court level, you may be right that it may ultimately be a mixed question of law, in fact.

But I think that ultimately the determination of confidentiality is going to be based on how the factual record is developed.

If the court has no further questions on this issue, I'd like to proceed to the due process issue.

This due process question comes down to a very simple issue, and that is whether or not this actually constitutes a sentencing hearing.

The state argues that this is not a sentencing hearing.

The defendant received a sentencing hearing.

In 2018, when she pled guilty and was convicted of crime, she received a sentencing hearing.

This is not a sentencing hearing.

It is a deprivation of conditional liberty.

And this court has previously outlined what due process is required for a deprivation of conditional liberty.

And it is different from that required for a sentencing hearing in the first instance.

So you would say that the faging case from Mayn that Ms. Hausmann relies on is distinguishable because that's about sentencing?

Because that is a sentencing in the first instance, as I understand it.

In this case, the more appropriate analysis is found in state versus Mawangi, which gives a six-part analysis for the due process required at the deprivation of conditional liberty.

Now, in Mawangi, the issue was a parole revocation.

Here we're looking at imposition of a suspended sentence.

But for purposes of the analysis, both represent a revocation of conditional liberty, and the analysis should be the same.

Mawangi mandates that there are six requirements.

Notice, disclosure of the evidence against him or her, the opportunity to be heard in person and to present witnesses and evidence, the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses,

a statement on the record by the court indicating the evidence it's relied on and representation for the defendant by counsel.

Now, the only conflict that could possibly arise under that analysis in this case is whether the defendant had an opportunity to be heard in person and to present witnesses and evidence.

The state argues that she absolutely did.

She had a two-part evidentiary hearing.

It was continued so that she could go and find a witness that she ultimately did not produce.

But she had an extensive amount of testimony on this.

We had an extensive amount of testimony on this.

We had cross-examination by counsel, and that is the due process that is required in this case.

But Mawangi didn't address this issue about how a telephonic hearing could be held or a video hearing if relatedly.

It did not.

No.

But the issue in Mawangi is what due process is owed to a defendant in the case of a revocation of conditional liberty.

Right, but the question was never posed there.

What happens if all this happens by telephone?

That wasn't the factual scenario.

It absolutely was not.

But we don't have a situation where all of this was done by telephone.

But the first two parts weren't, but the last part was?

Yes, the last part certainly was.

And the court, as your Honours have noted, the court has already come to its conclusion by the time of this final hearing.

And frankly, it's not all that clear that this final telephonic hearing was necessary at all.

The court, having held this two-part evidentiary hearing in person, the court reasonably could have in its order said what part of the sentence was being imposed and given the defendant a report date.

The purpose of the telephonic hearing was really to discuss her report date and how this was all going to be dealt with in light of COVID.

It wasn't meant to be a continuation of the evidentiary hearing.

But the test is laid out in your brief includes the opportunity to be heard in person.

And she was afforded that opportunity at the two-part evidentiary hearing?

But again, didn't she speak at the, or wasn't there some, did she speak at the telephonic hearing?

Yes, she was afforded another opportunity.

So wasn't she, by the terms of Milwaukee, to be afforded the opportunity to be heard in person?

Well, I don't know that she needed to be afforded another opportunity to be heard in person.

The judge allowed her to speak further, but I don't know that the mandates of due process required him to do that.

I think that when she was afforded the opportunity to present her case twice,

that this third bite at the apple was not mandated by the requirements of due process as they're laid out here.

Is there a distinction between the evidentiary hearing to prove the violation, if you will,

versus evidence about imposing the sentences? Are there two different evidentiary issues there?

Well, I think the extent that there are, I don't know that there really are.

I think the judge is considering all of this at once, but to the extent that there are two issues there,

both could have been dealt with and effectively were dealt with at the evidentiary hearing.

It's not clear what further evidence the defendant could have marshaled

and that being in person specifically could have marshaled differently that would have changed the calculation there.

In particular, where we have a situation where the issue with in person and the importance of in person

has to do with being able to judge credibility, demeanor, and the physical signs of someone's truthfulness.

Well, we have a lot of evidence in this record as to the defendant's credibility, demeanor, and truthfulness.

Frankly, there are a lot of instances in this record where the defendant is pretty conclusively shown

to have been untruthful and the judge was able to gauge that in person.

And your point under point three, the opportunity to be heard in person

and to present witnesses and evidence goes to the evidentiary hearing portion.

Yes, absolutely.

If the court has no further questions on this, I...

Thank you, Councilor.

Yes.

Ms. Hausman.

I have one quick point to make.

The state's argument on issue one is based on a faulty premise.

And that faulty premise is that SPOT's information is confidential.

In RSA 106B, the legislature has instructed the state place to gather certain information

and they shall make it available to law enforcement.

It does not say shall not ever make this information available to the general public.

Do you think it would be susceptible to a 93A request?

A 91A.

That is the second point that I was going to make,

that particularly concerning the situation is that it is a government record,

which in general is presumptively not confidential.

Thank you.

Thank you.
