Good morning, Your Honor. Thank you. Go ahead, Claire.

This is case 2020-0259, Christine Seward v. Charles Richards at all.

Thank you very much. Ms. Seward is represented by Attorney Meyers. Mr. Richards at all is

represented by Attorney, is it Diep?

It's Diep. Diep. And I understand that you've reserved

two minutes.

Please proceed when you're ready.

Good morning, Your Honors. For the record, my name is Attorney Melvin Diep, and I

represent the Defendants and Affluence of Chairman's View, Core Value, and Charles

Richards in his personal capacity. First, I want to thank the Court for

patience regarding both in dealing with this matter, with the COVID-19

pandemic, as well as some tragic circumstances regarding Defendants'

former counsel, and we really appreciate your patience and accommodations made

in this matter.

If you wanted to remove your mask, you're free to do so.

I'm sorry, yes.

And again, for the record, two minutes for a rebuttal.

This case is a collection dispute in which the plaintiffs are attempting to

collect on a judgment by manufacturing jurisdiction over third parties within

the state of New Hampshire. Plaintiffs are asking the court to detonate

basic principles of court governance, as well as due process, and all three

individual applicants by using a complaint that is filled with allegations

and adjectives, but sparse of facts relevant to a specific personal

jurisdiction analysis. If true, though, wouldn't they describe a fraudulent

scheme, the harm of which would be felt by a New Hampshire resident?

Well, Your Honor, I think that also creates another question about harm

in the context of patent and tangible assets. And ultimately, this is a

harm involving a tangible asset, which is a patent. The patent doesn't

fundamentally exist anywhere. And to conclude that the patent somehow

exists in New Hampshire when, in fact, it is just stored on the server

somewhere in the US. What about the security agreement? Where is that?

The security agreement was executed by one party here, which is Charles

Richards in its capacity as chairman's views director. And it has

nothing to do with the other applicants in this case. And again,

it's for better or for worse, we live in a world with corporate

governance where Calder versus Jones by the Supreme Court

emphasizes the importance of analyzing jurisdiction on a

defendant-by-defendant basis. Do you agree that this is about

personal jurisdiction rather than general jurisdiction? That is

correct. This is entirely focused on personal specific

jurisdiction. And our point here is that the trial court's opinion

is filled with facts that appeal to a general jurisdictional

analysis, not a specific one. And for example, the emphasis in

the Apple brief with the corporate registration of the various

defendants in this case, those are facts that relate to the

defendant to the forum. However, Walden versus Fiora has decided

by the Supreme Court in 2014 makes it very clear that the

facts relevant to specific jurisdiction focus on a three

prong nexus. They focus on the relationship of the

defendant, the forum, and the litigation all three. And

satisfying two prongs is not enough for that fact-based

jurisdiction.

But if a registration in sort of absolutely doesn't confer

jurisdiction, but in connection with the transaction, can't a

registration be a factor of unrelatedness?

Hypothetically.

Analysis.

Hypothetically, perhaps. But that is not the situation

for us. Again, this is a registration that just

seemingly occurred in a complete happenstance. And, you

know, there's no, the mere allegation of a general...

What was the happenstance? Excuse me.

Mere happenstance?

What I'm getting at is that the mere allegation of a general

jurisdictional fact, which is for registration within New

Hampshire, and the allegation of a scheme is not a concrete

fact. It is a general jurisdictional principle that

just contains an adjective of a scheme and thereby tries to

graft it onto a personal specific jurisdictional analysis

that is not sufficient.

But I also want to emphasize, again, that this case is filled

with forum shopping landmines regarding jurisdiction as they

relate to transfers and tangible assets. So the plaintiff

here, the plaintiff's main theory here, and it's on page

29 of their brief, is that, quote, Richard's machination

successfully targeted sewer security interest in cluster

injury in New Hampshire, and she was unable to exercise

the attachment this court granted her, Chairman's view

ownership in the interest of the patent. Understand that

the harm focused in this case entirely deals with the

attachment, and really not even the transfer of the patent.

So with that context, this court must understand two

things, that one, patent ownership and assignments are

a matter of public record at the USPTO. And I'm not

going to demonstrate this here, but I can take out my

phone, and in one or two minutes I could Google the

patent number and I can find the ownership history and

the assignment history of this patent. And when we look at

the facts in the complaint and the brief, at best they failed

to conduct this due diligence. And understood in that

context, Apple could have taken the New Hampshire

judgment, registered in a foreign court such as Alaska,

closed its eyes to due diligence and argued minimum

contact and harm in Alaska, and just as these proceedings.

And the second thing is why, why, how's Alaska, how's that

analogy really relevant here, where all the underlying

activity took place here? Including the original

litigation? Apple didn't just jump from, you know, she

lived here and worked here and all the underlying, the

litigation was here, the security agreement was

signed here. So I guess I'm not following that analogy.

Well, first of all, due process analysis doesn't really

consider the plaintiff, it considers the defendants

rights fundamentally. And secondly, this is the first

suit involved one defendant here, Chairman's view, and as

previously stated with Calder versus Jones, there's

an importance of analyzing jurisdiction on a defendant

by defendant basis, and creating facts that connect

all defendants together. And here, there's the one

underlying fact that connects all these defendants for the

plaintiff's allegations on page 29, which is this

attachment. And what the, the Alaska analogy essentially

says is that if I close my eyes to due diligence and I

simply file an attachment and, you know, ignoring the

fact that this patent had already been transferred

allegedly in the plaint, I can create a harm and I

can manufacture a harm and I can manufacture a

pursuing in any form, state, not just New Hampshire.

And again, for emphasis, one of these defendants,

Chairman's view was involved suit number one. The two

other defendants had no involvement in suit number one.

The core value didn't exist at the time.

I believe, didn't your client create core value

after the judgment?

I don't believe it was after litigation and you

can I, I don't believe it was sometime in 2016.

I do not believe it was after the litigation

and I don't believe it occurred.

Okay.

What difference does that make?

I mean, well, that's a potential defense to fraud,

but that's all it is.

The difference again, your honor, is for what it's worth

in the world that we live in with principles of

corporate governance, that we must apply jurisdiction

to each individual defendant and unless there are

facts sufficient to pierce the corporate bail

jurisdictionally, you know, each individual

defendant is entitled to the day and entitled to the process.

So if I may speak more about intangible

assets and the harm suffered here.

Just as a practical matter here, the plaintiff again

is alleging injury as a result of an attachment.

And again, on page 129, that is the core

harm that she is alleging here.

But as a practical matter, the plaintiff does not

allege any harm in New Hampshire because the

complaint doesn't even allege there are any

questionable assets or proceeds within New Hampshire.

And if so, this attachment is, you know, there

happens to be any harm in failing to or on being unable

to execute this attachment.

And as stated in the previous analogy with Alaska,

if necessary, this court should adopt a rule

that plaintiffs cannot manufacture jurisdictions

through their own actions and conduct.

There's another way to construct the fact pattern

in this case, and that's that your clients are

seeking deliberately to avoid jurisdiction

in the support of a fraudulent scheme.

Well, Your Honor, again, that is certainly a characterization.

However, you know, our position is that the facts

alleged with the complaint is petitioned, specifically as

they focus on the nexus of defendant's form

and litigation do not support the minimum contacts

or purposes of the ball of ailment or that

specific facts efficiently.

And for forever, I want to point to this court's

decisions in petition to Rodham and also the Supreme Court's

decision in Calle vs. Jones.

Rodham is relied on extensively by the trial court,

and Rodham reveals the amount of homework that a plaintiff

needs to do to produce the court prevail

for jurisdictional purposes.

It is an effort and a very comprehensive effort

by the New Hampshire Banking Commission to analyze

subpoena and really detail the business practices

of two businesses, one in New Hampshire and one,

so two of a defendant's business entities,

and then impute and recognize that personal defendant's

conduct within the context.

So again, we're not saying that it is impossible

for a plaintiff hypothetically to assert some kind,

to assert jurisdiction in some matter,

but not based on these facts.

There really are two fundamental facts here,

which is, one, the timing of the

signing of the security agreement,

and two, the timing of the assignment of the asset.

So, to the security agreement,

signed by Richards on behalf of Chairman's view,

those two defendants would have personal jurisdiction

in New Hampshire.

There would be personal jurisdiction over those two defendants

in New Hampshire based on the security agreement,

which is a contract executed here.

Correct me if I'm wrong, Your Honor.

The security agreement is executed in Charles Richards'

capacity as director of Chairman's view,

not in his personal capacity.

Okay, so Chairman's view,

there is personal jurisdiction over Chairman's view

by virtue of its having signed the security agreement

in New Hampshire.

Perhaps to one, perhaps to account, Your Honor,

but again, we need to...

Do we have to analyze each account

as well as each defendant?

Does there have to be personal jurisdiction

over each individual count here?

That is the framework analyzed in the

First Circuit Court of Appeals decision,

Phillips-Xer versus Howard.

And the court analyzes and commends a lower court

for analyzing specific jurisdiction

by claim basis.

Because, you know, to establish jurisdiction,

you know, the plaintiffs must establish

a prima facie case for each.

Was the motion to dismiss, which we don't have,

did it argue

per each defendant

and per each claim?

No, Your Honor.

The order on the motion to dismiss

generally graphs everything together.

Right, but I'm asking about the motion.

Did it lay out arguments

defendant by defendant, claim by claim?

Honestly, Your Honor, I'm not familiar

out the top of my head, but I can certainly take a look

at the five copies of the court if necessary.

Okay.

All right.

May I?

You want to proceed with questions?

Yes.

You don't have to do that now.

Oh.

No, sorry.

All right, but one of our concerns should be

to avoid piecemeal litigation.

So under your analysis, that would just emphasize

the fact that the plaintiff needs to

mitigate this case in any number of states

for any number of claims.

And that's not something that we're inclined to do, right?

Well, Your Honor, for, again,

the Supreme Court has held that

due process analysis does not concern

the plaintiff at all.

It concerns the defendant's rights first.

And secondly, the very nature of

collection proceedings on a patent

is piecemeal litigation.

In order to attach proceeds on a patent

or proceeds of sale on one state,

proceeds of sale on another state,

proceeds of sale on another state,

it is very likely that the plaintiffs here

are going to have to register for judgment

and attempt to try to get in many tashes.

Right, but where do they get that initial judgment?

Well, Your Honor, they obtain the initial

adjustment once in New Hampshire

and against one defendant.

And again, about the concerns

about piecemeal litigation, Your Honor,

the plaintiff's remedy here is simply to go

over the border to Vermont

and assert a theory of general jurisdiction

on all defendants.

And as fully admitted in our briefs,

she would have general jurisdiction

and specific jurisdiction in Vermont

over all defendants.

And let's say move the company to Minnesota.

I'm sorry?

And let's say move the company to Minnesota.

Well, with respect, Your Honor,

especially with specific jurisdiction

in this matter, the alleged harm here

all happens or all the decisions being made

or happened within Vermont,

even if a company moves to Minnesota,

that does not mean that a company

can travel back in time and change all the decisions

made in the location.

Your red light is on.

You still have two minutes

after we hear from Attorney Meyers.

Thank you, Your Honor.

If I may.

If you may, yes.

My name is Howard Meyers for the record.

I'm here with co-counsel David Cole

and also seated behind us

is the plaintiff Christine Seward.

We're here simply because Christine Seward

got a judgment almost four years ago

and she's been doing everything she could to collect it.

And we're here because those collection efforts

have been thwarted at every turn by these defendants.

Now, just a moment about that patent.

This isn't patent litigation.

This is a collection case.

It simply happens that the only substantial asset

of Chairman's view was the patent.

That's why the patent is playing a prominent role,

not because it's patent litigation.

Now, in terms of jurisdiction,

the legal answer is quite simple.

Chairman's view filed for a certificate of authority

to do business in the state of New Hampshire

on January 19, 2016.

It listed as its principal business address

Airport Road in West Lebanon, New Hampshire.

Charles Richards, who signed that application,

listed that same address as his principal business,

his principal business address.

They didn't have to do that.

If, as they say in their brief,

their principal business was always in Vermont,

all they had to do was say that their business address was

whatever that address may have been in Vermont.

And on that issue, Your Honor,

plaintiffs, I'm sorry, defendants

at pages 11 and 14 of their brief

make the representation to this court

that their principal place of business

for all of these entities was Vermont,

that all decisions, et cetera,

during the relevant period were taken in Vermont.

I would submit to you that those statements

and those representations are incorrect

from their own words.

If you look at the security agreement

that was discussed earlier in Council's argument,

that agreement to which Mr. Richards agreed

says it's between Christine Seward and Chairman's view

a Delaware corporation with a principal place of business

at 24 Airport Road that was signed on July 5th, 2016.

If you look at the patent assignment,

which constitutes the basis

of the fraudulent conveyance account,

that patent assignment drafted by the defendants,

which plaintiff had nothing to do,

says Chairman's view, corporation organized

and pursuant to the laws of Delaware,

having its principal place of business

at Post Office Box 97411 in New Hampshire.

So while they are representing to the court in their brief

that in fact the principal place of business in Vermont,

it wasn't.

They're admitting in these documents that it was in New Hampshire.

How do we get to, sorry, core value?

How do we draw the link to that independent?

We get to core value through the reasoning of this court

in the Kimmel Union case.

Kimmel Union I think versus Genovese where,

give me just a minute I had,

where the court stated at page,

this is 165 New Hampshire 132.

The court stated at page 137,

for jurisdictional purposes,

a party commits a tortuous act within the state

when an injury occurs in New Hampshire

even when the injury is the result of acts outside the state.

Now, I mean, there are a plethora of cases

which hold that, but that's how we get to core value.

Of course core value and riches were both instrumental,

well all three of them were instrumental

in the patent assignment.

And consulting software systems has an office in New Hampshire.

Consulting software systems has an office in New Hampshire

and the other individual plaintiff, I'm sorry defendant,

is a resident of the state of New Hampshire.

Let me ask you a seemingly oblique question.

If this case goes forward,

do you think the crime fraud exception

to attorney client privilege would apply?

I'm honestly not sure,

I mean that's an oblique answer and I apologize.

That's okay and if we said anything on that count,

it'd be dick anyway.

I'm not sure.

The important thing about that registration also

as regards Chairman's, well as regards both

Richards and Chairman's view is,

Richards signed that registration.

He's certified on the third page

that everything in there was true,

namely that his principal business address was

at Airport Road.

And the other thing is, of course,

they selected and stated that CT Corporation

was to be its registered agent.

There's another sort of oddball question,

but at the end of the day,

what is there to capture in New Hampshire?

I mean, you may be right,

but doesn't your client have to go elsewhere

to clawback assets?

No, Your Honor.

The plaintiff simply needs an order

from the Grafton County Superior Court

that that patent assignment is voided,

has to be reassigned.

Once that's reassigned, I mean, we...

I'm not sure whether this is in the record.

I mean, I was counsel all the way along,

but when the Grafton County Superior Court

issued the first attachment,

that attachment was recorded in the patent office.

Now, the problem with that was that at the time,

the patent had already been assigned to core value,

so it wasn't any good.

Once we get that order from the Grafton County Superior Court,

we simply record it in the patent office,

then Christine Seward is the owner of the patent.

Thank you.

So that's how that would work.

As I was saying, it's been settled law

for over 80 years

that the designation of a registered agent

for service or process in a state

constitutes a submission

to personal jurisdiction in that state.

And...

That was held in an opinion

authored by Mr. Justice Felix Frankfurter in 1939

in Nearby v. Bethlehem Shipbuilding Corporation.

General or specific?

Specific.

And there,

Mr. Justice Frankfurter wrote,

in conformity with what is now Section 210

of the General Corporation Law of New York,

Bethlehem designated William J. Brown

as the person upon whom a summons may be served

within the state of New York.

The scope and meaning of such a designation

as part of the bargain by which Bethlehem

enjoys the business freedom of the state of New York

have been authoritatively determined

by the Court of Appeals

speaking through Judge Cardozo.

And then they quote Cardozo.

The stipulation is therefore a true contract

the person designated is a true agent

the consent that he shall represent the corporation

is a true consent.

He is made the person upon whom process

against the corporation may be served.

The contract deals with jurisdiction of the person.

It does not enlarge or diminish

jurisdiction of the subject matter

it means that whenever jurisdiction

of the subject matter is present

service on the agent shall give jurisdiction

of the person.

A statute calling for such a designation

is constitutional

and the designation of the agent of voluntary act.

At all times during the relevant fact period

involved in this case

from April 2016

when Ms. Seward first made a demand

for the collection of the notes

through to the time when the appeal period

from the case ran

which was after the fraudulent transfer

Chairman's view was registered to do business in New Hampshire

Charles Richards was representing to the world

that his business address was in New Hampshire.

Now in fact it wasn't Vermont

and we know that

because the Court take judicial notice

of the official records of the Vermont Secretary of State

and the official the official records

of the Vermont Secretary of State

state that on June 1st 2014

before all this began

before she even loaned the money

the Secretary of State terminated

Chairman's use authority to do business

in the state of Vermont.

Why?

It doesn't say just says that has changed

terminated.

That may be.

But they didn't apply for reinstatement

until December 27th 2017

when they were reinstated.

That means that during this entire period of time

when they're saying their principal business

was in Vermont

all decisions were in Vermont

they had no authority

from the Secretary of State to do business in Vermont.

What matters not that the assignment occurred in Vermont

the assignment to core value?

I'm not sure where it occurred your honor

as I think we pointed out in our brief

the assignment was done on October 1st

and 2nd of 2017

we didn't even find out

that the assignment had taken place

until a pleading was filed in February of 2018

and yes

we didn't think to go to look

on the U.S. patent site

because we quite frankly didn't think

that they would do something like that

particularly when we had the security agreement

already in place.

As I said I think I'll say

Christine Stewart has been trying to

collect this judgment for almost four years.

It's a judgment that core value never appealed.

What they did do

as witnessed by this appeal

is to throw up every roadblock

they possibly could roadblock after roadblock

to avoid having to pay that judgment.

I urge this court

not to condone such roadblocks

and to issue an order

affirming the Grafton County Superior Court's

existence of personal jurisdiction

over these defendants.

Thank you.

Quick points on Rebuttal.

First we feel that the brief here

conflates foreign registration

for service process

with the principal business office address

and where the defendants

happen to do business

and that's simply not

rather foreign registrations

are not determinative of

where a corporation does business.

Second, the case cited...

It may not be determinative

consistent with jurisprudence

but they could be construed as admissions, correct?

Again, Your Honor, perhaps

but again these are not

not determinative and certainly this is a long fact based

long multi-fact possible test on it.

Second is the case cited

regarding the...

a defendant consented jurisdiction

on the basis of

service of process and designated register agent.

That case simply does not deal with a case

where an agent isn't served

and what the argument basically says is

if a entity

ever within the state of New Hampshire

registers a foreign business in New Hampshire

they'll kind of stamp with the scarlet letter

that permanently

subjects them to jurisdiction within New Hampshire

and that's all I have, Your Honor.

Can you shed some light on

why this case isn't exactly like

Kimball Union Academy as to the other defendants?

Yeah, so Kimball Union Academy

one, and I believe

that is a case involving construction

at Kimball Union Academy, one

there's a very specific harm to Kimball.

It is a building

within New Hampshire

and there's no possible way

that the harm could be constructed outside of New Hampshire

and that's number one.

And number two, there's

fact correspondence, licensing

and

many other attenuation contacts

by the defendant in that case

with his work specifically working

in the building in New Hampshire.

The entire scope of that defendant's

work was targeted at a building

within New Hampshire and that's

overwhelming facts to

confer jurisdiction in that case.

Thank you, Council.

Can I ask, please go ahead.

Will the plaintiffs have an objection

to having the defendant

provide the motion to dismiss?

No, Your Honor.

But may we be permitted

to submit our response to that

motion as well? I think we have

Maybe you have it. I apologize.

I think we have the objection, but we don't

have the motion.

But as a prophylactic measure, if you wish to do so,

you have the motion. Yes, feel free.

Thank you. Thank you, Council. Case submitted.

Thank you very much, Your Honor.
