The matter before the court is state of New Hampshire versus Mark Bolton. It is case number

2020-0025. The state of New Hampshire is represented by Attorney Elizabeth Woodcock. Mr. Bolton

is represented by Attorney William A. Corman. Mr. Corman, you may begin whenever you are

ready.

Thank you very much, man. Please, the court. Good morning. Again, my name is William

Corman and I represent Mr. Mark Bolton in this matter. In state versus Gonzales,

this honorable court precluded the exact type of testimony and type of evidence here that

the trial court erroneously allowed in in this matter.

Was that case rightly decided?

I believe it was. I mean, yes, yes it was.

I believe you're addressing the author and that's why he wants to know the question

into that question.

I appreciate that. Yes, it was one of the more brilliant legal opinions I think that

in the history of New Hampshire jurisprudence. Having said that, what I would suggest

to the court is that that particular case, it's almost on all fours with a Bolton matter.

It really is. And what we have here is we have Officer Baker presenting testimony

that the Gonzales case says is exactly the type of testimony that is precluded from

lay witnesses and it should not have been allowed to come in.

Well, in Gonzales, Attorney Corman, I don't believe that testimony came in on redirect

as is here.

It really appears to me that the prosecutor was responding to the cross examination of

Officer Baker.

The prosecutor was. It started down that pathway originally during direct testimony.

And then as the state says in their brief, they do discuss whether or not trial counsel

opened the door.

And what I would respectfully suggest to that, you know, this court has held before

that the fact that a door may have been opened does not permit all evidence to

pass through the open door doctrine, if you will, is intended to prevent prejudice and

is not to be subverted into a vehicle for the introduction of prejudice.

Otherwise, any time that any defense attorney seeks to poke holes in the state's case,

the theory could be, well, we've opened the door to any other types of evidence

that possibly come in.

So, so while I understand the open door doctrine, I understand its purpose.

We simply can't say that because defense counsel may or may not have been scoring points

through cross examination of a police officer that therefore that lawyer has opened the

door and the officer may testify to anything she thinks could possibly be relevant.

The open door doctrine doesn't fit in this category because that's exactly what happened

here.

Trial counsel was poking holes in the state's case and trying to use the open

door theory simply isn't applicable here.

But again, going back to Gonzales, what we really have here is testimony of a type that

is far beyond the knowledge of the ordinary juror.

It's the exact same type of testimony that was discussing Gonzales.

So you are doing that having an officer describe what a CAC interview is constitutes expert

testimony.

Isn't that really just lay testimony?

I think that we need to go beyond the CAC testimony.

I think when we get into what's going on, I would say pages 141, 142, the trial transcript,

the CAC, you know, I don't think that gets me where I want to go, but it really is the

testimony when the officer starts talking about almost why there will be a delayed

disclosure, why trauma victims, sexual assault victims, act the way they do.

I think the quote, it's on page 12 of my brief, you know, my training with

children working with child advocacy centers and forensic interviewing, we're constantly

saying disclosure is a process.

That's not something that a juror knows.

The officer herself is referring to her own specialized training.

But that statement that disclosure is a process came out across examination, not a director

even redirect, right?

I understand that.

I don't necessarily think that that's where trial counsel thought it was going to

go, but then the state picks up that thread and keeps going with it.

The fact of the matter is, is that this testimony where the officer herself is discussing her

own specialized training, red flags went up, red flags should have continued to go up,

and it was error for the court to allow it to come in.

It's almost exactly on par with what happened in Zala's, other than the fact there was

a social worker instead of a police officer.

I think that's a distinction without a difference when we're talking about the type of testimony

as to how sexual assault victims, trauma victims, sexual assault children, how they would react

to certain circumstances.

The particular transcript that you're pointing to isn't about sexual assault victims.

The only example that's given is a police involved shooting, and then it's a much more

general discussion just about memory and how people process information.

But it's the processing of information that when officer Baker is testified as to what

she knows based upon not her typical training of a police officer, I know there's conversations

about how many DWI arrests have you been involved in and things along those lines,

and the trial court tries to analogize this testimony with a standard DWI analogy if you

will.

And it simply doesn't fit.

We're talking about trauma.

We're talking about disclosures.

We're talking about interviewing techniques, and all those things are exactly what we're

talking about here.

That's where the problem lies.

It's when we go beyond even what an average police officer, if there is such a thing,

even what they would know, we're talking about specialized training, and they wander into

that territory, and it's problematic in this particular case, as I set forth in my brief,

that this is not a case where there was forensics.

This isn't a case where there was DNA, where there were videos, or any of those other

things that we've all seen hundreds of times in cases in the past five to 10 years.

There's no forensic evidence.

There's no physical evidence.

There's some, I think the state puts a little bit too much weight on the corroboration from

my client's son, but there's barely any corroborating evidence, and what we have is we have this

young woman who is testifying to something awful that happened to her, and anything

that's piled on, any sort of stamp of approval, if you will, from the criminal justice

system, from the officers that goes beyond what an officer should do, that goes beyond

what a testimony is problematic, especially in a case like this, where the evidence is

almost boils down to a simple credibility contest between my client and my client's

attorney and the defense they put on in the young woman who testified.

It's in these cases, I would suggest, that we need to be very careful how we put our

thumb on the scales of justice, and any time that that line is crossed becomes problematic,

especially, as I said, when the case simply boils down to a credibility contest, and

that's what we have here.

There's no other way to look at it.

Now, I understand that the state seems to think that even if the testimony should not

have been allowed in, and I don't want to put words in the state's mouth, they're

almost saying it really wasn't that big a deal.

It was just a small part of the overall case that was presented against Mr. Bolton,

and at the risk of repeating myself, I couldn't disagree more.

Again, these cases boil down to a credibility contest between the two sides, and any

time one side, and in this case, it was law enforcement, is able to testify in a manner

that this honorable court has already said is improper, it becomes problematic.

It really does.

It wasn't, and I would suggest that it wasn't just one small part of the state's case

against Mr. Bolton, otherwise it wouldn't have come back up again in closing arguments

and the state can minimize sort of the analogy that's drawn in the closing argument

all they want.

But what we have here-

If I remember correctly, the error was found to be harmless in Gonzales, isn't that correct?

The error in Gonzales was harmless, but it was a different case at the end.

The factual scenario around this particular instance, I suggest is on all fours.

But the end of the case, in this case, in Mr. Bolton's matter, it ends up being a very

different case.

I would suggest there's a possibility of evidence in this particular case.

The young lady's testimony I would suggest in this particular case was problematic.

There was the facts, if you will, and in our case, really talk about some brutal sexual

assault as described by the victim in this case, despite the fact that there were other

people in the house, there were no witnesses to it, no one heard anything, no one saw

anything.

Nothing was disclosed.

Again, I understand that there was some sort of question surrounding my client's son when

they were watching the movie together, but as far as the remaining offenses are concerned,

it is different.

It is different.

I don't need to caution this court, but again, when we have these cases, I would

suggest respectfully where law enforcement is allowed to testify in a particular manner

above and beyond what they are allowed to, it is especially troubling, it is especially

dangerous, and quite candidly is a slippery slope.

I'm sorry, I thought your owner had a question that cut you off.

Mr. Corman, looking at the particular language that you focused on, would you be making

the same argument if the phrase that my training with working with child advocacy

centers and forensic interviewing you know, then it goes on and speaks in a very

general term.

So it seems like she, and it seems like would you be, would your argument have equal force

if that phrase hadn't been used, would we be having to consider this issue?

I think that this phrase, the one that your owner just quoted, is the giant red flag

of all the phrases that we take issue with, because in that phrase, we really

are going outside the realm, even of what a typical, as I said, if there was such a

thing, police officer would know the officer is talking about her specialized

training experience.

I would suggest that that's a thread that runs through her entire testimony.

She's talking about what the CAC center is.

And again, I know that that isn't the end all be all, but again, the flavor

of her testimony and the phraseology that she uses really does indicate,

I would suggest to the jurors that this officer knows more than we think,

and more than we typical jurors do.

So two sentences after that, she's talking about in a general way, you know,

in general, you lose a parent or something, or she's talking about traumatic

events that we all have in our lives and a juror can relate to how they've

processed that type of information.

But if you pull back and don't focus on those couple of words, isn't what she's

saying just common knowledge and commonly within the kind of a juror?

Again, I would respectfully suggest that although jurors come into court with a

breath of individual experiences and a breath of individual knowledge, I don't

know that we can comfortably say that jurors understand what trauma is.

And it's not just that they understand what trauma is, but it's how

individuals react to trauma, how individual, how individuals emote

surrounding trauma, how individuals disclose that trauma to other folks.

No one's life is perfect.

There's been trauma and sadness and horrible things that have happened to

everybody.

But how individuals then process that, I suggest that crosses over the line.

Even if it could be considered lay opinion testimony, that's admissible, right?

Lay opinion testimony can be admissible, but I think that how individuals

generally react to trauma or how individuals generally react to horrible

occurrences in their life is beyond that.

I mean, we're walking into the realm of the psychological, and I don't know

that there are six of us on the WebEx right now.

And I don't know that everybody here would respond to trauma in a

particular way, that that's not how human nature works.

So when you have someone, since your time is limited, can I just

shift to the other issue, the rule 106 issue?

I just want to make sure I understand your position.

Is it your position that it was error not to admit the entire transcript or

was it error not to admit particular portions?

And if it's the latter, which particular portions are you pointing

us towards?

So I would respectfully suggest that while I do not want to waive

this second issue that I put forth in my brief, I think that the first issue,

that the one that we've been assessing for the majority of time,

is the issue.

Again, so in response to your question, I'm not trying to short shrift the

second argument.

I'm certainly not trying to waive it.

I do think that when trial counsel wanted to introduce the entire

record, I'm sorry, the entire transcript into the record,

she should have been allowed to do so.

I think that it's all or nothing in terms of your understanding of how it went

at trial.

It was your honor, you're airing because the whole thing isn't coming in.

We're not, we don't have to parse it any more thinly than that.

Is that right?

I think set forth me appendix, the memorandum that was submitted by

trial counsel where they claim, and I agree that the state cherry-picked,

that's their phraseology in the appendix, cherry-picked the statements that

should have been introduced.

That's what was error.

So the state didn't introduce any portion of that transcript, did they?

The transcript itself was not introduced into evidence.

It was not introduced into the record.

The trial court didn't impose any limitation on the use of the transcript,

either to refresh recollection or to mention it.

It could have been used in a much more fulsome way, isn't that right?

I'm not disagreeing with the court at all.

And again, I'm not suggesting the court shouldn't look at that argument,

but again, I'm suggesting that I don't want to waive that argument.

But again, I think the focus of what I'm presenting today really is the first argument

that I've presented to the court.

And just to jump back to that, and again, if the court has more questions

about the second argument, I'll entertain them.

But just to jump back to what I was saying just before, your honor,

law enforcement has a very special role in criminal trials.

And we all know that when police officers take the stand to testify about an

investigation, they already are not testifying as lay witnesses.

They are already held to a different standard, to a almost to a higher caliber of witness.

They are often trained witnesses.

They've done it before.

And therefore, using my allegation to the scales of justice before,

when we have law enforcement testified, especially when it's law enforcement,

that's where you need to be most careful, I would suggest to the court,

about allowing them to cross the line or preventing them from crossing the line

into impermissible testimony.

Thank you, Mr. Corman.

Thank you very much.

Thank you, I appreciate it.

Woodcock.

Thank you, your honor.

Good morning.

May it please the court.

Elizabeth Woodcock for the State of New Hampshire.

Defense counsel just said, with respect to the first argument,

that we're talking about trauma.

We're not.

We're talking about a response given to a question

asked on redirect examination after the defense attorney

had repeatedly challenged the police officer for the way that

interviews were conducted in this particular case.

And the defense attorney asked her over and over,

isn't it better to interview somebody right away?

Isn't it better to do this this way?

He repeatedly challenged the way that the case had been investigated.

And the way that the police officers had approached it.

And indeed, Officer Baker did not interview the alleged victim here, right?

She did not.

She was really sort of a peripheral witness.

She was the lead investigator for purposes of what went on in New Hampshire.

But the interview took place in Wisconsin.

And the thought that a comment about why you might not want to interview somebody right away

because people have to process things equates to expert testimony.

It's just it is what I hear here.

Here isn't it troubling that there also in this case was an issue of delayed disclosure.

And so wouldn't it make sense to avoid that sort of backdoor way of explaining it?

Because in addressing why the interview might not happen right away,

this testimony also provides a justification for a delayed disclosure.

So doesn't the state have to be a little more careful?

I think the answer to that is no, because in this particular case, the question that was asked

and the response that was given was why you would not interview somebody immediately.

And the defense attorney was going after the police officer over and over again on cross,

saying, you know, you wouldn't go and you never interview witnesses together.

And the police officer said, well, no, that's not always the case.

You interview people right away.

Well, no, you might not get the entire story if you interview somebody right away.

And that is really frankly common experience.

And though I guess my question might my issue is even on redirect, the state

refocuses the question.

The state asks, you talked a little bit at the beginning of that cross about giving people

time to process.

Council, I asked you questions about immediately interviewing witnesses and alleged victims.

So now we've gotten a more specific focus for this testimony that comes later.

Right, but you have to look at what the focus of the question is.

It's not why did this victim go back to Wisconsin and wait for a few.

I think that she disclosed the assaults took place in July and she disclosed in

September after she had what appeared to be kind of a meltdown.

She was not behaving well and her mother sort of said, you know, you need to shape up and

then she disclosed.

But the question wasn't why would a victim not disclose this right away?

It is why would you as a police officer not do certain things right away?

And then I'll get off this.

But again, the choice of words by the prosecutor.

And you started to talk a little bit about processing.

It just seems it's like the elephant in the room.

Everybody's thinking about this and the selection of words knowing how difficult it

is on your feet just seem to reorient this testimony.

I don't think it does here on her.

I think that the term she used the word processing, it's a common term anyway.

It's something that people throw around.

If you read Dear Abby, you're always reading about processing.

So it's not exactly PhD or medical doctor terminology.

Dear Abby might be an expert.

Why isn't this case controlled by Gonzalez?

Well, I don't think that I think that the that it's comparing apples to oranges.

This is simply not it's not expert testimony.

And it's not even addressing the issue that Justice Hans Marconi is raising.

It's not addressing the lame disclosure.

It's simply explaining why the police officer might handle a case in a particular way.

And that would be like asking a lawyer after a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel.

Why did you ask this particular question or why did you approach it this way?

The answer would simply be based on the lawyer's take on the case and experience.

This is how I would do it.

So the state doesn't argue that if there was an error here, it was harmless?

I realized that I did not put in a harmless error argument, Your Honor.

And I probably should have, but I was so focused when I was writing this on the fact that

this is simply not expert testimony.

It doesn't it doesn't fall into that.

It's the police officer's experience.

So when my colleague said, well, sex offenses are different from DUIs.

When when Judge Ignatius was saying, why isn't this just like a DWI?

In a certain sense, that's a fair question for the court to ask because

the officer is trying to explain why you would not necessarily go and interview somebody

immediately, or why you might go back and interview the person again,

or why you wouldn't necessarily always separate witnesses who had all witnessed the same event

that they might all be standing there and the officer might be taking down their names

and asking them questions as a group.

But the point here is there were no witnesses that observed anything.

Well, there was the cousin who observed the uncle climbing under the covers with the two children,

which I think, although my colleague sort of dismisses that, I think that that really is

very damning evidence.

I can't imagine a grown man climbing under the covers with children, essentially to watch a movie.

It doesn't strike me, particularly when one of the children is a 15 year old girl.

It just doesn't strike me as being very appropriate.

So I think that there is that.

But but I think that the real question here is that the defense was not challenging

the officer to explain why the victim would delay in disclosing.

The defense was challenging the investigation of the case and therefore the response that she gives,

which is honestly, I mean, I think that she when you read it, it reads as if she feels

like she's been on the witness stand for too long because she's kind of wandering around

and she's talking about people's parents dying and officer involved shootings.

And it's kind of this mishmash of what she means by the word process.

But I don't think that there was anybody in the courtroom who misunderstood what she was saying.

She was just saying that there are different ways of interviewing people under different

circumstances.

And that was the explanation.

I think if it had gone further than that, if she had if she had actually done what

Justice Hans Marconi is concerned about and said, well, this is processing.

And therefore it's not surprising that the victim would have delayed in disclosing.

That that might be an entirely different matter.

But she simply was explaining what she meant by the use of a particular term.

With respect to the second issue, the transcript, I can't find any vehicle

for doing what the what the defense wanted to do in this case.

Judge Ignatius, to her credit, really tried to explain to the defense attorney what

defense counsel needed to do.

And I give the court credit for that because I think having been a young lawyer a long time ago,

there were times when I would get up and I would start to make

a terrible error in trying to present my case.

And some judges would simply let me drown in my own stupidity.

And some judges would say to me, Ms. Woodcock, you're doing this the wrong way.

And I always appreciated that second judge, although it certainly was not anything that

the judge was required to do.

Attorney Woodcock, you're not suggesting that Attorney Corman should pursue an ineffective

assistance claim, are you?

I think that the real question there would not just be whether this was ineffective

assistance of counsel, but whether you could demonstrate any prejudice.

And I think in this particular instance, you can't.

What the defense tried to do was to introduce this transcript in a way.

But the defense was not prevented from asking questions of the police officer

or even having been given the opportunity to use the transcript in cross-examination

appropriately.

Otherwise, I think that the defense attorney did a good job in what I would consider to be

a fairly tough case.

Do you agree with Mr. Corman that the issue before us is sort of an all or nothing

admission of this transcript, that it wasn't farced more thinly like you can use this

or I want to get this part in?

It was just I want to get this admitted into evidence the whole thing.

Is that right?

That's the way I read what happened here, Justice Bassett.

And I just point the court to what happened after the state had rested.

The defense then came back and said, we want to just admit the entire transcript

with no witness, no testimony, nothing.

And the court said, no, you can't do that.

Having tried, as I say, over and over again to explain what the appropriate vehicle was,

the defense counsel just didn't seem to pick up on it.

But setting that aside, I think that the cross-examination of the officer

to the detective went into enough.

And there was enough corroborating evidence that if this were to be raised as an ineffective

assistance of counsel claim, I do not see it as measuring up to that.

So back on my back on my area of concern, the reliance in closing argument

on sort of this indirectly this testimony about processing to explain the inconsistencies

in the victim's testimony.

Does that sort of reinforce what may have been inadvertent discussion of this verboten topic?

But now we've had it before the jury kind of three times and again,

oriented toward explaining away the victim's inconsistencies and perhaps delay in disclosure.

No, I still am not going to go down that path with you, Justice Hans Marconi.

And the reason is that in closing arguments, lawyers frequently draw from their overall

experience. The jury is told in a lot of closings, don't leave your common sense at the door.

They're not supposed to exclude everything that they know from a general perspective about

the way that people process traumatic events.

So when the state is making that argument to sort of think about how a traumatic event may affect

you, that's simply fair game. It's not asking them to say, all right, this event took place in June

and July or these events took place in June and July. The victim didn't disclose until September.

Remember what the police officer told you about processing and this explains this

delayed disclosure. That's not the argument that was made. And I think that when you look at the

entire transcript, you'll see that this is really a very small piece of the entire puzzle that was

being presented to the jury. My yellow light is on. If the court has further questions, I'm

happy to try to answer them. Otherwise, I would ask that the case be submitted.

Colleagues, all right. Well, thank you both counsel for a wonderful argument. The case is submitted

and the court is adjourned.

Attorney Corbyn, you're welcome back anytime.
