You can go ahead, Claire.

Thank you.

Please be seated.

No, please be seated.

Thank you.

This is K2020-0165, a state of New Hampshire versus a days one jet.

Good morning, may it please the court.

My name is Thomas Barnard.

I represent Deshaun Jett.

I've reserved one minute for rebuttal.

I plan to make three points this morning.

First, the prior theft was relevant.

Second, it was not excludable under Rule 403.

And third, the error was not harmless.

In prosecutions for assault or homicide, motive is crucial.

People don't attack other people for no reason.

And jurors expect prosecutors to show evidence explaining the motive,

defendant's motive to attack the victim.

And Smalley and several other cases I cited in my brief demonstrate

that courts generally give prosecutors wide latitude

when it comes to proving a defendant's motive.

A defendant who claims self-defense is in the exact same position

as a prosecutor who charges assault or homicide.

That defendant is expected and entitled to admit evidence

to explain why someone would attack him.

But the court here failed to recognize that.

It fixated on the fact that Jett was not aware of the prior theft.

And this was legal error.

A defendant's knowledge of a prior event is required

if the defendant is arguing that that prior event is relevant

for his state of mind, for the existence and reasonableness of his fear.

But the argument is that that prior event is relevant

because it explains the other person's motive to attack the defendant

that the defendant's knowledge of that prior event is not required

nor even relevant.

So is motive of the individual's aggressiveness really relevant

if there's evidence that the victim was aggressive with the defendant here

and her friends?

It is, it is because there are an infinite number of degrees of aggressiveness.

And the question here isn't just whether the drug dealers were aggressive

but whether they were so aggressive that Jett reasonably believed

it was necessary for him to pull a knife.

And the prior theft explained why the victims had that motive

to be that aggressive.

When it was all said and done, the police found a $20 bill

lying on the floor in the vestibule.

And that fact speaks volumes because it suggests that for the drug dealers

this wasn't about getting Jett's money

and it wasn't about recovering their marijuana.

This was about retaliation.

This was about punishing Jett for what they perceived to be his transgression,

trying to steal from them.

As the old saying goes, fool me once, shame on you, fool me twice, shame on you.

So what is the logical connection between they're punishing him

for trying to steal with the fact that there might have been an earlier incident?

Right.

So the first time it happens, the reaction of the drug dealer

isn't going to be the same as the second or third time or fourth time it happens.

The first time it happens, first of all, they're going to be in shock.

They're going to take time to process what's happened

because they weren't expecting it.

And secondly, they may say this could be an aberration.

This could be a one-time event.

The second time it happens, now there's a pattern.

Now it's not, there's something wrong with this person who stole from us.

Now it's, there's something wrong with us because we are the targets.

We have been the targets of multiple thefts.

And we have to put an end to this.

And so it's not just about getting the drugs back or getting Jett's money.

It's about sending a message to the community of drug buyers as a whole

that any attempt to steal from them will be punished.

Was any of this relevant to the defendant's use of deadly force?

Well, because that informs their level of aggression.

It informs their, their body language.

It informs their posture.

It informs their tone of voice.

All of these things are relevant to Jett,

the reasonableness of Jett's belief that he was in sufficient danger

that he had to pull a knife to defend himself.

So was it the defendant's theory, a trial that stabbing occurred in a vestibule

as opposed to the car?

Absolutely, absolutely.

And the jury's verdicts established that the jury believed that the stabbing

occurred in the vestibule.

Because they didn't convict him of first degree murder.

Or second degree murder.

Right, right.

If the jury believed that Jett chased the drug dealers back to their car

and stabbed SG in the car, they would have convicted him of murder.

So the prior theft is relevant, as I've explained to demonstrate

the drug dealer's motive to retaliate against Jett

because they believed he had attempted to steal from them.

And it's also relevant for Chase's motive.

He has an additional motive because this has happened twice now.

And both times it's SG who's out the money.

So at this point, from Chase's point of view, SG must be starting to suspect

that at best, Chase is not very good at vetting drug buyers.

And at worst, he's in cahoots with the drug buyers.

He's conspiring with them to steal SG's drugs.

So Chase has to demonstrate to SG that he's loyal to her,

that he's on her side.

And he does that by assaulting Jett.

How much of this was before the trial?

This dispute was squarely presented to the trial.

All of the detail that you have described.

Right, right.

The trial court understood that Jett wanted to introduce this

to explain why the drug dealers, why the drug dealers

behave so aggressively towards him that he felt the need to act in self-defense.

And the trial court's order reflects that understanding

of the purpose of admitting this evidence.

Now I've identified two avenues of motive.

One that all the drug dealers had to retaliate against Jett

and another that Chase specifically had to prove his loyalty to SG.

And defense counsel below focused on the second of those as opposed to the first.

But they're really both two sides of the same coin.

So if we agree with you, why isn't that error harmless and reasonable doubt?

The error was not harmless because this was an extremely close case

when it comes to self-defense.

The state argues that the error was harmless by attempting to revive this theory

that the jury rejected, that Jett chased the drug dealers back to their car.

But as I've explained, the jury rejected that theory.

So the jury concluded that the fatal stab wound was inflicted in the vestibule.

What's happening in the vestibule?

Jett was cornered by three irate drug dealers.

He didn't know why they were pursuing him.

He didn't know why they were cornering him.

He didn't know why they were yelling at him.

He didn't know what their intentions were.

All of that demonstrates that this was close case when it comes to self-defense.

And the evidence that was excluded would have corroborated Jett's testimony in two crucial ways.

First, it would have explained why Chase grabbed money from Jett's lap in the car

because Chase was paranoid about counterfeit bills and counterfeit money

because they had previously been the victims of theft when a buyer used counterfeit money.

And second, it would have explained why the drug dealers wanted to punch Jett

for this transgression, for his perceived theft of money from them.

And third, it would have explained why Chase wanted to demonstrate his loyalty to SG by assaulting Jett.

Was there any evidence that the drug dealers had a deadly weapon or any weapons on them?

No, no, there was not.

So couldn't the jury have concluded that Jett acted recklessly by bringing a knife into that altercation?

No, no. Jett didn't just pull out a knife and start using it.

He pulled out a knife to keep them at bay.

He thought that if he pulled out a knife that they would leave him alone, that they would turn around and leave.

But that's not what happened. They continued to attack him.

So now the risk is that the drug dealers get the knife from Jett and use the knife against Jett.

I want to talk a little bit about Rule 403.

Rule 403 allows the exclusion of evidence if a court identifies danger and finds that it substantially outweighs the evidence's probative value.

Isn't our review highly discretionary of that function?

In general, yes.

But here the court committed legal error because it failed to identify any real distinct danger that this evidence had.

As the court recognized, the other evidence in the case established that the drug dealers had a history of selling drugs.

This wasn't their first drug sale.

It also established that Jett occasionally sold marijuana.

So it was no secret that everyone involved in this transaction had a history of dealing drugs.

There was no prejudice that was going to rise from that.

The only prejudice that the court identified was its belief that the motive argument was speculative.

But that's not the way 403 operates.

Rule 403 requires the court to identify a specific danger and to find that that danger substantially outweighs the probative value of the evidence.

In appeal, the state argues that the evidence was prejudicial because it showed that the drug dealers had a motive to assault Jett.

But that was precisely what made the evidence relevant and that's precisely what gave it probative value.

Rule 403 only allows the exclusion of evidence on the basis of unfair prejudice and legitimate probative value is not unfair prejudice.

On the question of self-defense, I don't think I can say it any better than a juror who sat on this case

who sent an email to the judge after the verdict and she asked a question.

She said, what if the races were reversed?

What if it was three black drug dealers surrounding a white drug buyer in the vestibule of his own apartment?

Would that be self-defense?

And I think when we look at the case in that context, it becomes clear that this was a close case when it comes to self-defense.

And if this evidence of this prior drug deal had been introduced, the verdict may very well have been different.

If the court has no further questions.

Thank you. We've still reserved one minute, sir.

Thank you.

Mr. Agati.

Good morning, Your Honours.

May it please the court.

My name is Benjamin Agati.

I'm a senior assistant attorney general of the state of New Hampshire and I'll be representing the state of New Hampshire today.

Before I take questions, I'd just like to make the state's argument clear that as the justices have already looked to, the record here is the key.

The record here doesn't support the defendant's theory of admissibility at trial below nor does it support his new theory of admissibility now on his appeal.

Even if it had been preserved, the record shows that the trial court properly excluded this testimony about a prior action of the victim

and that this discretion was not an unsustainable exercise of discretion.

The record didn't support admitting what the trial court called distant, wholly unrelated, misleading, confusing, purely speculative and unsupported assertions by the defendant.

And this court must defer to that trial court's review of the vast amount of evidence that it examined.

And the record showed that the victim's state of mind was not evidence of motive and even if it had been, the exclusion was harmless error.

Now, the record being clear on these two points, I would like to spend the bulk of my time addressing the merits of the properly excluded drug sale that we're talking about

unless the justices would like to speak about issue number two. I was not going to waste your time with that today.

I think both parties have made it pretty clear on the record what our positions are.

But that being said, I'll be happy to take your questions at any time.

One point before we get started to that is with regards to this juror email, I don't know where that is noted in the record on this case of a juror writing an email to the judge

about whether or not the defend or the victims or the victim's friends had been of a different race or how that would have factored into this conclusion.

I'm not aware of that and I don't know where that is in the record. I'm sure counsel will tell me where it is maybe later on.

So what is the evidence of the prior drug deal? How long ago did it occur and how is that evidence going to come in?

The evidence of the prior drug deal would not come in, Your Honor, just the same as if there were evidence of a defendant's prior actions of using a knife against somebody.

Who had the information? So was one of the drug dealers going to testify about this on cross-examination?

Two sets of sources for that particular information, Your Honor.

The first one would be that there wouldn't be a number of text messages that the deceased, Sabrina Golusha, had sent to others.

One of the people being Sam Chase who would have testified.

So one of the primary problems and one of the reasons why the trial court found that this would have gone down this rabbit hole of trying to prove

is that the only statements you have are text messages from the deceased that this prior sale involving counterfeit money ever happened.

So you've got an incredible hearsay problem right there that would be a gigantic distraction from the trial itself.

We only would have the victim say so in those text messages and also the text messages have stated that she was angry that she had been ripped off.

Not that she was going to assault the next person that she did a drug deal with or she was going to do something wrong to them

and she never carried out any acts of violence despite her statements.

Could the text date the prior drug transaction?

Not from independent means but based on the text messages that were sent by the victim to Sam Chase.

We've dated them to almost two months before involving somebody who used counterfeit money who was not the defendant in this case.

The defendant was a new person that the victim did not even know that she was going to be meeting that night.

The testimony came in that Sam Chase asked her to get together with marijuana

that he was then going to go turn around and able to sell to the defendant in this matter.

She did not realize that she was going to be meeting somebody else or selling marijuana to somebody else

until she got in the car to go over there.

So she does not have that knowledge of that background.

Does the state concede that given the jury's verdict this was a self-defense case?

The state concedes that that's what the defendant's argument is but we are vastly disagree about what the jury's verdict shows.

We do not agree that the jury's verdict shows that the jury ignored what we believe to be true

and what we think the jury's verdict showed that to find him guilty of manslaughter,

Mr. Jett, after he had the stolen marijuana taken away from him,

after he had pulled out a knife, been disarmed by the victim who threw the knife down in the vestibule,

then fled, that he then took that knife, opened it, ran back out to the car

and made a downward stab into the center of the checks.

Would that have been more intentional than reckless?

Our argument was that it was more intentional, certainly, Your Honor.

The jury, I don't know why with regards to, felt that it was reckless but that doesn't mean that the facts themselves

because also the physical facts didn't play out at trial.

The defendant testified in this matter, made a series of gestures and demonstrated for the jury his physical positioning.

That testimony was completely inconsistent with the testimony of the medical examiner

about the trajectory of the knife and how it went into Sabrina.

His statement was that he was holding it loosely and he was flinging about trying to get them away.

Dr. DePaul's testimony was that it would have taken a fair and significant amount of force

for that knife to come all the way through the ribs, through the pericardium and through the heart.

The jury's finding that it was reckless manslaughter and nothing more.

I think, Your Honor, in this case, you've got a matter where the jury has taken a look at what the facts are

and that they have decided based upon the extremes that have been presented for both sides

that they came to a conclusion that there was recklessness.

So wouldn't any aggression on the part of the other individuals, wouldn't that be relevant in this factual scenario?

Would there aggression on that day? Certainly, Your Honor.

And there was testimony about that, the amount of force they used.

In fact, the defendant's testimony was consistent with the testimony of Sam Chase and Madison Campbell

and the other people that were there.

They had them in a headlock for a period of time, et cetera. That was all consistent.

That was consistent, Your Honor. There was no disagreement about that.

And I think if the victim here, Sabrina Colusia, if there was some argument that she was being overly aggressive

or that the defendant's testimony was different than the other witnesses about how aggressive she was,

then maybe somehow you would have an argument to talk about this.

How her anger expressed through the text messages could have informed that.

Potentially, if she was overly aggressive, yes, but there was no testimony.

There was nothing in the record to support that.

With regards to her aggressiveness, again, it would also have to be aggression of action.

And here it was her saying that she was upset about what had occurred in the past.

We all the time get frustrated with folks and we say, you know what, that guy drives me nuts.

I wish I had punched him in the nose. It doesn't mean that you actually go out and punch the person in the nose.

But the argument you're making, presumably, is the argument that could have been made to the jury.

If this evidence had come in, you could have made this argument.

If the state could have made the argument, well, just discount it.

You know, everybody gets angry, so I don't see the harm in letting it in.

It seems to me to be probative, perhaps not very probative,

on the issue of aggressiveness of the victim.

I think the harm in bringing it in, your honor, was what would have to be done for it to come in.

And that's why the court found that it was going to mislead the jury and have some unfair prejudice.

To bring these particular statements in, right, you have Sabrina saying this event occurred and this is how she feels.

You have to prove that.

In order to prove that here, the only thing you have are out-of-court statements by her

that you're asking the jury to take are, in fact, the truth of the matter,

that this event actually occurred and that this is, in fact, how she felt.

You've got a huge hearsay problem there.

Was that argued? Was that point raised below?

I believe the hearsay argument, your honor, was not raised,

but it goes towards the misleading element of how the court found that this would be misleading to the jury.

You would have to go down this.

We never got that particular portion of the argument, mainly because the defendant's argument before

was that this information was relevant for Sam Chase,

that it was relevant to show what his particular motives were, not Sabrina Galuchas.

That's why we feel this argument has not been preserved to be presented now to say this is all relevant about her perspective

when before it was all about Sam Chase's perspective.

That being said, your honor, if there are no further questions,

I believe that the state's information that we've submitted is, in fact, I think fairly key.

And the record here is the key.

And I won't take up more of your time today.

Thank you.

I'll let the court ask questions. I would waive rebuttal.

Thank you both.

Thank you.

Case submitted. Court is adjourned.
