Good morning. This is K-2020-0450, appeal of New Hampshire Division of State Police.

Please proceed. May it please the court. My name is Emily Gehring. I represent the Department

of Safety Division of State Police, and I intend to reserve one minute for a bottle. Thank you.

To understand this appeal, I think it's necessary to understand the magnitude of

Trooper Owens' conduct and to not lose sight of what the underlying conduct actually

was here. Trooper Owens was not terminated from his role as a state trooper because

he had a problem with his time card. He was terminated from state police because he

made mistakes in time management, and rather than bringing that to a superior and coming

up with a reasonable fix, he decided to engage in a practice of deception to cover up those

issues because he had previously had a number of time card violations. He knew he was

looking at discipline. He didn't want to get in trouble, and rather than bringing

that to a superior and coming up with a reasonable solution, he decided that he

would take matters into his own hands and falsify an official agency document.

So you're asking us to substitute our judgment for the PAP's judgment?

I don't think that you need to substitute your judgment for the PAB's judgment. The

PAB specifically found that Owens did falsify the time card to make it work and that

he was looking at a policy violation if he didn't make these changes to inaccurately

record his time. The PAB itself has already made findings that he did engage in this

practice of deception. The reason he was terminated for this was not because it was

a problem with his time card. It's because his credibility is called into question to

such a severe degree that state police can't even use this individual as a state

trooper anymore. So when the PAB decided to reinstate trooper Owens, what they

were doing is said, yes, he did engage in a pattern of behavior. He tried to

distance himself from that. He knew he was going to get in trouble, but

despite the fact that he lied here, we think he should still be an officer.

Well, you say he's been ordered to be reinstated and he can't be used by the

state as a trooper. Why not? He lacks credibility.

Owens doesn't have to testify in every role available at state police, does he?

He was reinstated as a state trooper. The current position that he was

reinstated to is a position that involves making arrests, engaging with

the public, testifying in court. State police simply cannot use him in that

function anymore because he's so readily impeachable and state police doesn't

trust his people. I don't really understand that. The impeachment goes like this.

Mr. Owens, you lied on your time sheets, didn't you?

Yes or no, whatever he says, assuming a judge allows that. So what?

So anecdotally, more often than not, when there's an officer who has these

kind of integrity issues, their cases simply aren't prosecuted and gets

fined. Are there any other state troopers actively employed who have

credibility? It is possible that there are other troopers who are employed, but

I would like to address that. It came up in the Owens brief. There are no

details to know why those other troopers had their integrity issues, what the

conduct was, the severity of the conduct. Perhaps when those integrity violations

occurred, perhaps those troopers have decades of distinguished career

service that has come after that, that mitigates that lie that initially

gave them. Perhaps that will happen. I don't think state police needs to

take that risk. If we've already identified that someone has this

propensity for lying, for something that is an incredibly small offense, why

put them back out in service knowing that they are someone who is willing

to engage in a lie and run the risk that they tell a bigger lie next time

that it has someone's life? So you agree that this offense is minimal?

I think it is easy to characterize this offense as minimal because it's a

time card. I do not think that the conduct is minimal at all. If you take

this same conduct and put it in any other policing activity, it's

obviously egregious. If he falsified evidence to make the case work, or if

he falsified what went into a police report because he didn't want to

get in trouble for a chain of custody issue, that's egregious conduct

on behalf of a police officer. So state police has to take the position

that whether it seems like a little lie or a big lie, behavior indicative of

your willingness to lie. So if you're willing to lie on something as insignificant as

a time card, what keeps you from lying in something where you are truly

looking at getting in trouble? It's a charge of a firearm.

Mismanagement of funds that are seized through evidence. I mean, that's

why state police has to take this incredibly hard line. So I think it is

a disservice to state police to think that this is a little lie. So why make

this into such a big deal? Can you refresh my recollection? I've read the order

as I'm sure the court has. Didn't the ABB

specifically find the officer credible? Didn't they make

that finding? And didn't they not make the finding

that he had violated the integrity policy? It's a little more

nuanced than that. The PAB never specifically says whether or not he violated the

integrity policy. They never say that they affirm or overturn

that finding. Well, that's not a fair implication that they would have said

that he did if they found that. I don't think so because they were silent to it.

But back to the question about the fact that they found that he was credible. They did say that, right?

They said he consistently told the same story. And so for the last

three or four interviews, he told the story that yes, he knew he was going to be in trouble. It was in the back

of his mind that he was going to be in trouble for this again. So he falsified those documents.

So it may be credible that he told the same story three times

in a row. But that story establishes that he engaged in a pattern

of deception. So it's, you know, that the credibility and sticking

to the fact that he said, yes, I lied about something doesn't negate that initial

argument. Presumably all these arguments were made with equal force to the PAB.

But the PAB clearly didn't buy it. Well, that's the

issue here. Is that in despite this public policy

the commands that we clean up our police forces and the needs to be accountability

and transparency and policing, PAB said yes, he falsified

these records to distance himself from wrongdoing, but we think he should be an officer.

And so the issue there is the PAB who is comprised entirely of

law enforcement is now telling state police, here's an individual who you

didn't think was suitable to be an officer who has consistently said he could falsify

records, put him back on the force, send him back out to engage with the public

and to do policing duties. So do I understand the

basic premise of the state's argument is that

appeal of state police in 2018 established that there was a broad

discretion in the PAB to reinstate, you seem to accept

that. Just say, but if there's, if it

involves a dominant public policy, then they can't do it.

Is that right? Precisely. And there's a dominant public policy here. Have we ever

in the PAB case said that

setting aside, reverse the PAB because of a dominant public policy

and where do we go to find that? So to my knowledge there's

not a case yet in New Hampshire where we have reversed a PAB decision.

There are PELRB cases that have opined on this. I believe that's the

amalgamated transit union case which talks about dominant public policy. PAB is

a different employment board and I do not believe this

report has reached that question. But you look to dominant

public policy from a number of areas. It can be statutes, it can be case law,

it can be other authority. And that's what we're arguing here right now.

We're in this moment in time where there's an incredible push for police

reform that creates this public policy. There's executive orders,

there's the LIACT commission, there's the LIACT findings. There is a cultural

conversation about cleaning up the police force. State police

tried to do that here. They identified someone that was a cop who lied and they

terminated him and now because of this PAB order

they're stuck with him again. I mean that completely defies public policy and the public

expectation that you're going to have officers and particularly state

troopers who are credible. So the

two places that you're directing us to look for this dominant public policy

are the LIACT commission. Some of those commission

recommendations were adopted by the legislature and some weren't.

And then the police standards of conduct, is that right?

Those are the two places we're supposed to look. Exactly. So there's also the police

standards of conduct where integrity is a specific component of

your obligations as an officer, as a New Hampshire state trooper.

The LIACT commission adopts a number of model professional standards

of conduct, all of which contains some component talking about integrity

and the need for truthfulness both in your personal and professional life.

It seems like a very slippery slope you're asking us to get on

to make this sort of super judgment. Oh under normal circumstances

under the state police case

from 2018 this would be fine but

here we're finding there's a dominant public policy so we're going to set

aside the ruling of that board. That seems like

you're asking the court to take on an extraordinary role.

I don't think it is an extraordinary role. I think the public has an expectation

that we are only going to employ good cops.

When the organization that employs those cops itself has said this is not a good one

we need to get rid of them, public policy supports that

that we only employ good cops that will only allow good cops to go out and arrest people

in Hampshire. So wouldn't that speak to the

ability to reinstate an officer? No because an officer

can be terminated for any number of reasons. They're not always integrity reasons. I mean there's any number of reasons

that an officer could be terminated. There's not public

policies behind all of those reasons. But with Trooper Owens

there is a public policy that we really want to clean up police

force. We really need to get back. Is there a decertification option

as well? I believe that there is a decertification option through the police

manager and training. Isn't that different from what the PAB is looking at?

I suppose it would be different because it's revoking

the certification but I don't see how that makes any difference here because

that almost makes it worse if he's decertified as a trooper

as an active law enforcement official but he is back into employment.

Here he's reinstated by the PAB for a very specific

review. That would be different for example

if someone were decertified and then no longer qualified. Right but then

what would state police do with him? They now have to find a job because PAB said

you need to employ him. If he loses the licensure. Because of this particular

review and the findings made here.

I think it still creates the same problem that even if

he gets decertified and admittedly do not know as much about the decertification

attorney bowed one might be much more familiar with that process but it still ends up with this issue

that state police has saddled somebody that it can't use because if it's a

they've been reinstated as an employee but they're not able to do law enforcement duties

well need somebody out on the road who's able to effectuate arrests

and secure convictions and do policing.

So that's really the issue here is that state police has made a determination

they're doing it in the interest of the public they're doing it

in concert with all of these police reforms and the PAB who has no wisdom

about what policing is come in and said well let's put this cop who lied

right back on the floor. So it's essentially unreviewable then if the

state police make the determination this involves integrity

we're going to terminate somebody once those two

buttons are pushed then there's no review by the PAB.

I don't think it's unreviewable because there still has to be evidence that's put

before the PAB right if the state police with no evidence

or support whatsoever just says this officer lied

and then that gets appealed to the PAB they have nothing to substantiate

the fact that there was a lie that's still reviewable there would be

no evidence to base the state's decision on but in this case

there was evidence put forth that he lied I mean we have Trooper Owen's own

admission during his interview that the PAB was able to look at

to say okay here there is evidence that there was a lie

I don't think that this is an unreviewable issue.

It's either lie or no lie. I would say yes because

as I discussed earlier state police cannot be parsing hairs

about big lies and little lies. I mean all lies

show a tendency that you are willing to lie to cover yourself

state police can't take that risk that they wait until a big lie happens to get rid of someone

and that's why Troopers are terminated over these seemingly small issues

that are in fact indicative of a much larger character flaw

in policing. With that I will conclude.

You still have two minutes. Thank you. I'm sorry one minute. One minute. One minute. Thank you.

Thank you for your correct. Mr. Baudouin or Baudouin

you tell me which. It's Baudouin. Thank you.

Good morning if it pleases the court. My name is Mark Baudouin

and I'm an attorney with the law firm Milner and Kropsky here in Concord.

The distinct honor of representing Thomas Owens in this matter

are arguments based on two prongs here. First

that the PAV did find Trooper Owens credible in their decision

and second that even if

arguments say that they did not find him credible there's no

dominant public policy here that would prevent him from performing the duties of a trooper.

The state right now is attempting to re-litigate this case

but the PAV has brought authority under RSA 21-I

colon 58. They held a full evidentiary hearing on this matter

which lasted a full day. They heard testimony from several

witnesses to include Mr. Owens himself and they examined numerous

documents and exhibits as a result and they came to the determination

that Mr. Owens was terminated with unjustly in life

of the facts and evidence under the personnel role. So how do you reach the perhaps

review or how do you characterize the PAV's plan

and whether the integrity violation was sustained and is that something that we need to

address? That's a great question and I'm going to

address that is this. They found if you read the order

they said that they found that he said the consistent statements over and over again.

They also found that he didn't harbor any intentions to be deceitful towards his

employer and I think the concluding statement that they had in

their decision kind of spells us out and it says that I quote

the errors and omissions including failing to communicate his problems to his superiors

in a timely manner or record keeping and traveling

16 minutes on state time on the way to a detail wearing the wrong uniform

constitutes policy violations and warrant a suspension of

20 days without pay. What interestingly noted

missing out of that statement is the word integrity, credibility

or anything of that nature. So to me a reasonable person reading

this decision reads that they found incredible and that overturned

the alleged integrity violation.

So the state beliefs have a basis for replacing Mr. Owens on the EES?

They believe they did do it as a result of the termination

they did it at the same time. But again our argument is that he shouldn't be on the

EES because again the PAV found incredible

innocence overturned that decision of the integrity violation

and I think there's more evidence here of that to answer your question a little further

when the state filed motion for re-hearing it made

this argument as to why they should overturn or have another hearing

in our objection to that we clearly said

that the PAV overturned the integrity violation

to which the PAV responded with a simple deny. Now if we

correct in our assumption the PAV would have presumably

come out and said no you misunderstood us the integrity violation

is still there however we are still reinstating Mr. Owens.

That didn't happen in this case. So again which again would

lead a reasonable person to believe that they did

find incredible and they did overturn this violation.

Now to address the state's argument so even if you are going to

for argument's sake assume that maybe he still does have a capability issue

and we're looking at this dominant public policy that is supposedly out there

I think the state's lacking there as well too because no controlling

statutes, there's no regulations, common law or

applicable authority out there. They do cite this PAV commission

they do cite the social conversation that's going on

out there in the public right now. But if you look at Inray Pellum

where it says public policy is shaped by the confines of positive law

rather than general considerations of supposed public interest

Alright in this LEAC commission nowhere in there did they ask

for officers that had credibility or integrity issues be

summarily dismissed from employment. In fact this court heard

testimony on Tuesday about HP 471

which came out of the LEAC commission as well

the public was concerned that certain officers weren't having due process

on this EES last and were bringing that forward

even if that's not enough there are other case laws out there that

show that officers have returned to duty even with

so-called credibility issues. I point you to the appeal of

Armaganian. This court found that Armaganian did have a credibility

issue and mentioned it in its opinion.

He continued with his employment with the state police.

I would also point you to the appeal of Holston. Again it was found that Holston

had a credibility issue and he continued on with his

employment with the state police. Credibility issue or integrity issue

credibility integrity. I think it's synonymous with

and I think as Justice Hicks mentioned I think you're alluding to

this is a really kind of boils down to an evidentiary issue

that they retained as troopers. Yes they were both retained as troopers

and I'd also point you to a case that you're really familiar with is the

Ganter versus the City of Rochester. Officer Ganter was found and I believe the state also argued

that that case was fairly similar to this one in that it was a minor

integrity issue. Officer Ganter continued his employment

with the City of Rochester. So the argument that you can't be a police

officer because you have an integrity violation or because you're on the EES list

simply isn't true because it happens every day. Another

interesting side note which I thought about I found interesting with this particular case

was the ACLU filed an amicus brief here in this case.

And as well as the state brought it up too about how in Liac we're looking for

transparency and we're looking for accountability. That's exactly

what you had in this particular case. The PAB is a public hearing

this was a hearing out in the public there was no hiding this information.

It was on a board in front of a civilian board that's appointed. This

civilian board decided that it was unreasonable what the state police did to

Mr. Owens and they made that decision. At the end of the day

like I said it comes down to a evidentiary issue.

I think I can't remember which justice mentioned it

but really what you have here is you're asking the state is asking you

to basically say that it doesn't want to be subject to review.

Once the colonel makes up his mind that's it.

Those two prongs I think it was Justice Bassett that mentioned that once you push those two

buttons there's no more review. That simply can't be the case yet.

Do I understand you correctly that even if we interpret the order

as finding an integrity violation

that would not affect

the discretion that we give to the PAB

and that we should affirm?

First of all I don't think that was a credit. I think they overturned that integrity

violation but even for arguments sake that they didn't

I still think that there's no reason why Mr. Owens can't continue his employment

with the state police. Other officers have done it in the past.

Other officers still currently doing it right now. The state police is a large

organization that even if you didn't want him on the road there's other positions

that you could put him into where he would have the most likelihood of testifying

in court. And it would be up to the PAB to make those predation

calls. Small integrity issue versus

large integrity issue? No I'm not going to make that argument that

you know you have a small lie versus a big lie. I think

in this particular case I don't think he lied in this case. He did

he admitted to what he did with the facts. Everybody admitted that what he did on Tuesday

was an accident. It's when he came to the time card fixing the time card

that they had an issue with. And all he was trying to do when he did that

was to try to make the numbers work for the Garcia reporting period so that the computer

would accept his entry. When he was questioned about it by his

superiors. And as the PAB noted he consistently told them

the same thing for all four interviews. They

didn't like that answer. Is decertification another option for the state police?

I think

you can try to have a decertification hearing. However

I don't think it's appropriate in this manner. I don't think if you look under the

rules I don't think this would fit in the categories requesting a decertification here.

At the end of the day all the PAB found as I read it

is that he exercised poor judgment and not going immediately

to a supervisor to help work this issue out immediately.

And what I would like to point further too is under direct

testimony at the PAB. Colonel Wagner who was the colonel at the time

had made the comment that if he was his supervisor he probably

would have told Mr. Olsen to do the exact same thing that he did.

What the state police just doesn't like is that they weren't told about it first.

And that they found out about it after the fact. Again he fell on the sword

and he told them everything that he did and why he did it.

I believe why the PAB found him to be credible and why they reinstituted

him to his position. Because another thing that was mentioned

by the colonel was that the sole reason that they

terminated him was for the integrity issue. So again presumably

if the PAB is reinstating him they are overturning that integrity

violation. Are you aware of any

PAB case where we've looked to dominant public policy

as a grounds for overruling the PAB decision

and what are the pros and cons of

us adopting that approach? I am not aware of any specific

to the PAB. I know that attorney Garrowing mentioned

the one that she cited that involves the PLRB.

I think again if you're going to look at the dominant public policy

I think you really have to point to something other than just

the public's talking about this right now.

We had a LiAC committee. Some of those have been

turned into bills. Some have been passed. Others have not.

So I don't think there's enough there to point here to being a dominant

public policy. And again with having so many officers that are on this EES

list that are still working as police officers.

So in conclusion like I said we believe that

the PAB did hear a full evidentiary hearing on this matter.

They looked at a lot of documents that heard testimony. They made the appropriate

decision. They found that he was credible thus overturning the integrity

violation. And as a result

I don't think we even need to look to the public policy aspect of this

but we would ask that you affirm the PAB's decision

and that you reject the state's argument of the dominant public policy.

We would ask that if you have any further questions I'm willing to answer them but other than that

that would be my case submitted. Thank you council. Thank you very much.

Thank you I intend to be brief. I would just like to remind the

court that even if you do not find there's a dominant public policy which this

stands from that there is in fact a dominant public policy here. This court

also has the ability to reverse the PAB order on the grounds that it's unjust

and unreasonable. Reinstaining Trooper Owens

is unjust to the people of New Hampshire who expect a certain caliber

out of officers and expect that cops who lie are not going to be out on the streets

affecting arrests. And the PAB order is also unreasonable

to the Department of Safety Division of State Police who now has

to find a position where they can put this trooper who they themselves do not feel

is suitable to do policing activities. If

this court is to find that there's no dominant public policy there's this additional

off-ramp to reverse the PAB order on the grounds that it's unjust and reasonable.

So the state would ask that this court does reverse the

PAB order which would effectively uphold the

termination of Trooper Owens because failure to do that and affirming the

PAB order is going to put a bad cop back onto the floor.

Thank you. Thank you council. Case submitted. Court is adjourned.
