This is case 2021-0268, state of New Hampshire versus Samuel Marino.

Good morning. May it please the court. Kirsten Wilson for the appellant, Samuel Marino. I've

reserved two minutes. What the police were initially presented with in this case was

a concerned mother that indicated she was alarmed. She saw a text come through her daughter's

phone and she screenshotted it, and the person on the other end was alarmed, and she went

to the police with this information. In reality, what was discovered when there was expert

consultation done was the screenshots presented to the police were not in fact screenshots.

There were photographs of one phone photographing another phone. What also was apparent was the

conversations that were shown to the police were likely closed and reopened repeatedly

so that the receiving end, the mother's purported end, that part of the conversation was deleted.

Why is that important? It's important because of the overall question which I think the court

needed to ask is why would a mother purposely curate and obfuscate information that is relevant

to the crime? I think what's really important when you actually look at the expert's

report on page four of eight, that photograph actually is two phones talking about screenshots.

One of the phones has the initial M on it, possibly Makayla's talking with who seems

to be the mother about the conversation that was going on. When you think about

how this actually unfolds in reality, the mother and the daughter pursuant to testimony

trial were in what equates to a studio apartment. They shared a fulled out couch together. Through

the morning what the expert report shows is that there weren't screenshots that were

taken. They were photographs of a phone. Half the conversation was likely deleted

and at some point the mother and daughter start sending messages back and forth with what

is purported to be actual screenshots of Snapchat, which would have been available to the police.

What's important in that bottom image on page four of eight in the expert report is that

the daughter would have been involved in curating what was going to be presented

to the police. In reality, once we have the expert report actually done, there is a question

which Justice Stonovan you just asked. Why would, or my answer was, why would somebody

do this? Why would there be this careful curating of what's going to be not only presented

to the police but lies about what was done? The mother told the police that she got the

message, was alarmed, pretended to be Mikaela, screenshot the conversation and the defendant

in the case, Mr. Marino, was alarmed and said why did you do that and there was no more

conversation. None of that is accurate. What's further concerning is that once we

have the expert report and we look at what was actually presented at trial, the photographs

that are in the expert's report were completely further obfuscated by the state submitting

a chalk of a conversation. Exhibit two that was submitted at trial is not the, they're

not the photographs that were submitted to the police department. They are a carefully

manufactured chalk that makes it seem like an ongoing, consistent conversation between

two parties. That is not what happened. But even if the chalk is a misleading duration

of a purported conversation, where is the prejudice with respect to the exhibits and

the chalks? Particularly given the trial court's conclusion that the case essentially

frozen fall fell on the testimony of the victim, MS.

And I would submit that that is not supported by the facts of the case. The juvenile's

testimony was so conflicting each time she did offer a testimony that would

satisfy an element. There were numerous other occasions where she would say

things contradictory. But again, my question is where is the prejudice on

the chalks? Where, how do we find prejudice there?

Because even if you accept that the trial council strategy was one of saying that

the juvenile embellished, how better to cross examine that embellishment with

the fact that she appears to be part of manufacturing and carefully capturing

the underlying conversation to present to the police before her story is told.

So it would have been another line in the cross.

I think it would have been a very effective line of cross. Her going to

the CAC and recounting what happened as I tried to point out in the factual

section of the brief is replete with inconsistencies with leading in order

to get juvenile to hit the necessary elements. She was impeached so much

that CAC video and transcript came in because of the extent of the

impeachment. And so did it come in for substantive purposes?

It came in to assess credibility. But presumably Judge Honenberg knew all

of these issues and the challenges to her credibility. And here he was

the trial judge who's then ruling on the motion for new trial. And who

better to understand whether or not there was prejudice or not than the

trial judge. This isn't a case where there's a jury that could have been

misled. And trial courts often let in evidence for what it's worth.

Understood. And I would answer that by saying that respectfully, I think

Justice Honenberg didn't carry his analysis far enough under Wilbur. As the

courts aware, the court has to find there's a reasonable probability

sufficient to undermine the confidence in the outcome. The court failed in

this case to take the critical step of analyzing new information in the

totality of the evidence submitted at trial. So and when you read through his

order, he said, well, they could have used this to impeach the mom. And but the

mom's testimony didn't hit at the underlying elements. But the issue is

the entire origin of how this came to light to police, how this was

brought to the attention of the prosecution was that what they said

had happened did not happen. We know that from the experts report. And then

there is the enormous question. Why would an alarm mother, a trial victim go to

the extent of texting each other in a studio apartment of taking photographs

that they're then going to represent our screenshots screenshots that they

were explicit in describing how it occurred and the notice that went to

the defendant and how he reacted. And none of that happened. And we know that

from the snap that records just on that point. One of the points that I think

I gleaned from the expert report is those screenshots established nothing

as to the basic foundational elements of who sent the message and who

received the message. Sam exclamation point exclamation point could be

anyone. And and there is no, there was no

basis to conclude it was even the defendant. That's accurate. And that was

part of why I filed a reply brief in this circumstance was

it is easy to adopt that these were sent the Blender Rodriguez account

and a vanity name is very different from actually showing that this came

from a specific phone a specific person a specific Snapchat account

because anyone could make up a vanity name. Yes, the person receiving the

messages and put anyone's name in there. So it could have been the

mother texting with the grandmother or the mother texting with the

daughter and you change the name and therefore it can then

be purported to be absolutely anyone. I think in reviewing the case law,

I liken this case to Martin. Now Martin, the court really focused on the

fact that it was an expert. Dr. Gladstone in that case that impermissibly

bolstered the complainant's credibility. And I would submit the same

thing has happened here because of the chalks that were submitted

because detective Holland testified in a quasi summary record keeper

capacity but testified as to what the record showed and what they the

company kept or did not keep in a sexual assault type case. The court

is hardly ever presented with corroborating evidence. So did the

state have access to your to Mr. Marina? They did not. They did not

seize it. Just just on the phone dump issue was is that part of your

prejudice analysis the failure to do one? It certainly is. And just

because we're running out of time is is. I isn't the cross that plays

on that issue sufficient with Detective Mulholland. Yes, the

juvenile with the detective Mulholland. I mean, the issue is

whether the the investigating agency should have done a forensic

analysis of the phone. Going back to that bottom photograph on

page four of eight. If that is McKayla, the juvenile in this case

representing that she has taken screenshot and she's sending it

to her mother, that would be in the phone. They looked at

Snapchat. They did not look in her phone. And there are things

that can be recovered. And so I think it just it does seem like

an animating. Thrust of the at least the initial investigation

was Snapchat. Snapchat communications are

automatically deleted so there's no point in doing a forensic

examination of the phone.

But I think that the records that were obtained and submitted

as for ID exhibit for for ID at the trial show that it's not

that simple. There were actual conversations that were captured.

There were times there's a lot of information in there that

again was further obfuscated by the way it was presented. And

that never came in as a full exhibit. It did not. And there's

some discussion in the state's brief about exhibit three. Is

that is that an issue here?

I didn't review exhibit three before I came in. I have pulled

up exhibit two, one and four. The biggest concern from my

perspective is exhibit two, because even what they did have

in their possession without doing all the necessary

investigation as I would submit, they did have in their

possession. There were problems with it. It was

presented to the court as technical, hard, unbiased

evidence that corroborated and impermissibly bolstered.

How should the evidence have come in on exhibit two?

On exhibit two, I think that the appropriate thing, first of

all, would have been for trial counsel to have an expert so

that they could have examined and that to could be a

chalk for closing arguments. But the underlying

screenshot should have been submitted and all of the

problems that were outlined and the bias and why they would

be lying about the foundation of this needed to be explored,

especially if the strategy was one of saying that the

juvenile embellished, ignoring expulsory evidence that the

trial counsel had in his possession is never a good

trial strategy.

Thank you. Thank you. May it please the court. Good

morning, your honors. Adriana McCullohanson for the state. My

colleague started her argument by talking with you about a lot

of facts that establish a sound trial strategy. But

establishing a sound trial strategy is not the test for

determining actual prejudice. The test for actual

prejudice is is there a reasonable probability that

the outcome that the confidence in the outcome is

undermined by defense counsel's performance. And

that's not at issue here. There is no actual prejudice in

this case. For one, my colleague has not established that

actual prejudice in her brief. She did not put any facts in her

brief about it, and she did not present any argument. The

first argument you've heard about actual prejudice at the

appellate level was during her oral argument this morning.

Secondly, the trial court found the victim credible. And

that credibility, the victim was the only witness at trial

who put forth any evidence relative to the charge. How do

we know that that credibility termination wasn't

tainted by, shall I say, the potential for tampered

evidence behind that chalk? How do we how do we separate

those two things in the court's mind? So you can

separate by reading the trial court's order and the trial

courts and a page of his order talking about the victim's

credibility and how he found, at least in the digital

evidence that there was no evidence of the charged

conduct, either the image or the message in those

chalks that were submitted. And he focused solely on the

victim's...

But he didn't have the images behind the chalk.

That is true, Your Honor. He did not. However, Rule 106

allows the state or any proponent of evidence to present a

chalk or some sort of summary of...

But it wasn't a chalk. It came in as full evidence. And part

of your argument is, as a matter of law, it should have

been admitted. There was a proper foundation for each one

of the statements in Exhibit 2 that there was evidence about

who sent the message and who received the message and that

it's admissible for hearsay purposes. I mean, how can

that possibly be the conclusion based on the record that

was laid? I mean, the colloquy between the prosecutor and

the mother, which was the principal basis for this

exhibit coming in, was simply this. I'm going to ask you a

couple of questions. Do you recognize these messages pointing

to Exhibit 2? Yes, I do. And are those, I guess, a fair and

accurate description depiction of the messages you were

able to screenshot that day? Yes. And it's on that basis

that this comes in and all the states come in as evidence?

That is true, Your Honor. It did come in as evidence.

However, the trial court determined that the relevant

material evidence to the charges all came from solely the

victim's credibility. My question to you, accepting the

defendant's argument here, that it was in fact prejudicial, how

is that correct as a matter of law? I mean, that is part of

your argument that it should have come in under Rule 901.

That is part of my argument, Your Honor. And I think if

you disagree with that argument, it doesn't, it's not

a death knell for the state's case. And that's

because even failure to object to one item of evidence in

a trial does not equal actual prejudice, unless that

evidence is so prejudicial for the defendant that it

changes the outcome of the case. And that's just not the

case here, because those messages, while they were

testified to about the mother and they were really the

catalyst for reporting it to the police, they don't

include the charged message and they obviously don't

include the charged image. Well, after this Exhibit

comes in, she's asked to read the stream of

messages as if these messages actually occurred in

real time. And we know that is not the case. And it seems

to me that is pretty close to the line of prejudicial in

terms of misrepresenting what actually happened.

I see your point, Your Honor, and that I think would

have been a sound trial strategy. But the trial

counsel's defense strategy that he used was to

undermine the victim's credibility was an equally

sound trial strategy. And while that may be the

strategy you would have taken or attorney Wilson would

have taken, it is not the strategy that defense took

in this case. And I know that part of the standard for

deficient performance and really for ineffective

assistance of counsel is to eliminate the

distorting effects of hindsight. And that's, I

think, what gets to the heart of the issue with

the text. They put the defense could have and

maybe did consult an expert. Frankly, we do not

know if defense counsel consulted with an

expert, because no one called the defense

attorney at the motion for a new trial hearing to

ask him and no one to post him, at least that I

have a record of. Well, if he did consult with an

expert, why wouldn't he use that information? I

mean, that that's even more founding, I think, if

he had this information and to use it. But there

is a concern with throwing plenty of defenses at

a wall and seeing what sticks, right? I think

it's spaghetti analogy of throwing a plate of

speaker at a wall and seeing what sticks on it.

You can't use multiple defenses at your

trial and then expect the track finder,

whether it be a judge or a jury to find

credibility in that defense strategy. It would

be a better strategy, I think, which is what

this attorney here was to pick one theory of the

defense and one theory of the case and put it

forward throughout the entire case. And his

defense strategy, which was sound, was to

attack the victim's credibility, not simply

and ignore tribe evidence regardless. I don't

think it to ignore it, but I think to

diminish its importance because it has

nothing to do with the charged conduct.

From his perspective, from his perspective,

the victim offered the only direct evidence

of the crimes in this case. And I don't

even think that some of these text messages

are circumstantial evidence of the crime,

given the indecent exposure charges.

And who sent them? And that foundation was

never been laid.

And frankly, I don't think even the state,

the defendant's expert could have laid it. As

you pointed out with my colleague, the

expert could not say who sent those

messages. And there was testimony at the

trial about the difference between a

vanity name and a username. And so that

was already admitted a trial. There was

cross examination of the detectives

about their lack of investigation into

the case. And while the defense in his

closing could have tied that in more

effectively, making his argument about

the lack of evidence in the case, that was

not his sound trial strategy. His sound

trial strategy was that the victim was

incredible. Not just because she was

embellishing, but because she had

provided so many inconsistent statements

about the charged image and the

charged message. And that was really the

heart of the case.

But given the allegation about how the

image came, which is at the heart of

both charges, wouldn't the

lack or wouldn't the exclusion of any

evidence regarding Snapchat communications

been absolutely crucial to the defense?

No, Your Honor, I don't think so. And

that's because the direct evidence of

the crime came from the victim. So

whether a thousand Snapchat messages

came in or one Snapchat message came

in, the trial court would have still

been tasked with determining the

credibility of the only witness who

had direct evidence of the crime. So

I think at that point, the trial

court in his order indicated that

that's what he really used to make his

finding, that he focused on the

victim's credibility. He received

all this new evidence and even made

some findings that there was some

deficient performance for lack of

hiring an expert to consult with

or challenging the image as a trial,

which I will get to if I have time.

But despite all of that, even if he

had all of that come in a trial, he

could have considered all of that

evidence to discount the exhibits

that were admitted. He still found

the victim's testimony credible to

the two charges. So is there some

significance to the fact that this

was a bench trial as opposed to a

jury trial? I think there is, Your

Honor, and I think that's based on

the trial strategy or the decision to

have that trial strategy that the

defendant selected or his attorney

selected. And I say that

because maybe you would more heavily

guard against exhibits coming in

with messages that we don't know who

sent what if you had a 12-member

jury who's not so sophisticated in

the rules of evidence or how to weigh

certain pieces of evidence based on

cross-examination about those

exhibits. But in this case, we had a

trial judge who was acting as a

fact finder, but he is a judge

and he's more knowledgeable about

what weight to give certain pieces

of evidence based on others. And

so he would have known from...

Oh no, I'm sorry. Go ahead.

That's okay. So should it matter

to our analysis that the trial

judge and the judge who considered

the motion for new trial were the

same? Should that matter? It does

matter. I think in that you can

give enhanced difference even to

the facts, the factual findings

that the trial court made at the

motion for new hearing. And I say

that because this is perhaps the

best evidence that this court would

have of what the fact finder was

thinking at trial and how the

fact finder was affected by the

evidence that came in and the

defense strategy that was

employed at trial. Right? We don't

normally have... We don't have the

ability to depose 12 jurors for a

motion for a new trial hearing to

see how they would have considered

new expert information or new

cross-examination lines. But you

do have that in this case. You

do have Jeff Ponegberg saying,

yes, this may have come in. Yes,

it would have undermined the

mother's credibility. Yes, it

would have undermined the police

investigation. The police

investigation was already

undermined. But either way, I

focus on the victim's

credibility. I found the victim

credible, despite what was

argued at the motion for a new

trial. If there are no more

questions about prejudice, I

would like to move for a few

minutes if I have them on my

deficient performance argument

because I do think this court

should consider reviewing that

decision by Jeff Ponegberg and

reversing that decision by

Jeff Ponegberg. And I'll

explain why. I think that

finding creates some

challenging precedent for the

criminal defense bar in

New Hampshire. It would

essentially require criminal

defense attorney to consult

with an expert in almost any

case where there's digital

evidence, regardless of how

voluminous that digital

evidence is, regardless of how

knowledgeable the attorney

already is about that

evidence and regardless of how

that evidence relates to the

charges. And that's because

he's essentially saying, even

though I did not find there

was any actual prejudice in

this case, the lack of

cross examination regarding the

digital evidence due to a lack

of consulting with an expert

is deficient performance. And

as you all are well aware,

there is no per se rule in

New Hampshire that requires

defense to hire an expert

witness. But this is a

professional conduct that

requires counsel to be

familiar with technology and

to be competently familiar

with technology, right? That

is true. And for all we know

this trial counsel was

competent and knew this

information. We don't know

because nobody called him at

the motion for new trial

hearing. And so we don't

know what his knowledge level

was. We don't know if he

decided it's not worth it to

attack these snapchat records

because my defense at trial is

going to be the victim's

credibility. And because I

have a bench trial, I know I

can focus solely on that and

not any of the other

evidence. We don't know. But

this ruling standing the way

it is would require in

almost every case where

there's text messages,

snapchat records, Facebook

messenger for defense to

get an expert. And having

prosecuted almost every case

that I ever had had some

form of digital evidence,

whether it was text messages

after the crime, whether it

was text messages to set up a

drug deal. But we concede

it's relatively unusual for

our law enforcement agency

not to do a fling dump in a

case where digital evidence

is so crucial. And shouldn't

his finding be considered in

the context of that fact?

That is true, Your Honor.

However, under the Lewandowski

petition of state appeal,

which I have the site for

somewhere in my notes,

there's no requirement for

the state to investigate

the defendant's case.

And I understand your point

that the police maybe should

have done a cell phone dump

of the victim's phone.

However, they did not in this

case. But there's also then

no requirement that the

state preserve that evidence

and provide it to the

defense to investigate

their defense for them.

And consulting with an

expert in this case, again,

would have just revealed,

I know that the expert

wrote his six issues out.

Some of those issues were

already addressed during

cross examination.

And so if that's the value

of what the expert constant

is providing is six lines

of cross examination, some of

which were already explored

in this case.

That's unduly not as

effectively, but that's

because trial counsel's

strategy was

You can't get off the

credibility of the evidence.

Your Honor, I don't know

if I can help you.

But to try to help you

see Judge Honigberg's point,

I think because he was

a trial judge, he could

effectively, obviously,

determine the victim's

credibility not only

in her spoken words,

but in her affect

and how she delivered

that testimony.

And I know I pointed out

any probing as to messages

reflected in the chalks

were created.

And frankly, Your Honor, maybe

she, maybe the victim appeared

from the trial counselor's

perspective to be

sufficiently challenged

on her credibility regarding

the elements of the offenses.

I think from the record,

at least a trial, she had

been cross examined

for a couple hours.

And I'm sure her direct was

maybe not two hours long,

but was probably lengthy.

She was 12 or 13

at the time of the trial

and 11 at the time of the crime

and was frankly so embarrassed

or nervous or whatever word

you want to put on it

that she couldn't even say

the word of what was

in the picture that she received.

She had to circle it

in an image.

And so I think both trial

counsels made the decision

not to push her any further.

Because while we all need

to prove our case

and while we all need to make

sure the defendant's rights

are protected, we also

don't need to be further

traumatizing 12-year-old

victims of crimes.

Right.

But to your deficient,

the strategy of attacking

for credibility just seems to me

to bleed into the rest

of these exhibits.

I understand, Your Honor.

Yep.

So from another perspective

of deficient performance,

I also would just like to point

out that some of the defendant's

arguments in his deficient

performance section were not

preserved below for the trial

court's review.

And that would be specifically

the arguments about the lack

of cross-examination

and the lack of objection

to the exhibits.

Those were discussed

at the Motion for New Trial

hearing.

But they were discussed.

I referred to them as results.

But those were discussed as

that was what occurred

because the defense attorney

had not consulted with an

expert and had not then

challenged those screenshots

at trial.

But not preserved as an

exception or an objection?

Correct.

And also not preserved

as two additional findings

of deficient performance.

And so I think asking you

to add those deficient

performance findings to the

findings that Judge Honigberg

already made would be

inappropriate.

Because he did not have the

opportunity to hear of it

or he heard evidence,

obviously, but have the

opportunity to determine

legally if those two pieces

were also two other

deficient performances

by trial counsel.

If there are no further

questions, I'll give my red

light to Son.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Thank you, Willis.

I want to briefly touch upon

Attorney McCulloch-Hanson's

deficient performance

strong argument.

And I would just simply note

along with the rule of

professional conduct that

the judge in his order cites

do guess versus Copeland

and says more of our

consultation with an expert

may be required in a case

when the validity of the

government's proposed

evidence is in question.

Or when technical or expert

evidence about which trial

counsel lacks knowledge forms

a cornerstone of the

government's case.

In Marston, in this case,

in most similar cases,

the complainant's credibility

is everything.

And when there is something

such as a business record

that purports the unbiased

immovable and it is presented

in a way that completely

corroborates what the mother

said, what the daughter said

without diving into why

the two of them were

working together to manufacture

exhibits that morning,

it is such that you do need

to consult with an expert.

Maybe you wouldn't if these

were actual screenshots that

lined up with the actual

records, but they are not.

And this has everything

to do with the credibility.

The issue I take with Judge

Honegger's order is he

essentially puts a cofferdam

around the mother's testimony,

the detective's testimony

and says, well, you could

have cross-examined them.

I believe the victim.

And he doesn't take the

additional step under Weber

of Wilbur, I'm sorry,

of looking and saying,

how is this viewed in the

totality of the evidence

that came in at trial?

And if the challenge strategy

is one to go after her

credibility, trial counsel

had in his file photographs

that didn't line up

with the exhibit submitted,

that didn't line up

with the testimony,

that didn't line up with

any of the information

that he had prior to trial.

And I think Judge Honegger

failed to look at this

new evidence in the totality

of the evidence, how it could

have affected the juvenile

witness.

I do think because of that,

his decision to set her aside

away from all of the

information that came out

about the Snapchat stories

was unsupported by the evidence.

I also think because it didn't

look at the totality, how

this would have affected

her credibility is erroneous

as a matter of law.

Ms. Wilson, can I just ask you

to address the state's

argument about preservation

that she closed her argument

with?

Well, I think it's hard for

somebody to object and argue

things that he wasn't aware

of from what we have

in the record.

He did not pursue the expert

analysis.

And so how does he cross-examine

on it?

How does he object to things

that would have been exposed

if he had that?

Doesn't that all depend a bit

on the level of technical

knowledge that counsel had?

And counsel never was called

to testify at the hearing.

Maybe counsel had great knowledge

about this and therefore didn't

need an expert.

If counsel had great knowledge

about this and his trial strategy

was one of impeachment

on credibility, this immovable

unbiased information would have

been critical to challenge

and ask them about.

And even looking at the judge's

order, two quick sites, I know

my light is on.

The trial court in its own order

referred to the snapshot

and screenshot evidence

as crucially important

to the state's case

and inflicting damning effects

on the defense and goes on

to say that law enforcement's

failure to conduct forensics

was a critical investigatory

mistake.

Critical, crucial damning.

Thank you, Attorney.
