This is case 2021-0419 in the matter of Alden Satis and Courtney Crabtree-Satis.

Morning, Council.

Attorney Woodbury, I understand you reserved two minutes.

Result.

Please proceed.

Good morning, Mr. Chief Justice, members of the Honorable Court.

My name is William D. Woodbury, and I represent Courtney Cressado, formerly Satis who is with

us in the Court here today along with her husband Ivan Cressado of three years.

As you say, I've asked for a 15-minute oral argument and reserved two.

I would also waive the three-minute waiting period for questions if it pleased the Court.

By way of very brief history, just to establish some timelines, the parties in this case were

married in 2012, and at the time Ms. Cressado's son D.B. was about two-and-a-half years old,

sir and son from a previous relationship.

The parties together had another son, J.S., some years later, and in April of 2016,

the parties separated.

And by October of 2016, it was clear that Ms. Cressado needed to address some issues with

substance abuse, substance addiction, and at that time she expressly agreed with the appellee

that he would retain care of the two children while she sought that treatment.

But the parenting plan didn't address D.B., did it?

Why is that?

It simply did not, Your Honor.

It was not, it is my understanding, it was not the intent at the time to formally create

a parenting plan for D.B., D.B. is D.B. is the appellate son only, and it was not a mistake.

It was the intent of the parties at the time.

I was not counsel at that time, but that was an affirmative action on the part of

the parties at that time to not create that parenting plan.

What was the father's status at the time that he was caring for the child?

What was the father's status at the time he was caring for the child?

The biological father?

No, the step-parent here, the father.

At the time of the divorce?

No, during the period of time he was caring for the child.

When you say what was his status?

Was he a step-parent?

Was he a local parentess?

What was he?

I think, Your Honor, that it would be the most logical argument to say that he was in local

parentess at the time.

They were divorced, and as we have cited in our materials, if we look to Reuben v. Reuben,

the step-parent relationship terminates at the time of the dissolution of marriage.

But certainly, when he was caring for those children by himself, he did stand in local

parentess to D.B.

So what terminated in local parentess?

Well first, Your Honor, by 2019, summer of 2019, Ms. Crisato had gotten her life and her health

together.

She was working.

She transferred her work back from the western part of the state to the Plymouth area, was

working in a restaurant, and that's when the parties began sharing equal parenting

time, nearly equal to equal parenting time.

The argument we would make, Your Honor, is that first, at that time, when the appellee makes

the decision, or agrees with the appellant, that it is in the best interest of the child,

that the child had nearly equal to equal parenting time with each parent, he no longer

stands in local, he no longer is the sole parent of the child.

One can say that if he is, well, and then the most, I think, clear, the most clear line to

be drawn with respect to his and local parentess status is in May of 2020.

So in May of 2020, he sends a series of texts to the appellant, indicating that D.B.

is having behavioral issues.

And these texts, the full call, can be found in the appendix, the appellant appendix, specifically

46 to 61, but at page 61, we have the text that is most pertinent, and he indicates

at that time, and I apologize for profanity, but he indicates, quote, I'm not tolerating

it anymore.

It's terrible.

He's an asshole.

He's so disrespectful, speaking of D.B.

Right now, I don't want anything to do with him, and he needs to understand that it was

at that point that he told the appellant that she was going to care for him at this time.

But don't we owe deference to the trial court in terms of the existence of the and local

parentess relationship or the strength of it, and didn't the trial court address that?

The trial court, respectfully, I think the trial court was somewhat, there wasn't a great

deal of analysis occurring with the trial court at the time.

The trial court looked to, I think the Bodwell case almost solely, that was briefed by the

appellee at that time, I don't think the Bodwell case is particularly applicable in

this matter.

I think they are using the Bodwell case to suggest that a step parent can be afforded standing

outside a divorce scenario, but Bodwell was a very different case.

Bodwell was a case where the husband thought he was the father of the child.

He was still married to the bio mother, and finds out to the course of events that

he's not the father.

So he is the step parent.

He's still married to the bio mom, but he had also signed an affidavit of paternity.

In that case, he was clearly in local parentess.

It doesn't matter that Bodwell was decided when the family division was in the superior

court and was acting as a court of equity in parenting issues, sort of aside from divorce.

Does it matter that there's been a change and now we're in a circuit court with specific

dictates, if you will, statutory dictates as to what the court can consider?

No, I think it's certainly an important consideration, Your Honor, but if we're looking specifically,

I assume, Your Honor, you're referring to 461A65.

And with respect to 461A65, to paraphrase it, that statute indicates that a person who is

a step parent is able to decision for parental rights over a child.

And the distinction we're making here is that the step parent relationship pursuant to

case law ends at the time of dissolution of the marriage.

However, if the step parent or former step parent remains in local parent status, then

certainly that individual would be able to petition for parental rights under the case

law.

However, in this particular instance, Mr. Satis had voluntarily relinquished his in

local parent status by virtue of saying, I'm not dealing with him anymore.

You take care of him, and DB remained with the appellant for a period of six months before

he even filed a petition.

He had relinquished that in local parent status to say that in local parent status

persists indefinitely, I think, is contrary to the law.

There's nothing in the Hampshire law that would suggest that just because one has

established in local parent status at one time, that that endures.

But again, isn't that a factual determination?

How are we to make that type of determination about the strength and duration of the

relationship?

Because, Your Honor, I think that the trial court, when it rendered its opinion, it

ignored it.

In fact, it found in local parent status specifically citing Baudwell, leaning heavily

on Baudwell.

But as we have said, Baudwell is applicable here.

It's a far different set of facts, far different conditions, far different

status of the stepfather by virtue of the fact that stepfather thought the child was

his, signed an affidavit of paternity, and then finds out while still married to

the biome mom that he's the stepfather.

He's in local parent status.

He's still taking care of the children.

In this case, this individual voluntarily relinquished that status.

There is no way for anyone to, for an objective observer to say that once he has,

he said, I'm not taking care of this child anymore.

He is not taking any responsibility for that child's care.

He has said, I'm not doing.

And for six months prior to the petition, she has sold custody of the child.

The trial court engaged in the best interest analysis and found that he

should have a stepparent relationship with the child.

So how do we get around that?

I think the trial court engaged in the best interest analysis after finding that

there was standing, which we appeal.

The best interest analysis, I think we can't get there until we establish

that there is in fact standing.

And the trial court says, and I'll paraphrase, the exact quote is escaping me,

but the trial court basically said, regardless of what the legal issues are in this case,

it's in the best interest that DB maintain a relationship with this person,

regardless of the legal issues in the case.

It needs to be understood by all parties in this matter, by everyone involved,

the appellant does not deny that there is a relationship between Mr. Sadis and DB.

She does not deny that there is love there.

She does not deny that there should be an ongoing relationship.

It doesn't seek to terminate it.

However, what the appellant is saying is that if a stepparent, a former stepparent,

can nearly four years later come into a situation where he does not stand

in local practice, is not caring for the child,

doesn't for some time, and against the objection of the biological parent,

against the objection of a fit biological parent,

who is actually caring for the child, seek parental rights.

Would your argument be different if you were seeking for strictly visitation?

I'm sorry.

Would your argument be different if you were seeking visitation as opposed to parental rights?

Yes, because essentially that gets us to where we believe we should be

if he is simply seeking time with the child,

but is not seeking decision-making for medical relocation,

education.

The appellate suggests that there is, it would lead to an absurd result

if the court were to find that the stepparent relationship ends upon dissolution.

But the absurdity, I think, lies in if you were to suggest that every stepparent

in a scenario where during the minority of a child there's multiple marriages

and multiple stepparents, which is a real possibility and really occurs,

that all these stepparents can come in at various times.

Is that exactly why the statute is written to say to a stepparent

that we can grant reasonable visitation privileges to a party who is a stepparent?

So doesn't that contemplate this decision gets made at the time of divorce?

It doesn't say former stepparent.

Precisely, Your Honor, and one of the things that the trial court did,

in its opinion, is it cites to Black's law dictionary.

But Black defines stepparent as, quote,

the spouse of one's mother or father by a later marriage.

If it were logical that a stepparent was either the current or former spouse

of one's mother or father, then it would be defined as such.

It is not.

I think the trial court in this case was, I see my red light is on.

May I continue? Go ahead and finish your sentence.

I'm sorry.

I think with great respect to the trial court, I think in this case

the trial court was anxious to get past the standing issue.

The trial court at various times during the argument kept saying

that this is a no-brainer.

I would argue it's a full-brainer.

And it must be analyzed thoroughly.

Thank you very much.

Thank you.

We bring in reserve time during Ketzer-Evers.

Good morning, Your Honor.

My name is John Ketzer-Evers.

I'm with the Schwartzberg law firm in Plymouth, New Hampshire.

I present Alden Sadis, who's seated in the courtroom today.

He is the European.

I'd like to address these arguments.

So first of all, it was my understanding that we're doing an interlocutory appeal

on simply one question of law.

And that is, as the justice brought up, what is a stepparent,

was a stepparent, et cetera, et cetera.

I think the whole case hinges on that analysis.

So I'm going to start there.

We all agree that under no circumstances are parental rights

and responsibilities handed over to anyone who's not a biological parent

or a stepparent or a grandparent.

That was the box that we're working in.

So in the trial, if the child were to spend two years with an uncle

by agreement of the parent, that doesn't converse.

And even if that uncle develops an uncle-parent status.

Yes, sir. That's absolutely right.

And isn't the box a little bit smaller because we're dealing with a fit parent here?

We're not dealing with an unfit parent.

Well, I meant to say, with a fit parent, yes.

Anybody can get parenting rights if the parent is unfit.

But that's not for today.

Both parents are fit parents for the purposes of this analysis,

and that's how we're going forward.

So apologies for the confusion.

So just to tidy up the facts a little bit,

I understand that the appellant has an idea of what the facts may be,

but I'm working on what the facts were as found by the court.

The trial court heard these arguments, many of these arguments,

and made specific rulings.

The court ruled that Mr. Sadis stands in local parent days with the child.

The analysis was done.

The issue is, because the timing of the request for parenting rights

took place after the divorce, we were led to understand

that this can't happen because he's not a step parent anymore.

He's a former step parent.

There's no definition for former step parent anywhere.

It's sort of just a logical conclusion.

But the case law seems to suggest that these things do happen after

and that a status of step parent continues

as long as the in local parent days standing also travels with it.

And yet a step parent has no obligation to support that child post-divorce.

No support.

We didn't come up with the law.

But that's an interesting point.

The rationale behind that was the obligation to support a step child

came from a specific statute.

And this court analyzed other jurisdictions that had similar statutes

and found out where that came from.

And those statutes were specifically designed around,

I believe the quote was, with a collateral valid marriage.

So therefore the duty, the obligation only exists in the context

of a valid marriage once the valid marriage ended.

So did that.

Does your client's status as a step parent influence in any way?

The appellant's husband's ability to adopt the child?

No pressure.

Well, that's an argument for another day.

And I don't think I'm prepared to answer that question.

Your Honor, I apologize.

I certainly know how we would argue in favor of the step parent.

But if I can just conject, there have been issues where grandparents

have had some parenting rights.

There was an adoption.

And the same argument was made,

grandparents are not grandparents after the adoption

of the thirsty ticket.

But they're biological.

But they're biological.

So where a biological relationship is physical

and a step parent relationship is based on law,

I can see that we may be hearing it.

So was in loco parent status terminated?

According to the trial board, it was not.

So is that a question of fact or a question of law?

That is going to be entirely a question of fact.

And a question of fact that was already determined by the law

or court because we discussed it.

I believe the word that was used by Brother Counsel was ousted.

And the text messages that came in that he points to

say things like, right now I don't want anything to do with it.

And without going through the whole process again,

this is a contextual situation.

This gentleman was raising this child alone

without support, financial or otherwise.

And raising children is difficult.

And at some point he wanted mom to step up and do her share.

And this response is a response of frustration.

It's not, I never want to see this kid again.

I don't want him to be part of my life.

It's nothing like that.

It was just, can you do your share?

But it lasted for six months.

Say again?

It lasted for six months.

Yes, sir.

But at any rate, the rest of the findings are that

this child, Alden Sadis is the only father he's ever known.

He was raised.

The brothers are together as brothers.

They do their activities together.

They go hiking, they go fishing.

Everything that they know from a very young age

was done as a family.

So as far as the kids and the father are concerned,

there is no change.

And that can't continue without this court intervention

and establishment of rights in the former step-brother?

Can't that relationship continue with the step-brother?

Well, not necessarily.

That's going to be up to the parent.

If the biological parent, my understanding

would be if she says you're never

seeing this child again, that's her fault.

But actually, as a parent, she can do that.

What this case today is going to decide is,

does the step-parent have some rights?

Actually, that's not what it's going to.

I think what we need to determine is, is he a step-parent?

Because if he is not a step-parent,

and the timing is critical.

In other words, the request for parental rights

has to happen during the divorce.

Then we're out.

We're done.

And what I'm describing as an absurd result is,

we know step-parents can't have parenting rights.

I mean, excuse me.

Only step-parents can have these parenting rights.

So all the cases where step-parents now have parenting rights

are going to look at this case and say,

well, wait a minute.

That person is not a step-parent anymore.

Can't I just come back to court

and strip them of all these parenting rights responsibilities?

And the answer would presumably be yes.

So is it your view that in Locoparentis is,

or is not an independent basis

for sustaining the trial court's ruling?

Is it independent from the step-parent issue or not?

Our position is that they should come together.

I mean, you have to have a step-parent relationship

and that in Locoparentis stand together,

and it must continue.

So certainly what I think counsel brought up is

it would be absurd for, say, a step-parent 13 years later

to say all of a sudden,

oh, I've decided I now want parenting rights.

Can't I do that?

Well, no, you didn't have that

in Locoparentis relationship,

so you're out in that sense too.

How about serial step-parents?

Age one to four, there's a marriage.

Age four to eight, there's another marriage.

Do we have multiple step-parents?

You can, but again, the critical part of the analysis

is what is the relationship between these two human beings?

Where does that particular step-parent stand?

Right, so at the time of divorce,

step-parent number one gets part of the parenting plan.

Now there's another marriage,

and then there's a divorce, a period of time,

and then the second step-parent comes back.

So do we have three parents?

I think you do.

Yes, Your Honor.

Well, in that case, the parenting plan

at the time of divorce addresses that issue.

So you're assuming in your hypothetical

that the step-parent hasn't addressed,

hasn't created a parenting plan

that includes parenting rights

at the time of divorce.

If we decide that you need to address this

at the time of divorce

in an initial parenting plan,

then there's much of a problem.

We're not upsetting the apple cart.

If that's the decision,

then yes, Your Honor, that's exactly what would happen.

Our position is that a lot of times,

this case is a prime example,

at the time of the divorce,

there was no need for him to ask

for parental rights and responsibilities.

He had it.

There is a dispute over the agreed upon,

or expressly agreed situation

where he would take care of,

where elder status would take care of her child.

What in fact happened is she had some personal problems

he had to address and both children

were simply left in his care.

Yes, but there was a parenting plan

for the other child, wasn't there?

There was.

I wasn't part of this case.

I understand.

Yep, and it was certainly

could have been handled differently

and shouldn't have been handled.

Your response to Justice Bassett

is that the local parentess

and step-parent analysis

I guess converge for purposes of this,

the appellee's position.

I mean, how do we reconcile that

with the plain language of the statute?

So, you have to have both.

One, alone, separate,

does not convey stand.

You have to have,

be married to the biological parent

and have raised the child as your own

and that should,

as our argument is,

that should endure beyond

the finality of the divorce.

So, in other words,

the relationship between father and son

is not going to change.

The child doesn't understand

what a divorce is,

presumably.

All he knows is one day

his dad's gone

and that is what we've got

to make sure doesn't happen.

In this case, it's older children.

It's not going to be

as much of a terrible result,

but certainly in the case of younger children,

that's precisely...

Well, you say,

we need to make sure that doesn't happen,

isn't that what's supposed to be dealt with

at the time of the divorce?

That's where it should be addressed, right?

It seems like maybe

we're trying to fit a round peg

into a square hole here

where there's a place where it fits pretty well.

Ideally, in an ideal, perfect world,

that's how it should be done,

but there are going to be cases

such as this where

prosaise did the divorce...

For any number of reasons,

I don't know what the reasons are here,

but it slipped through the cracks

and D.B. was left out.

He shouldn't have been.

It was an error.

So in cases of those errors,

I think we should fill in that crack

and the light's...

the yellow light's on so I can continue.

I just want to hit a couple more quick points.

So I guess I'll just go over this.

The voluntarily relinquished

and it didn't happen.

It was not found by the court.

I believe that we are here

to determine the timing.

The trial court's order actually says

I don't see how the timing matters

and the judge is referring to

the timing of the divorce.

He was a step-parent.

Arguably is a step-parent

for the purposes of this

conveying of parental rights and responsibilities.

If he's not,

he's out the door,

but so is so many other folks

that are in similar situations.

I think I would yield the balance of my time.

Thank you very much.

Thank you, Attorney Woodbury.

Thank you to Attorney Contreras.

I just want to address briefly

the issue of ouster.

The appellee says repeatedly

in their briefs and here today

that there was no finding of ouster.

There's also no denial of it.

When one reviews text message

in the actual events that occurred,

there cannot be a denial.

But there was ouster.

He said he was no longer going to take care of the child

and the child went to the appellant

and remained there and thrived there

for a period of six months

before petition was even entered.

And I think if we...

Your question, with respect to

what is this factual

or is this legal,

the judge says that,

regardless of the legal issues here,

it's in the best interest of DB

that there be a relationship.

But in local practice,

it means in place of the parents.

And how does one ride at the conclusion?

How does one make a decision

that supposes that the legal definition

of in-local parenthesis

or in-local parenthesis status

endures somehow when the child is...

or when the parent asserting

in-local parenthesis status

is not caring for the child?

If in-local parenthesis status is

in place of the parent

and they are not in place of the parent,

the legal...

the analysis of the legal definition

of the term in local parenthesis

would necessarily lead you to the conclusion

that he is not in local parenthesis.

I know that's convoluted,

but it's the...

I think the judge improperly,

for lack of a better word,

applied that

and saying that they're...

that he stood in local parenthesis

when there was no

way to find

that he was caring for the child.

Thank you very much.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you very much.

Thank you, Your Honor.
