This is 2021-0153, appeal of Fran Rancourt.

Good afternoon.

Good afternoon.

Mary Johnson, reserve one minute.

Thank you.

Good afternoon, Your Honors.

I'm pleased to be here representing Miss Rancourt, Dr. Rancourt,

who is a university vice president of the New Hampshire system.

She's a highly educated individual who suffered a head injury at work,

leading to severe post concussion and visual disturbance issues,

which have continuously totally disabled her.

The CAB decision reducing her to DAC, the diminished earning capacity rate,

is about to cause her to be without any workers' compensation benefits

due to the five-year reaching the five-year mark.

Dr. Rancourt, obviously based on this record, has no worker earning capacity.

I'd be happy to answer questions anytime.

So just to clarify for me, the fall on the boat,

that was the precipitating reason for you filing something.

And then it seems to me that's not what the action is now.

This is about whether there's diminished earning capacity.

She was on temporary total disability due to her fall in an icy parking lot

where she had the hole in the top of her head.

The carrier moved to reduce her benefits to the diminished earning capacity rate,

which is what initially brought us before the Department of Labor.

As we were going there, we also had denied medical bills for the fall on the boat,

which we believe was related to her dizziness and sequelae of her head injury.

So are those medical bills still at issue,

or are you just fighting about the bigger issue

about the change from her diminished earning capacity?

I'm more concerned about the bigger issue, Your Honor,

but whether the fall on the boat is causally related to her

indirectly causally related to her injury is at issue,

as well as those medical bills.

So that was a minor issue.

And just to cover that briefly,

the best they have on that is Dr. Glassman's opinion

that her fall was not directly related.

He doesn't mention whether it's indirectly related.

But our primary issue is her ongoing mental,

her head injury concussion symptoms,

which her expert providers,

who were the type of doctors recommended by Dr. Glassman,

have continually given the opinions of her various objective tests

that render her disabled vision and hearing tests as well.

And so they are the experts that Dr. Glassman referred her to.

And most of Dr. Glassman's reports also have significant limitations.

He was also opining about her hamstring injury,

the boat incident,

and he gave her lifting restrictions, bending restrictions,

that kind of thing in the addendum to his third IME in March,

in May of 2020, which was based on his third exam of March of 2020.

And in that IME report apparently he was requested to do an addendum,

and he said that the lifting restrictions he gave were related to the head injury,

which makes no sense, particularly since his March of 2020 report talks about

he did objective testing, he did convergence testing,

and said it made her nauseous.

His other reports clearly have her,

at most he said she could try three hours a day,

four days a week to 12 hours,

but her computer time was limited.

There were all kinds of restrictions which were consistent with her treating providers.

So we don't believe that his opinion,

the addendum is competent evidence of her having a work capacity

and an earring capacity that's required to have a change of condition.

What are we to make of the third paragraph in the decision and conclusion section?

I know you're familiar with it,

but it's the third paragraph that says that your client was not credible.

Well, I mean, number one, she had a head injury,

and so, you know, she has a head injury,

so she's not credible because she doesn't remember something.

I mean, primarily, I mean...

Well, I don't know, but you're driving the point home.

We would have to delve into inconsistencies and lack of memory

just as the workers' compensation appeals board did, though.

Wouldn't we to reverse this case?

I don't think so, Your Honor,

because you have medical records that are primarily consistent throughout.

She has objective testing that, no, they're not MRIs

because all the doctors agree that MRIs don't show up this type of injury,

but she has hearing tests, she has multiple vision tests

that providers are doing that have, you know,

numbers and testing and medical science behind them

that shows she has an objective head injury.

So anything where they mentioned credibility,

which was primarily, you know, I mean, was the water choppy?

How many times did you go on a boat?

Could you walk with a cane around your yard?

They found her not to be credible,

or whether she lost or didn't lose consciousness?

I mean, this is an accepted injury,

and importantly, none of the doctors are saying she's not credible

or because she lost consciousness

or she didn't lose consciousness,

that that was critical to their opinions.

So basically what we have is a board that's substituting

its own medical opinionist

whether those things are important or not.

The issue of loss of consciousness,

it goes back to the original head injury,

the fall on the ice, right?

Right, and she said she didn't remember.

She knew she fell, she woke up and someone was there.

So I think she classified,

how do you remember if you don't remember?

Like how do you know that you don't remember?

So, I mean, that injury or head didn't heal for months

and there's a picture of it in the appendix.

But as far as credibility,

I think that number one,

that wasn't a fair finding by understanding that they're finding,

but there's nothing pointed out by the carriers in this case

that makes that important to any issue to be found or against her

because she has objective testing,

even if it were legally required, which we argue it is not.

So what makes this case different

than any case where they're competing experts

and the board has to make a choice between them

and normally we defer to those types of choices.

Why is this different?

Because Dr. Glassman's addendum and the sentence where he says

that the restrictions he was giving were related to her head injury

just doesn't bear any weight or credibility itself

because he also in the prior March of 20 report

and the prior reports talked about her dizziness,

not being able to look at a computer.

He's never talked about what she can lift and what she can't lift.

He was clearly talking about her leg injury,

the hamstring injury which disabled her for a period of time.

He was not talking about,

he didn't go into any of the non-insertional limitations

which I've expounded upon at length of my brief.

Being able to think,

I mean she was the vice president and a professor

teaching at three different schools including two online ones

and she has trouble counting.

Dr. Glassman in his last exam of March of 20

from which the addendums produced from

said that she couldn't remember,

she remembered two out of three items at one minute

that his visual testing made her dizzy.

Can you remind what kind of physician is Glassman?

Dr. Glassman is a, I think he's a DO, I'm not positive.

He is not a surgeon.

He's not a head injury expert.

He actually in his, I think his first IME,

first hair or two,

that she needed to go to concussion specialists

which is admittedly means

he's not the concussion specialist for those things.

He referred her to visual person, auditory person

and those are the doctors that we're relying on

or the providers that we're relying on

which I have in the brief between pages 14 and 19

or 14 and 20

which went on about her various limitations.

The July 12th, 20, Browning expert report

says that she suffered a coup contra-coup injury

to her brain with axonal shear.

Dr. Smith shares that opinion.

She says that kind of bruising does not generally appear

on a CT or MRI.

Dr. Perzinski says she had a concussion,

double vision, convergence and sufficiency,

other irregular eye movements

and that's a 12, 23, 20 report

and she's treated her a number of times.

It's not accurate that during the year

prior to the workers' cop hearing

that she only saw a doctor one time.

She saw one of her providers 17 times

and I listed the number of times

that she had seen other doctors on these symptoms

in the center.

What do the medical records establish

of the evolution of her condition

and her symptoms in the year before the hearing?

They were pretty consistent.

She had a little bit of improvement

but she still was unable to focus, unable to concentrate,

had trouble counting.

They're relatively consistent

across types of providers

that she was still having significant difficulties.

There was lay testimony from her husband and friends

about her forgetting things,

not being able to follow a line of thought.

Her husband had to watch

that she remembered to turn the stove off.

All kinds of things that one would just take for granted

and necessarily if you don't have ADLs,

activities of daily living skills

and taking care of yourself,

you don't have an earning capacity.

Clearly under A48

or under A2, the gainful activity,

she doesn't have the skills

to go back to her regular job.

She has trouble using a computer for a period of time.

One of her providers, and it's in the brief,

said she wouldn't be able to teach an online class.

When she uses a computer for 20 minutes or so,

she gets headaches and dizziness

and that's not something,

obviously she can't go back to university vice president

or teaching classes as a professor,

but she also can't be gainfully employed

in a competitive labor market

where she has trouble counting,

remembering items, has to rest during the day.

We believe that the opinion was

against the weight of the evidence.

There's no confident evidence supporting it.

What we have is Dr. Glassman saying,

those lifting restrictions,

they're a head injury but that's inconsistent

with the rest of that examination

and the report from March of 20.

What do the lifting restrictions

have to do with her vocation?

Nothing that I can tell.

University vice president might have

to lift a file thing or something

but he did not go on in the addendum

about the non-exertional limitations.

He has some of that covered in the March report

where he says she was,

let me see if I can,

in the March report where he says that she was...

March of 20?

I'm briefed on page 31.

He says that she,

in his exam of March 2nd of 20,

extraocular muscles were intact.

Convergence testing was positive

at 10 inches for blurred vision.

Head rotation maneuvers and vestibular eye movements

were critical for slight nausea.

Balancing test was done for two seconds

and 10 seconds.

She said they're working on that

at physical therapy.

She got the colors correct

and had two out of three objects

at one minute

but the objects were only two out of three.

We call it three out of three at five minutes

and so that's the last physical exam

he did of her

and he issued a report in March of 20

and then he did the addendum.

Of what year?

March of 2020

which was his last physical exam

prior to the DOL hearing that we're here on.

Then he did his addendum in May of 20

and he says that the physical

restrictions he gave were related

to her head injury.

But he never explains the non-exertional limitations

or what non-exertional limitations

would come out of this physical exam

that he did.

In his report of May 2019,

the year before,

he did have a ten pound

and five pound lifting restriction

which was before the

hamstring

fall off the boat.

But it was preceded by about

six lines of

restrictions on

how many breaks

during computer work,

length of time for computer work,

three to four hours a day,

three days a week, partial duty.

Those restrictions disappeared.

Was there a reason

that those restrictions disappeared?

I don't believe

so, Your Honor,

that there was any reason for those to disappear

and in his March of 20 report he says she would have been

I don't know if it's March or May

but he says she would have been in a medical

endpoint in November of 19.

Right, this was May of 19

and there were severe restrictions on her

computer

let me say her non-physical.

Right.

And he says in his later report in 20

that she was at an endpoint in November

of 19.

Well, that's closer in time where he's giving her

restrictions are which are

close to what

they're similar to what her treatment providers,

the experts, the types of providers

he sent her to, said.

So he's admitting he's not even the expert

on those.

And so

we don't think that his May addendum,

the one sentence about what the physical

restrictions were is competent

medical evidence that the board

could reasonably rely on in this case.

If I could have a moment.

You have

reserved one minute.

You're red lights on.

Thank you.

Good afternoon, Your Honor.

I'm Kevin Stewart from Bernarda, Merrill and

Manchester. I'm here presenting

a mutual workers' compensation carrier

for community college system.

And this is a case about

competing medical opinions.

In this case, the board

did what the court has told them to do

many times which is examine competing medical

opinions, review the evidence,

state who they find more persuasive

and did that.

I haven't scoured the medical records

like you have, I'm sure, but

can you tell me what medical evidence there

was of a change?

Well, he

said there.

Dr. Glassman had done three exams

and so that's one of the benefits.

One of the things the CAB noted

reasons they find a persuasive is a good three.

In overtime, she was

35% improvement. By the time he started

the last time, she was at 60% improvement.

Headaches had improved

and we heard a concession that think

she was getting better in the record. So there was

subjective improvement.

The court, I mean

the panel also

noted that

he didn't reflexively say

this isn't all work related. He said

I agree, she's still got some symptoms,

but she's improved and

he only gave her more restrictions

at the beginning, commensurate with

his findings which he improved

and then she got up to a full time

with restrictions.

So I'm sorry, I just want to make

sure you're satisfied with your answer.

So what was the change, the medical evidence

of a change? Well, she testified

to subjective improvement. She testified

she was up to 60% improvement from 35.

This case is almost all subjective

complaints. Okay.

How does that relate to

her capacity to achieve

a diminished earning capacity?

Because previously, prior

to that, she had only been given a part-time

work release. Then she gets up

that Dr. Glassman finds she's improved

to the point she's got a full time

which is important for establishing

whether you can go back to work and modify

duty and with those restrictions he provided

which he plainly stated

were related to the work injury and

I understand they're saying there was

only just lifting restrictions

or also, for example,

he said there was restrictions on driving

and he did the testing, he said

yes, I find some vision issues but I also

find her telling me that she can

drive a little bit so I'm going to say

she can drive but she's going to have

occasionally driving.

So occasionally she's up to one third of the day

that wouldn't limit her from doing any

of the job she did because she wasn't a driving

or driving position. Most of the jobs

she had were professional

jobs. She also was teaching online

so these restrictions on occasionally driving

which wasn't clearly related

to an orthopedic injury was related to

so forgive me again

so did Dr. Glassman say

she could go back to teaching?

He

didn't specifically say she could go back to teaching

but did he say she could go back

to being a college administrator?

He didn't specify

those jobs whether she could go back. He just said

these are the restrictions and then

in evidence for the CAB

was all the jobs

she could do and to establish

her work history or education

PhD, she started

several businesses, she'd been a CEO

What were those things they determined

she could do at this point in time?

They just

established that she had a

they didn't establish which job she could do

but in evidence for them which is the standard

was that she had a PhD

that she had been a CEO

started a couple businesses, she'd been an educator

she'd been an administrator

she'd been taught online

All before the head injury

None of those things would be limited

by the work released from Dr.

Glassman

so that was the evidence that they had

Who said that?

No, that was just

that wasn't found by

Glassman but none of those jobs

by their inference would be

limitations from

lifting like we heard

Right but it seems like they all require

high executive function and that's what

got compromised by the head injury

the ability

to lift 5 or 10 pounds

is really not critical to

all of those jobs that require

high executive function

Right and Dr. Glassman did not find that those

restrictions existed anymore

What he did find was a driving restriction

he said these are the restrictions

that are left

from your injury and he said

plainly these are from

the head injury not from the orthopedics

and those restrictions did exist

even before

the lifting restrictions he provided already

he said I understand

they're saying that you can't have lifting

restrictions for a head injury but

Dr. Glassman and there's no experts that say

lifting restrictions aren't related

to a head injury

so and Dr. Glassman said they are

so and just to point out

about Dr. Glassman

he's a medical doctor not a DO

this is in the appendix page 63

he's a board certified physiatrist

so we have an expert in this area

but at some point he said

that there are people who deal with

concussions and that she should be

in their care that those are the specialists

that she should be seeing

Right yes absolutely

he agreed that she had a concussion

and he said you should

I'm not the treating doctor you should

continue to treat concussion specialists

but that doesn't mean he's not an expert

that also doesn't mean that he's

saying that she doesn't have a work capacity

he's agreeing that there was restrictions

which goes to the board

the board found that as credible

they found this is a reason to find him persuasive

but the only restrictions that

you say that he identified

at issue here are the

weight restrictions not

the function restrictions is that right

well he did limit for example

drive which is

not a lifting restriction

and that's he said look there's vision problems

you've tell it you're subjectively

telling me there's vision problems on my testing

but you also telling me you can

drive so I'm gonna limit your driving to

occasionally so that's not like a lifting

restriction that's you know I'm accepting

everything you say but I still don't

understand how your

client carried its burden of proof

before the

CAB

well

they found that she can

go back to work on a full they

adopted Dr. Glassman they found it credible

and persuasive and he says go back

and work on a full-time basis

with modifications they didn't terminate

benefits just said you have a

diminishment in earning capacity

so that's their finding here

I think they're in their rights to terminate

benefits in the abstract you mean to

abstract that's what the lab will talk about

diminished earning capacity they found

a diminished earn capacity that's

sufficient to sustain your client's burden

of proof and to show a change of condition

which went from part-time very

restricted to full-time

with restrictions not nearly

as restrictive as before

and he found improvement and that

corresponded to his increased work capacity

on a full-time basis

as far as showing gainful

employment they had in the record

she's very educated very skilled person

she clearly could go back

according to the evidence in the record

she had lots of skills to be able to go back

and do something but what were the

cognitive changes

in her functioning

that in the last year

that justified a change

in her status

putting aside the

put aside the fall in the

which seems like sort of a red herring

well there's two issues here one is

those are almost all those are subjective

all those are subjective complaints

that doesn't mean they don't count does

well no but the board made

a specific finding on what she was credible

in her testimony and they said no

and they said all these discrepancies

discrepancies what you're telling us

and what the records say for example

they said when you first went

through your visit to the emergency room

you said there was no loss of consciousness

no vision problems

then you get terminated

and then the very next visit you say

there was a loss of consciousness they cited that as an example

they said an example

you're telling us you're

right but they have a right to look at all the evidence

and say look these are discrepancies

and others are more recent the boating accident

they said you're telling us

you are telling us you absolutely

fell because you lost the balance

from the work injury but when you look at the

the medical records in evidence

was

the evidence

before them

the boating accident and they cited the discrepancy here

patient was

stepping into a boat when it moved away from dock

patient hyper extended leg

her pop fell into water

they said there's another discrepancy

perhaps because of the perception

issue

well this next note says

this is appendix page

68 of mine

patient extended her left leg to pull a boat

that was drifting off the dog

back in and when she did this

she felt something snap in her left buttocks

and she fell into the lake

there's nothing about this dizziness

so they cited this

as another example of a discrepancy

why they didn't find her testimony

is that really a discrepancy

that would bear upon

a medical decision

excuse me

that she could change from

100% disability to a diminished

earning capacity rate

yes because all of these

you heard all these complaints she has

they're all subjective and they're telling

and they're saying we don't find

her testimony credible

her testimony was

corroborated by the witnesses

on which

the witnesses that described her

thought and ability to

count and ability to remember things

did the panel just ignore that evidence

they're

entitled to look at all the evidence

and figure out which they find persuasive

and they did not find her persuasive

testimony based on

these things

was it

as far as the hearing

well she could participate

in the hearing

well she testified

that she could never spend more than 20 minutes

on a computer

and she spent off and on more than 4 hours

in front of them

on a computer

is it evidence

in there entitled to

get the weight they think and they thought

this could be persuasive that

you're telling us you never can spend

more than 20 minutes on a computer

in front of us you spent off and on 4 hours

on a computer again this goes to the weight of the evidence

and they were the fact that

of course tells them to do which is way

the evidence

it was the same day but

there was breaks

it wasn't 4 hours straight

there was breaks

well it isn't just her who's saying

limitations on her time on the computer

aren't there physicians and medical

providers that have also

addressed limitations on

her time using a computer

there are and the board

did not find those reports as credible

as Dr. Glassman

that's what you're telling us

I'm saying that that happened

they seem to cite

Dr. Glassman as

in other discrepancies

she was saying she couldn't do things

at home at all

they found her going up to Millinocket

being on a boating more than once

didn't her husband drive to Millinocket

she wasn't driving to Millinocket

no and no one said she drove

but just being in a car

being going boating

when she described such extreme

inability to do things at home

they found that a discrepancy

we don't find your testimony

persuasive because of it

but she wasn't driving the boat

she was a passenger in the boat

that's very difficult or strenuous

if it's

choppy water

considering her description of how extreme

her symptoms were

they found that would be a discrepancy

you would voluntarily go boating

more than once on this very long

car ride even though she wasn't driving

both these cross examination techniques

that they found

your skill were able to generate

that carried

the carrier's burden of proof

approving a change

that warranted a deviation

from full disability

to diminished earning capacity

those discrepancies

supported the board's

actual finding that her testimony was not

credible

which is what this court has told the CAB

they're supposed to do

take a decision on credibility cite the facts

which they did

well

the burden was met

they relied on Dr. Glassman who said

you went from part time to full time

your increased work capacity

not full release

but modified duty

he said these I appreciate

the claimant doesn't think these restrictions

are for the head injury but Dr.

Glassman who is a medical doctor

certified physiatrist said these are for it

and that's what the board

adopted so that was why

there was a change of condition

did Dr. Glassman specifically

address the issue of

ability to sit in front of a computer screen

and work

he had in the past and this time

he didn't give restrictions which is commensurate

with his address it one way or the other

correct but he had restrictions

a lot of things

in the past so now he took

they're not mentioned now a reasonable

inference for the board is that there's no restriction

on that anymore but he didn't explain

why they disappeared

well he did give an explanation that

there was a

improvement from 35%

60% and we heard

they considered that she was saying

the symptoms had improved the headaches for example

we're getting better and she was obviously

still getting treatment

so there was quite a bit of evidence

in the record to show

why Dr. Glassman

progressively increased her work capacity and again

he didn't say she was full duty and the board

again found that it was one of the reasons

why he was persuasive

and he'd seen her three times

and

they never say there's an objective test

but they do cite

the board also says

the radiological studies here are negative

that's a piece of evidence

they didn't say you have to have

which one?

the circle MRI

with a brain diminished capacity

why would they be anything negative?

well if there's a brain injury

many times they do show up on a brain MRI

many times they do

where does it say that on the medical record?

that you're going to have

a positive finding

on either MRI or CT

if you have a brain injury

I'm not sure it's actually

anybody said other than

maybe in the initial emergency room

they said we don't think you need

more studies because of our

the thing with the Canadian protocol

on head injuries

she had a concussion so there was no need to

do a study

the initial

I guess I'm out of time

the

records show that the

her neurologist

said that the brain MRI was normal

that's evidence that they had

but he also concluded that she had a concussion

yes everybody

agreed she had a concussion

just briefly thank you

there was a lot of objective testing

and you'll see

and I've detailed it in the brief

from providers Kruzynski

and Browning

and even Dr. Glassman's

last exam on March 20 had objective

testing where he's saying

not just when I'm testing her vision

at 10 inches

he also said in his addendum

which I have in the brief

I'm not sure what page

but in his addendum he said

she would have reached MMI

maximum medical improvement as of two years post

injuries which would have been 11-2019

he was asked

has she reached pre-accident status

he said she has not reached her pre-accident

status she still has ongoing

deficits and ongoing symptoms

has treatment been reasonable and necessary

post concussion syndrome treatment

has been reasonable, medically necessary

and causally related

and that's all of the things with Dr.

with Browning

and Kruzynski that detail

the objective evidence with regard

to the testing that they did

gainful employment under

A2 means she can go back

to her old job she has

the mental and physical capacity

to adapt to other forms of labor

that to which she was accustomed

and that's under 281A2

we've cited in our briefs

we believe that the

evidence should be considered uncontroverted

one sentence from Dr. Glassman

in an addendum where he says

oh yeah she still has those deficits

he just doesn't bother to detail what they are

still because he's done it three times before

and she's clearly disabled from working

thank you

Mr. Counsel
