This is case 2021-0075 in the matter of Matthew Costeau and Alejandro Flores.

Good afternoon. Terry McGrath, I understand you've reserved two minutes.

That's correct, Chief Justice.

Please proceed.

Thank you.

Before you proceed, let me note that Justice Donovan will view the video of this argument and will be participating in our deliberations.

Okay.

Permission to take the call?

It would be easier to hear me.

Thank you.

May it please the court.

What does it mean to provide a home for a child?

Poets, writers, songwriters have all ascribed innumerable meanings to the word home.

The word home evokes different emotions for everyone.

It may be tempting when considering the meaning of the word home in isolation

to include those emotions as part of its meaning.

But a full reading of Chapter 461A indicates that the legislature did not intend the phrase provide home for the child to include those emotions or meanings.

Chapter 461A does have a section that sets forth the goal of parents having stable and meaningful involvement in their children's lives.

That's in Section 2.

Chapter 461A also sets out factors to be considered by the court in determining the best interests of the child when it comes to assigning parental rights and responsibilities.

That's in Section 6.

None of those sections talk about home as anything but shelter for where the child stays.

It's hard to consider that in isolation, though, because whether you say so or I say so means a lot more than just where you hang your act.

I think outside of this statutory scheme that's true, outside of assigning parental rights and responsibilities, I think that's accurate.

You think there's a clear division between the two concepts. One does not touch the other.

Which two concepts?

Well, you made a residential or parental, you call it.

Yes, I think there is a clear distinction between parenting time and residential responsibility.

Now, residential responsibility, the differentiation of making, and I think the statute makes, both in the definition section and throughout the way the statutes are set up,

is that residential responsibility is when the child is at a parent's home.

Parenting time can be both residential and non-residential.

You can have parenting time when you're out at a restaurant on a Wednesday night.

But residential responsibility is providing the home for the child to stay.

So how does the other parent interfere with residential responsibility?

That's a great question.

As distinguished from other parental responsibilities?

Certainly.

I think there's a number of ways.

You could have a parent making repeated phone calls to the other parent's landlord.

You could have a parent showing up at a parent's house and causing a ruckus so that the landlord might consider eviction.

You could have a parent taking actions that would push the other parent towards homelessness.

Wouldn't a threat to report the mother's immigration status necessarily deprive the child of a home?

No, I would say no.

Because reporting, making any type of report...

If the mother is deported, isn't the child necessarily deprived of a residential home?

That's true.

And likewise, if the mother is convicted of murder or sent to prison for some...

That's not what happened here.

She was threatened by...

She was threatened with respect to her immigration status.

She was threatened to be...

And that was a fact that was considered by the trial court.

A fact considered by the trial court was that my client threatened to report her to immigration,

to report her to law enforcement.

And that's no different than reporting someone to the police because they may be incarcerated.

That's a report to law enforcement is not interference with residential responsibility.

You have both the action of reporting, but then there's the independent action of the agency and what they do.

I mean, if interference with residential responsibility includes a report to law enforcement,

the family court will overrun with cases of multiple reports.

I called the police three times and they did nothing.

You're interfering with my residential responsibility.

Was this issue raised below?

With distinction between parental rights and responsibilities and residential responsibilities?

Well, I believe it was on an evidentiary issue that there was no evidence that supported...

No, it's the legal question raised before the trial judge so the trial judge could consider it.

Well, our appeal is that there is no evidence that support...

There's insufficient evidence that supports a finding.

So I'll take that as no.

It was not raised below.

I don't think they ever got there.

It was not in the motion...

It was a motion for reconsideration.

It was not in the motion to reconsider.

What was in the motion to reconsider was there was insufficient evidence to support a finding of interference with residential responsibility.

And that's what our appeal is.

And that would subsume the question of what constitutes interference with residential responsibility?

It necessarily does because if you look at the evidence as a whole,

many of it support a finding of interference with residential responsibility.

I'm saying you're saying there was absolutely no evidence before the trial court of interference with residential responsibilities? Zero?

There was no evidence of intentional, repeated and unwarranted interference with residential responsibility.

From which the trial court could draw an inference that there was?

Correct.

So preventing the child from spending time in the residence of the other parent is not interference with the residential responsibility of the other parent?

I think that's a closer question.

But those are not the findings that the trial court made in the factual findings?

Well, enrolling the child in preschool.

Enrolling the child in preschool...

On the other parent's parenting days.

Sorry.

I'll take both of those.

When the child was enrolled in preschool, he went to school on the days he was supposed to be with his father and not go to school on the days he was with his mother.

He stayed home from school with his mother, which is her right.

So that finding is erroneous.

The preschool included mother's parent days during which she could care for Michael?

I think the preschool included those days, but she chose to have the child home with her.

And then the next...

Scheduling a vacation during the other parent's parenting time.

And admittedly, my client did, on one occasion, schedule...

And I think that was the court's finding.

There was a one time where he scheduled a vacation that included two or three days of my client, of the appellee's parenting time.

Reporting to DCYF in the category of reporting to law enforcement.

I would put reporting to DCYF in the category of not my client's actions.

His grandmother did that.

The child's grandmother did that.

Not my client.

And in fact, it was also done by a medical professional.

So not all of those DCYF calls were the result of...

None of them were the result of my client's actions.

And not all of them were the result of my client's mother's actions.

My grandmother's actions weren't sort of a proxy for your client.

That was not evident from the record.

I didn't see any evidence that supported that, nor did the court cite any.

And it's important to note, I think, a review of this idea of using interference with residential responsibility

as a basis for modifying a parenting plan is quite rare.

I mean, in my research, it came up once in New Hampshire and nowhere else in the United States that I could find.

In New Hampshire, it came up in one 3JX case that never reached the merits of the case.

It only was mentioned as part of the claim.

The other states use statutes with terminology similar to ours?

The new statutes in New Hampshire, I think, are based on a more formalized...

I don't think they're exact, but they're based on a more formalized statutory structure.

And what all those other states generally look at is parenting time.

Are you interfering with the parenting time of a child?

And that's what really, what the trial court found here, is interference with the appellee's parenting time.

But that's a different test. That's a different section of the statute.

And it requires, first of all, it requires clear and convincing evidence.

Interference with residential responsibility requires preponderance of the evidence.

And I'm talking specifically about Section C of 461A111.

And you have to... If the interference with the parenting time rises to the point where it creates an environment that's detrimental to the child,

either the child's physical, mental, or emotional health, then you have to prove by clear and convincing evidence

that it's happening and that modifying the current order outweighs the harm likely to be caused by a change in environment.

So compare those two burdens.

Residential interference with residential responsibility to modify an order based on residential responsibility

only requires, by a preponderance of the evidence, a showing of repeated intention of unwarranted interference

with residential responsibility.

That's it. And the reason that burden would be so low is because it's such a rare thing.

It is such a narrow issue. But it's an important issue.

Obviously, allowing a parent to provide shelter for a child and have a place for the child to live is important.

And that's why it's such a low burden. But it's not used very often as the...

Does it also encompass the decision making for the child while the child's in the residence of that parent?

So not just having the house and providing the shelter, but managing the child while they're in the residence?

There's nothing in the statute that indicates that.

I mean, the statute defines residential responsibility as providing a home for the child.

And there are a number of different ways that the appellee could have obtained the relief she wanted in this case.

One is contempt. She could have filed contempt for violating the current parenting plan, which she did and was successful.

And she could have filed under a different section of the 461A11 to modify the parenting plan.

But she didn't. They chose interference with residential responsibility.

And...

Is the trial court limited to the specific allegations in the petition? Is it a form over substance?

Is the trial court allowed to perhaps expand the inquiry, match the facts to the...

The trial court could have, but then they would have to apply the correct standard,

which would be the clear and convincing evidence, harm to the child,

or one of the other sections of 461A11.

So overall, this really was...

The trial court taking a bunch of facts was unhappy with mistreatment, I think,

between the perceived mistreatment of one parent over the other

and tried to fit it into a statutory relief...

Tried to find some statutory relief that was pled.

And it might be some carryover from years ago.

I mean, the terminology has sort of changed over time.

There was custody and then there was residential responsibility and now there's parenting time.

And that has evolved over time.

And the current statute now is pretty clear about which is which.

And so I look at that and say, okay, maybe 10 years ago,

this might have been residential responsibility, but it's not anymore.

Turning McGrath, your light's on.

Oh, okay. Thank you.

Good afternoon.

My name is Christine Bernardus and I represent Alejandra Flores.

Before taking questions from the panel, just a couple of points that I'd like to make today.

It's the court.

With respect to the trial court's order,

I think there were two very important rulings made with respect to the parenting issue.

The first is at the bottom of page two where we talk about the immigration status.

And in that circumstance, the court found, and I'm paraphrasing because your honors have the order,

but the court found that father's use repeatedly and on multiple occasions

is evidenced by numerous text messages that were put into evidence,

including one actually quoted on page three within the trial judge's order,

with all of those actions that father did interfere with mother's residential responsibilities

in the fashion of repeated, unwarranted, and intentional.

That finding in and of itself warrants modification in this case.

But the court took it one step further and looked on page three and four of the order.

If you look on that page, there are multiple occasions

where the court found continued interference with mother's parenting time.

So in addition to the initial finding that could stand alone and end that conversation

is the second finding on page four where the court notes that individually in and of themselves,

each of those things may not meet the standard for modification,

but together as a whole in combination with the immigration issues

and the threats and such are in interference with mother's parenting time.

You say in your brief and I apologize for distracting

because I think you're on an important path here.

You say in your brief that those, the counterarguments or the arguments

that your opponent makes are disingenuous.

That's on page 27.

Is there anything that is explicit, not candid or not sincere

about counsel's argument in that vein?

The terminology that I, when I read my mother's brief,

I felt like he said that the court admitted that mother didn't prove her standard

because each one of these individual things couldn't satisfy Burton.

And I think that's a disingenuous statement because I don't read what the court said that way.

I think that the court said-

Rather than disingenuous, don't you think it's just a fair stretch of good advocacy?

I didn't when I read it candidly.

I wouldn't have used the word if I did.

I felt like the court said, hey, each and every one of these things individually isn't going to satisfy the burden.

However, taken together, certainly the burden is met.

I think that's an important distinction because you can't prove repeated, unwarranted and intentional,

particularly repeated with one particular instance.

So I think the court looked at the whole thing as a group of events.

And when I hear that my brother talked about where law enforcement may come,

there isn't law enforcement coming just one time to the home or a threat to call the police on someone.

The court found, and there was sufficient evidence in this case that this happened on many occasions,

the threats with respect to law enforcement or immigration.

And immigration, just going back to the point, immigration does affect one's ability to provide a home for a child.

If you are threatened with your immigration status, if you will not be in this country,

you are not providing a home for your child.

You cannot have residential responsibility for your child if you're not here.

Before we took our detour, you had mentioned that these were incidents of interference with parenting time.

Are you disagreeing with the distinction between residential responsibility and interference with parenting responsibilities as has been outlined?

Are they two different things?

No, I think they're one and the same.

I think the parenting, the other parenting responsibilities that you see in that parenting plan are part of residential responsibility.

And the two different parts of the statute that allow for modification with different standards, how would you distinguish those two?

Here we're under section G, excuse me, B.

Yes.

And that other one is section C.

Yes.

And so I think it, well, I think it encompasses and you can bring it together under section B.

Because I think it all relates to, my brother talked about songs.

I think of the phrase, what makes a house a home?

A home is not your four walls and a roof and your windows.

A home is the stability in your home, the ability to help your child educationally, to have a healthy home, to have a safe home.

Of course it encompasses food and shelter and those things.

But a home to me and a home, if you look at the statutory scheme here, is more than just that.

He's focused us on a term that's been defined in the statute and its residential responsibilities.

It's a separate definition.

How do we just glom everything together?

I think if you look at the parenting plan, that section B says residential responsibility and parenting schedule.

And it has five subsections.

In those subsections you have routine schedule, three-day weekend schedule, et cetera, et cetera.

And the last one talks about other parenting responsibilities.

Those parenting responsibilities are part of that section.

It's part of the residential responsibility.

And so I think on page three where the court looked at all those different instances, that falls into residential responsibility.

I think the one point I also wanted to make is that we're looking at statutory interpretation here.

And when we look at the statutory interpretation, we're not just looking at the black and white of the word, the definition within the quotation marks.

The court, the law says we need to look not in isolation, but in the overall statutory scheme.

And in Flores' brief, that's the reason why I spoke of all the different pieces of the parenting and all the different RSAs that relate to parenting.

Our parenting plan in New Hampshire begins with an explanation of the focus of parenting and involving both parents, et cetera, et cetera.

And then it goes into our decision-making and our residential responsibility, which includes not only our parenting schedule,

but the other responsibilities we have as a parent to provide a home for our child.

So I think in all of these instances, and again, I would again focus very much so on that very first finding by the court on page two,

that those immigration threats in and of themselves threatened mother's ability to provide a home period,

but then secondarily in the ruling on page four, that all of those other instances are relative and relate to the court's ultimate finding.

Can you address the child support issue?

I sure can. I do think, I think that whether this court affirms or turns over the lower court's decision, there's an independent basis on the child support.

And so I would first say, Appellant argues that there was no substantial change of circumstances.

If the first argument is affirmed, then the modification of parenting plans are substantial change in circumstances.

If not, there was three years that had passed since the previous order, I believe it was December 2016.

That provides a basis.

And then if you look at the income, Appellant filed on a basis that mother's income had changed.

In fact, you can see that father's income had changed.

And so in 2016 it was, and I have the numbers in my book, I don't have them in my fingertips, but it was just under $7,000.

In 2020, when the case was decided, if you look at the, there was no, unfortunately the court didn't provide guidelines in the findings,

but if you look at the USO, the 4% number for medical support was $320.

We also have his financial affidavit that shows income upwards of $9,000.

So father experienced a change in circumstances where his income was higher.

We also, there was a claim that Appellant raised special circumstances and that the court ignored those, so to speak.

If the court takes a really good look at the facts raised in this case, the Appellant testified that he had three children living in his household.

There was no testimony how that would have economically affected him.

For example, that those three children are in daycare and cost sex number of dollars.

That those three children participate in whatever activities or have a medical issue that exposes a financial burden.

So while there was testimony that there were three children there, it didn't show any economic consequences.

Nothing in the RSA, however, requires the court to look at that special circumstance and apply a deviation.

So I think that's a very important point.

I also recall that there was an argument that the court didn't make specific findings about a deviation and whether or not the special circumstance or deviation should be applied.

And the law here says that if there's going to be a deviation from the guidelines, there needs to be specific findings.

But here the court applied the guidelines and so I'd suggest that there is no need for the court to make specific findings in the event that the court chooses not to do a deviation.

And so just to confirm, three years had passed from the last child support order.

Yes, the last child support.

That was not the basis on which the court made its ruling.

The court actually checked both.

The court checked three years and the check mark for substantial change in circumstances.

And that being the modification of the parenting plan.

So on the USO issue that day, the court did indeed check both.

And the court also relied on the change in income for both parties.

The court particularly did not put to appellant.

I noticed that in looking at the case, but those facts certainly do exist.

The court did not acknowledge that in his ruling.

In the child support guidelines worksheet.

Can you tell from the entries?

Whether there the trial court was relying on the new number for the appellant.

The court did not provide the child support guidelines worksheet.

Wait a minute.

Let me make sure I'm telling the truth there.

I can look it up too.

No.

The court did not supply the guidelines worksheet in the order of notice issued with the final finding.

However, when I looked at the uniform support order, I could see that $320 as the medical support obligation, which is 4%.

And my recollection is that the numbers add directly to father's financial statement, which was filed with the court as an exhibit.

The court could see it.

With the new number.

With the new number.

Yes.

If the court has no further questions, I would rest on my brief and thank the court for your time.

Tony McGrath.

Thank you.

Quickly, I will say on the child support issue, if this court affirms the lower court's ruling on the change in the parenting schedule, then a modification of child support is warranted.

If not, then I'd say it isn't.

In the three-year issue, the statute says that a party can apply for child support change after three years has occurred.

This, the appellee, applied based on the three-year change too early.

In fact, by the time the case finished, three years had happened.

But she applied, it hadn't been three years.

But at the time of the trial court's order, it had been three years.

It had been three years.

So that's what happened with that.

But the statute says you can't even apply until that three years happens.

And I think the appellee's argument is that everything in 461A6, which is what the court should consider in determining best interest of the child, they're arguing that all of those considerations are residential or should be incorporated in the term residential responsibility.

And 461A, as I think the Chief Justice pointed out, 461A defines terms.

It defines residential responsibility, which means a parent's responsibility to provide a home for a child.

It also defines parenting schedule.

That means the schedule of when the child is in the care of each parent.

Those are two different terms.

Parental rights and responsibilities is also defined in 461A1.

And that means all rights and responsibilities parents have concerning their child.

Which arguably includes residential responsibility if you complete the loop.

That is correct except statutory interpretation would tell us that if the statute requires a more specific term, which is what residential responsibility would be,

then it necessarily excludes the larger term, the more umbrella term.

So that's why that section of 461A11, 1B, that section, its residential responsibility is so important.

It does not include, it specifically excludes all other parental responsibilities and rights.

Thank you very much, Council.

Case is submitted.

Court is adjourned.
