Thank you, sir.

Claire.

This is case 202010146, petition of State of New Hampshire.

Ms. Garland, whenever you're ready, and I understand you've reserved one minute.

Yes, Your Honor. Thank you.

Good morning, and may it please the court. My name is Sam Garland, and I'm here on behalf of the State of New Hampshire.

Before I turn to questions, I'd like to touch briefly on the standard of review in this case, just to make sure that the state's position on that is clear.

And I think there is a dispute as to the proper standard of review.

It's the state's position that the NOVO review applies in this petition because we are challenging

legal determinations that were made by the trial court. And so while the trial court may have

discretion over how it handles matters of discovery, how it resolves questions of law

is entitled to the NOVO review. There is case law from this court, including Lawrence vs.

Phil in Lawrence, USA, that stands for that exact proposition.

And an error of law is a sustainable exercise of discretion.

Inherently so, Your Honor. Yes.

And so in our view, the trial court erred as a matter of law in two related ways, but ways that I think I'd like to address somewhat separately.

The first way it erred was how it assessed RSA 10513B in its position ultimately that police personnel matters,

particularly in the wake of town of Salem, or rather police personnel files are presumptively public.

We think that's incorrect. We think that's incorrect.

What basis did you have for saying that, the trial court?

I'm not sure, Your Honor. So as I read the trial court's orders in this case,

it seemed to be largely based on this court's recent decisions with respect to the right to no statute.

And the view that Fenneman is no longer good law, there are no longer categorical exemptions under Roman numeral four.

But our position, that has no bearing whatsoever on the analysis in this case.

This is a case that it's a criminal case. There is no dispute that RSA 10513B applies in criminal cases.

And so I think you've been presented with a question, I think including yesterday,

whether it applies outside of that context, that issue isn't present here.

Any other parties in this case raise 91A until the trial court did?

That's an interesting question. I don't believe so, Justice Bassett. It may have been referenced.

It wouldn't have been referenced. I don't think it was.

I don't think it was a motion for a protective order.

It wasn't, Justice Donovan. I'm just trying to recall what specifically,

there was a string cited there, but it wasn't referenced in there.

It was something that the trial court addressed in the first instance.

So what do we do about the fact that there's nowhere in RSA 10513B

does it provide that exculpatory information is confidential?

I have two responses to that, Justice Donovan.

My first response is I think the structure of the statute does support the proposition that

even exculpatory evidence is confidential and the confidentiality is,

the exception to that is limited solely for the purposes of providing it to a defendant

in the context of Brady-Laurie obligations.

And it doesn't reflect any further dissemination beyond that,

particularly dissemination that is based on First Amendment concerns or public access concerns.

That really the central purpose of Brady and Laurie is to vindicate due process rights.

And that's separate from this sort of First Amendment prior restraint concerns

that the trial court had here and that the respondent...

I'm sorry, Mr. Arlen. You finish.

My second point, something I'd like to emphasize is that we do not agree with the proposition

or the assumption in the trial court's order that this was information disclosed under

Roman numeral one, that this was in fact exculpatory information.

It was potentially exculpatory information.

That was the representation.

The trial court reflected that.

It's reflected in the briefing.

In my understanding of practically speaking what occurs here is under 105-13b2,

that would be provided to the court for in-camera review.

That's a cumbersome process.

That's something that bogs down trial courts.

It's something that slows down discovery and creates appellate issues for you folks.

And so as a matter of just a discovery tool,

parties enter into assented protective orders so that the information can be disclosed

to the defense counsel has access to it and defense counsel can make a determination

what to do with it.

So if the information is per se public, why have in-camera review?

I guess we could ask that question, right?

I think that was one point I was going to make in particular with respect to parts two and

three, which is that the information we believe is not public in light of the

legislature's contemplation of in-camera review.

If the information is exculpatory, if it's something that has to be disclosed

under Brady and Laurie, there wouldn't be any need for an in-camera review because the

constitutional product of there would outweigh any sort of interest.

So the alternative here to giving it to opposing counsel with a protective order

is just giving it to the trial court for ex parte review.

I think that's the practical effect.

If this court says that prosecutors and defense attorneys can't use these

sorts of protective orders as a means of facilitating discovery,

it's going to significantly increase the in-camera reviews.

It's going to slow just six seconds.

Thank you.

Was that issue teed up, a motion for reconsideration?

I would have to refer back to the motion of the many things that read before

to that one, something I probably didn't read as recently as I could have.

Do you want me to decide what we need to decide and whether it's succinctly put before us?

I think it is in the briefing.

I have to look for a matter of preservation, your honor.

Go ahead.

But ultimately, I do think you can take into consideration the ramifications

of endorsing the trial court's approach.

I do think those are fully briefed and they are part of really why we think the

trial court air does a matter of law here.

One of those ramifications, probably the most likely one,

is in-camera review far more often in a way that slows down criminal proceedings

and in a way that creates, again, more issues because I'm not a criminal practitioner,

but as I understand it, if an in-camera review happens, that becomes a joint

appellate issue in basically every case because the defense doesn't know what was in those documents.

As I understand it, one of the ACLU's arguments is this is a gag order,

unlawful gag order, and it's asymmetric.

What's your response to that?

My response to the first part of that is that it's not.

Or excuse me, we've raised waiver and preservation arguments,

and I won't get into that unless folks have questions about it.

In terms of the substance of really what the First Amendment argument is here,

the federal president at least makes clear that as long as there's good cause for the

protective order, and we would posit that there is, and that's also the standard

under criminal rule 12 v. 8, that that gets rid of any First Amendment concerns in the context

of an ongoing discovery matter.

And that's the lens you think the law requires us to look through, correct?

That is, yes, Your Honor.

But the trial court provided the state with an opportunity to do just that, right?

Didn't the court say show cause, but have a hearing?

Tell me why this should be held confidential.

I have two responses to that, Justice Sullivan.

The first is that we think that the trial court in doing that applied the incorrect

standard, that functionally it applied the right to know balancing,

which is a much more stringent standard than good cause.

This court hasn't defined good cause for the purposes of justifying a protective

order, but federal courts have used the standard that it requires that

the party seeking protection show specific prejudice or harmful result

if no protective order is granted.

If the standard is mad, the federal courts have said that, oh wait,

any public interest concern or First Amendment concern in the context of that specific case.

The trial court went and took the position that the public interest is an inherent

factor here and that it can outweigh but for the most specific and articulated

showing of privacy interest.

And we think that basically has it backwards.

So none of the litigants raised, I'm starting to shift if you don't mind,

the presumption that the trial court found that police personnel files are public

documents.

Is that, am I quoting the record accurately?

I'd have to again refer to that and maybe I can address that on the bottle,

to the motion for reconsideration, Your Honor.

Maybe I can say it more clearly.

Is there a presumption that police personnel files are public documents

and how did that issue come before the trial court and was it raised to a sponte?

Your Honor, I think the trial court's conclusion was raised to a sponte.

I think it was probably before the trial court, even in the motions for the

protective order, in paragraph five there, the state or the parties,

I guess the state, but it was a sent to two specifically referenced RSA-105-13B.

And it's our position that that statute in fact operates at a minimum in the opposite,

that it creates a presumption that police personnel matters are confidential,

not that they're accessible to the public or that they're public documents.

Well, it says what it says.

It says they are confidential, correct?

I believe that's exactly right, Your Honor.

And I think you can look no further frankly than the title of the statute,

which I understand is not dispositive, but this court has said,

goes a long way to telling you what the legislature's intent was.

But this case is at the point where the state has made the come to the conclusion

that there are exculpatory records that need to be disclosed to the defendant

pursuant to law, right?

I would dispute that, Your Honor.

My understanding is that the state has made the determination that there's

potentially exculpatory information in there.

Candidly, I don't know what the information is that the state made that determination

with respect to, but as a matter of really a shortcut,

a shortcut that is a simple discovery tool to avoid the need for in-camera review

and to really produce information more quickly and more robustly,

it's off to go through the assented to protective order route

that rather than going the other route.

And then the parties can make a decision whether, one,

it's an exculpatory, whether they need to use it at trial

and the trial court can make its rules.

Exactly, Your Honor.

In two points I'd like to make that kind of flow from that,

that I want to make really clear for the record today is,

we are not taking the position that there's categorical confidentiality

in this information if it's going to be admissible in an open criminal trial.

There may be reasons why certain information could be limited.

There may be a case-by-case argument that could be made in emotion and

lemony, but once you get to open criminal trial,

once that information is admitted into evidence,

that's a whole different ball game.

And so we're not making an argument that at that point,

confidentiality persists.

We are also not making the argument, or rather,

we are making the argument,

but we don't think that the court need to determine

the application of 105-13B in the right to no context,

whether it stands as a statutory prohibition on access.

I think you may need to make that determination

in light of yesterday's argument or in other cases that are before you.

Your point is we would require a part of a standing

before we broach that issue, correct?

I think that's right, Your Honor.

And I think in the current...

I don't want to take a position on an issue that I know was raised

in the argument yesterday.

The state has not appeared in that,

and I'm very cautious not to appear in that

in light of the Chief Justice's role.

But what I can say is we have briefed in this case

that we do think, as an alternative argument,

that the language in RSA 91A4 that says

otherwise prohibited by statute is a categorical...

I won't even call it an exemption,

a categorical prohibition on use.

It basically makes documents that may be

in government possession, not public documents.

You don't ever get to balancing under Room 5 and A5.

It's just a prohibition in and of itself.

We have also taken the position as an alternative argument

in this case that RSA 10513B stands

as that sort of prohibition.

But we don't think the court needs to reach

either of those arguments in this case

to resolve this case.

All this court needs to do is to resolve

whether the trial court applied the correct legal standard.

And we believe looking to the right in the law was error

and concluding that there is no...

That there's a presumption in favor of public access

to confidential police files was also error.

What is the confidential status

of exculpatory information?

They don't use this process.

And the state gives the trial court the information.

The trial court decides, yes, this information's

exculpatory and provides it to defense counsel.

What are the rules at that point?

So that's an open question that I don't think

the court needs to answer in this case,

in light of it being potentially exculpatory.

Our position is that it remains confidential

at least until...

For the purposes of the criminal trial,

at least until either the defendant says

there's a due process reason why I need

to disseminate it more widely than my defense team

or it's an open court.

We think that the only thing RSA-10513B

authorizes even under Roman numeral one

or two or three to the point the court

has made a determination that should be disclosed

is disclosure to the defendant.

And we think the protective orders here reflect that.

The last thing I'd like to say,

and I know I'm running out of my initial time here,

is briefly with respect to remedies.

We think good cause is the correct standard

and we have asked this court to tell the trial court

that it should have entered the protective orders.

And the reasons for that I think are twofold.

First, our position is the statute's determination,

the legislature's determination

that this information is confidential

is in and of itself good cause.

It reflects the fact that there could be harm

or prejudice in producing that information.

If the court is unwilling to go there

or if the court thinks that that's an issue

better left for another day,

we think that the harms to the system

that we've identified in our briefing,

whether it be who's vindicating the privacy interests,

creating appellate issues that are unnecessary,

limiting disclosure, slowing down disclosure to defendants,

those are harms and prejudices

that this court can determine from this record

justify the relief.

What in the record supports that?

Is that was there fact finding about that?

Or what is the basis for those statements?

Suppose they're legal arguments, Justice Bassett,

is really how we've presented them to you.

How old are these cases that are now pending?

That's a good question.

They've been pending for a while, Your Honor,

but I think maybe I'm getting the point

you're trying to make here

that illustrates the prejudice in and of itself.

We're going to have appeals in all of these cases

or there's going to be potentially witnesses

who are coming to you saying we need relief

from what's going on in a criminal case.

That's going to cause prejudice in and of itself.

And I think that's something the court could frankly

basically take judicial notice of.

The alternative remedy, which we would prefer

and we think the correct answer is

remand and tell the trial court

to enter the protective orders,

in this case for the reasons I just said.

Add a minimum.

And you would have us do that

not withstanding the usual deference

that we give to trial courts for discovery matters?

Yes, Your Honor, because either the statute

or the circumstances, the prejudice

that is kind of manifest in what's happening here,

we believe as a matter of law meets

the good cause standard.

If the court's unwilling to do that though,

and I could understand why it would be,

reluctant, we ask at a minimum

that the court make clear to the trial court

and trial courts in general that

the public interest balancing that exists

in right to know does not apply here.

It's a good cause standard.

We would ask that you adopt the federal standard

and that ultimately if a showing of harm

or prejudice and that's not a high threshold

can be made, something other than

I see them out of time.

So we'll have it.

But you can finish your point

and then retain your one minute.

Good luck.

Thank you, Your Honor.

The court make clear the correct

legal standard and that it's a low threshold

and direct that the trial court apply that standard.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Mr. Clementowicz, did I say that correctly?

Yes, Your Honor, thank you.

That's the first time.

Good morning, may it please the court.

My name is Henry Clementowicz

and I represent the respondents in this appeal.

I'm happy to take questions at any time.

Including from yesterday's argument?

I don't want to take questions

without my opponent from yesterday.

Okay.

In this case, the state is conditioning

Brady and Lauri material,

which it is constitutionally obligated to produce

on a one-sided protective order

which it says the trial court must enter.

Our position is that the trial court

has significant discretion in deciding whether

to issue a protective order.

Even if it does,

where does the trial court come off

saying that police personnel files

are presumptively public document?

So I think what I took that to mean

is that public records are presumptively

public under 91A, which is true,

under the preamble to the 91A statute

and given the constitutional basis for that statute

that it's the burden of an entity-resisting disclosure

to demonstrate why a document

is exempt from public disclosure.

Well, let's assume there was no

exculpatory information in either of these files

because apparently the trial court

hadn't yet made that determination.

Would you agree that if there was

no exculpatory information

that the files were in fact confidential?

So I think that the statute,

that's a really good question,

Justice Donovan.

So I think the statute makes

exculpatory evidence non-confidential,

which is what the Foster memorandum says

when he was Attorney General in 2017.

I think it makes potentially

exculpatory evidence that gets turned over

from a trial court after in-camera review

non-exculpatory.

And I think it makes otherwise relevant information that's just-

You meant non-public.

Yeah.

I mean, you meant public.

It makes it public.

I'm sorry.

Yes, public.

Yes.

I'm trying to follow you.

Go ahead.

Thank you.

Then under Section 3, anything else

that may otherwise be relevant

is turned over to the defendant

and is also not confidential.

And the reason for that I think

is just a simple matter

of statutory interpretation,

which is Section 3 of RSA 10513B

provides that only the remainder

of the file shall be maintained

confidential.

So your position is forget about this

proposed protective order,

which was at least seemingly offered

to speed the process

and not bog the trial court down.

So forget about that.

The information goes to the trial court.

The trial court looks at it and says,

this is exculpatory information.

It's your position that when it's provided

to the defendant's counsel,

it is public information then.

So my view is that the trial court

may issue a protective order

in that circumstance.

As long as there's good cause

such that a defendant's first amendment

rights and Part 1 Article 2 rights

are not violated,

a trial court may issue a protective order,

which is what the rules provide

subject to good cause.

The defendant's first amendment

rights and whose?

Oh, and Part 1 Article 22,

the attendance state constitutional rights.

So provided that good cause exists,

a trial court may...

What is the defendant's

interest there

in making this information public?

So I don't represent

Justice Hans Marconi,

the defendant's down below,

so I can't make any representations

as to what...

What's kind of my concern is

part of the harm here

is the delay in the defendant's trial.

There's a process that was in place

that allowed for this,

you know, avoiding this balancing,

if you will,

or having the trial court

have to make these preliminary

rulings on this information.

And I'm not sure what interest

we're trying to vindicate here

because the defendant

could have gone with the prior process

and made an argument

if there was a reason

to disseminate the information

beyond the protective order.

So I'm just concerned

with what interest...

We don't have a public request here

that we're reviewing.

So I'm really concerned

at what interest we're trying to vindicate

or whether we're speculating.

So I think,

turning to your point about delay,

I'd point out that at least

in one of these cases,

the state was already a year and a half late

in providing this information

before it even offered the protective order.

But again, they may not have had to provide it

till they determined

who their witnesses were going to be.

So that's not...

I mean, the delay I'm concerned about

is now we have this appeal.

Which the state brought in,

I agree that that adds

prejudice to my clients

in terms of the delay.

In terms of the interest,

I think the statute does not provide

that confidentiality is mandatory.

And as the trial court correctly considered,

construed the language in RSA 10513B,

since there's nothing else

that makes this information

necessarily confidential,

we're in unsustainable exercise

of discretion territory.

Because Rule 12B8

provides that a trial court may issue

the trial court a protective order.

It doesn't say a trial court must.

And Rule of Criminal Procedure

50D provides that simply in agreement

of the parties that information is confidential

is not sufficient to deem the information so.

And doesn't the statute under Roman numeral three

make the remaining portion of the five

confidential and shall be returned

to the police department?

Yeah, that's right.

The remainder...

It's my understanding, correct me if I'm wrong,

but there's been no ruling

that the information that the state was inclined

to present to the defendant

was either exculpatory in this case or relevant.

So I think that by presenting the information

pursuant to Section 1,

that's an implicit concession

that the information is...

They used the legal procedure

for exculpatory information under the statute.

Well, have the state identified its witnesses

by that point?

I'm not counsel below.

I don't know, I imagine,

given that the case was a year and a half old,

that they probably had.

Well, if I'm trying that case,

I'd want to know whether, one,

a trial court's going to deem this information exculpatory

and then I'm going to take that witness off of my list.

That removes this whole problem, doesn't it?

So I think that the reason that the statute

was codified the way that it was

was following the court's decisions,

which were critical of placing...

Prior to the 2012 amendment,

all potentially or exculpatory information

was submitted automatically to the trial court

for in-camera review

and the legislature determined

that that was not an appropriate process

because the prosecutor themselves

have an independent constitutional obligation

to conduct that review.

And so when a prosecutor looks at it and says,

this is exculpatory, they have to turn it over.

And if they can't decide,

then they're supposed to take it to the trial court

for in-camera review.

And the state's complaints

that that would bog down the judicial system

with requests for in-camera review

is a policy argument

that it should present to the legislature.

It's obligation, if it doesn't like the term of the statute,

to suggest that the legislature changes the statute.

It's not for the court to re-write.

I think we're more concerned

about the artificial creation of an appellate issue

that would be intrinsic to the delay

in any criminal proceeding.

And I think that that can be resolved

by saying RSA 10513B does not require,

does not make exculpatory evidence confidential.

And there's nothing else that requires

a trial court issue or protective order.

It may do so under good cause.

It was within its discretion to decline to do so here.

The state had an opportunity, multiple opportunities,

in fact, to present particularized privacy interests

and it declined to do so.

And the state, like all litigants,

has to live with the litigation choices that they make.

And so I think this court can send back

a pretty bright line rule and just say,

10513B does not make exculpatory evidence public,

which is what attorney general,

or does not make exculpatory evidence confidential,

which is what attorney general Foster recognized

when he was attorney general

and what the plain text of the statute says.

And then just say, otherwise,

protective order requests are governed

by the familiar, unsustainable exercise standard under rule 12B8.

Until Judge Shulman injected 91A into this,

was 91A or the first amendment claim

before the court had anybody brief that?

I don't believe so.

My client is assented below with the caveat

that one of them later filed a clarification

in the motion to withdraw assent,

which I think actually defeats the state's waiver arguments.

But I do believe that was raised

by the trial court for the first time.

And to be clear, our position is not

that this case is governed by 91A.

It's that having decided that 10513B

does not make exculpatory evidence confidential,

the trial court is free to consider a variety of factors

in determining whether to issue a protective order.

In this case, it examined a heightened interest

in allegations of sustained police.

But again, we're predetermination

of exculpatory evidence.

So I might agree with you

once the evidence is deemed exculpatory

and introduced in a criminal trial,

but where is this predetermination phase?

And that's what the state says that they've done.

That's not what the statute provides for.

The statute does not allow the state

to just give not potentially exculpatory information

to the defense.

It requires them to give...

So the state has to identify

absent a court view and stand by that.

This is exculpatory.

I think that prosecutors have ethical obligations

to identify exculpatory information and produce them.

Maybe you covered this,

but why at that very moment should it become public?

At some person's opinion.

That's right.

It's a constitutional requirement.

I think the courts have a role to play too,

but I think...

Constitutional as to the defendant,

but as to the world?

That's right.

So why should the information become public

is because there's nothing in any statute or rule

that requires that it remain confidential.

And information is presumptively public.

There are rules of criminal procedure

that require the state to turn over

witness statements and police reports

and accident reconstructions.

The state can under rule of criminal procedure 12

ask for a protective order on that information.

And all they need to do is show good cause.

That's right.

But the court is not...

The trial court is not obligated to issue that protective order.

Well, when the motion is sent into,

generally speaking,

you can give the parties the benefit of the doubt.

I agree that it was unusual,

but rule 50 of criminal procedure

provides an agreement of the parties

that information is confidential

is not a sufficient basis to make it so.

And so in an ordinary course,

I think typically these rules,

these assented two motions for protective order are granted.

I think even if this court affirms Judge Shulman,

that will probably continue to be the case

unless people start objecting to the protective orders.

But there's nothing that requires

a court to issue that protective order.

And I think that's the key point here,

is that if the statute doesn't do it,

nothing else does.

One of the points you make in your brief

is that this is asymmetrical.

What are we supposed to take from that argument?

Well, I think what we're supposed to take

from that argument is that this is a viewpoint-based

and or speaker-based discrimination

against the defendants,

because the state is free to use this information

however it pleases, but a defendant is not.

So it wouldn't be a problem if the state said,

well, we're not going to make it confidential,

so you shouldn't make it confidential.

So it's now symmetrical.

No problem?

Well, I think that problem would be evaluated

if the protective orders of the parties are prohibited,

rather than just defendant and defense counsel.

But that's not what the protective order says.

And that's not the draft protective order

that's not where the protective order,

then we wouldn't have a case here?

Well, I think Judge Shulman might still have denied the motion.

I think he would have found a way.

He may have.

So I think that that is an unconstitutional

discrimination on the basis of viewpoint

and frankly unsupportable.

There's no reason why the state should not be bound

and the defendant should.

And just to utter factors that the court could consider

when it declined to the protective order,

in addition to whether the documents

may be public under 91A,

the court I think also looked at

the First Amendment implications,

but it also looked at the sort of unique chill

that this place is on the defense bar.

So one of the things that Judge Shulman suggested

was that this prohibited defense counsel

from talking to other practitioners

in the area about problematic police officers

or sharing that a disclosure had been made in one case

and hey, you have the same officer,

did you get the disclosure?

Isn't that far from the interests

of the particular defendants in these cases?

I don't think that the trial court

is so cabined in what it's allowed to consider

when it decides whether to issue a protective order.

But for example, a prosecutor would be allowed

to go to the officer in question and say,

hey, tell me what happened, where their witness is,

how can we present this testimony

in a way that's going to minimize the sting to the jury?

They can convince the issue.

The defendant can't because it's prohibited

from talking to the world about the nature of the evidence

and that includes the officer who may have done it

or any witnesses to that misconduct.

And so I think the trial court

also appropriately considered

that this could have a due process implication.

Certainly the defense counsel going the witness list

would go around and talk to other defense counsel

about various witnesses, including the officer at issue.

I don't think that that's entirely true.

They could.

I've spoken to the-

So the list of witnesses is confidential?

The list of witnesses is not confidential,

but I don't think that this defense counsel

would be able to go if it were a public defender.

And one of these cases was the public defenders.

Right.

They have a weekly case conference.

And they can't say, hey, I just got a lorry disclosure

for this police officer.

He has a credibility problem.

Has anyone else ever crossed him on that?

I have this police officer on my witness list

and cases that are already resolved.

They're arguably is no confidentiality.

I don't think that that's true.

I think the protective orders outlive the cases.

And I can represent to this court

that I spoke to the director of litigation

and training at the New Hampshire public defender

who says protective orders like this

are exactly what prevent the public defenders

from establishing an internal lorry list.

Let me ask you this.

It may not be relevant.

But what if the personnel file contained a police officer?

Contained a notation that he suffered from Glock Holm.

Absolutely.

The issue in the case was the ability to perceive.

Does the fact that the court, the first of all,

the state would naturally disclose that to Brady

and that the court, if it got involved,

would order that to be disclosed to this defendant?

Why should that be then open to the public?

I don't think that should be open to the public.

I think that a police officer's medical information,

and I see my light is on if I hear the answer.

I think that there absolutely would be a basis

to seek a protective order on the basis

that we're talking about truly confidential medical information.

And the trial court gave the prosecution an opportunity

to come forward with exactly that type of evidence.

And oftentimes, it may be that the lorry disclosures

or the evidence in question, some of it

should be under protective order

or maybe there's a public version

with redactions that can be shared,

depending on what's in that information.

And so if there is medical records

or names of juveniles or counseling records

or someone's sexual history,

that probably should be under protective order,

but the state forego its obligation

or its opportunity to share that today.

So I agree with you.

What should we remand for proceedings

consistent with that idea that the trial court

should give the state an opportunity

to present evidence as to why this information

should remain confidential?

The trial court did give the state that opportunity,

but I would be fine.

I think a remand saying the statute

doesn't require confidentiality.

The court may subject to good cause,

issue of protective order.

Perhaps these are things to consider, try again.

I would be okay with that.

Thank you.

Garland.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Three points if I can get them in very quick.

The interest, Justice Harkony,

we don't think is implicated in this case.

It is a First Amendment interest

or a public access interest to information

that can be vindicated through the right to no process.

It can be vindicated by a criminal defendant

if he or she wishes to use that information

outside of the context of the criminal case

or a criminal defense attorney, the ACLU, anybody

can seek the information.

There are questions that need to be resolved

about access to this in the right to no context,

but it is an interest that can be vindicated

or at least attempted to be vindicated

outside of the criminal process.

The interest here is a due process interest

and I don't want to overstate the thoroughness

of my research, but I was unable to find a single case

that talked about First Amendment being the justification

for turning information over under Brady Glory.

It's a different right

and it's more specific to the criminal process.

The second point I'd like to make

is that the view of 10513B

that the respondents are advocating

and that Judge Shulman signed off on

really moves a very useful discovery tool

that exists in virtually every other context.

The ability for parties to exchange information

subject to protective orders

in order to facilitate the process.

Reading the, we don't think it's necessary

to read the statute that way

and if you do read it that way,

it's going to remove a tool that exists

basically everywhere else in litigation

and we'd ask that you don't do it.

Thank you.

Thank you.
