This is case 2021-0138 in Ray, the Omega Trust.

Good afternoon.

Good afternoon.

May it please the court.

My name is Lisa Balanti of Campton, New Hampshire,

and I am the attorney for David Apostoloff, the appellant

and the petitioner in this matter.

It is our position that the trial court committed

reversible error when it dismissed the petition filed

by Mr. Apostoloff to validate the alleged Third Amendment

and restatement of the Omega Trust.

This case had a somewhat long procedural history

where Mr. Douglas, the grantor and settler of the Omega

Trust, passed away in 2016.

Initially, my client filed a petition

with the 10th Circuit probate division in Brentwood

to seek the court's instruction regarding the no contest

provision in that trust.

That was resolved.

And the petition to validate the Third Amendment

was brought in 2019.

What complicated this slightly was

that the original beneficiaries per the terms of the trust

were not able to have a copy of the trust

or much information about the trust.

And therefore, the court appointed attorney Syracuse

Hillman to be the special trustee

to represent their interests.

He also filed a petition for instructions

regarding the no contest provision.

And that was resolved as well, where the court did allow him

to contest our petition, or his clients

to contest our petition.

So after that was done, attorney Syracuse

Hillman, a special trustee on behalf of his clients,

but the people whose interest he represented in the trust,

brought a motion to dismiss, which

was granted by this court.

I mention all of this to just get into why this person has been

pending on the circuit for so long,

and also why there was never any discovery done in this matter.

There was never an evidentiary hearing done in this matter.

And it's our position that our pleadings

would have passed the reasonably, the pleadings

as pled would reasonably be susceptible to recovery

in this case.

In New Hampshire, RSA 564B441 states

the method for creating trust in the state of New Hampshire,

which goes so far as to say trust does not

have to be in writing to be valid.

In this case, the trust itself stated

that the power allowed the settler or grantor

to amend the trust without any consent from any other person

by giving notice to any other person other than the trustee.

And notice was given to the trustee here as your argument.

The argument is that the notice was given to the trustee

in the way that he had told the trustee that he

was amending his trust.

Does this be emailed or telephoned?

No, he emailed his attorney.

And so the idea was that the settler grantor, our position

is that he told the trustee that he

was contacting his attorney, which he did.

I don't think that's disputed.

And gave a very detailed email to his attorney

about how he wanted his trust to be amended.

Did the trustee admit that that conversation occurred

between with the grantor?

As far as I know, the trustee stated

that he did not know of the specific amendment.

I don't think he denied that he knew that the trustee was

the settler grantor explained to amend the trust,

but he didn't know the specifics of that amendment.

And that's the position of the respondent,

that because he didn't have specifics to the amendment

that we didn't have enough.

Our response is that we never had an evidentiary hearing

on that.

We never got to this.

So this was done on a motion to dismiss,

so therefore the attorney broke.

I think it is never testified.

Never.

I've never talked to him.

Trustee was never deposed.

Correct.

And the emails were before the trial judge?

They were as part of the petition.

But there was never any discovery done at all.

And I state that because it's significant,

one of the issues that the court found

when they ordered the dismissal of my client's case

is that they relied on a Pennsylvania state of field

where the trust amendment documents were found

in what was the red binder in the case.

And the court in its order stated

there was no such evidence of anything

as far as what the trustee found.

I don't know what the trustee found

because I never asked the trustee what he found.

So including in the respondent's brief,

there are other allegations, for instance,

that the trust protector, who is now the successor trustee,

Don Corrente, that she helped Mr. Douglas type out

this email to his attorney, Attorney Burke.

I don't know that's true because I never actually

talked to Corrente.

The only person I've talked to about this is my own client.

So there are these facts that were alleged

that never got put into discovery.

So the court found that, quote,

the exchange of the emails did not substantially comply

with the terms of the trust?

Yes.

You're arguing that there would have been additional evidence

that might have been brought out

had there been further litigation?

That's correct.

And that argument was made to the trial court?

Yes.

Yes.

It was made.

Presumably the trial court asked what evidence?

What was the response?

I'm sorry.

I didn't.

Presumably the trial court at that point said,

inquired what evidence and somehow you

or your predecessor counsel responded.

What's the answer?

What evidence?

We never had a hearing on the motion to dismiss.

I filed an objection that stated

that we didn't do discovery and that was my idea

that we don't know what's gonna pan out of this case

because it's done before, the motion to dismiss

this file before even any discovery was done.

So I never got to address the court directly

on any of those issues.

Well, why isn't the failure to execute

the agreement fatal here?

You know, I would argue that the law,

the RSA 564B6602 states that it's

to be substantial compliance

as long as the trust doesn't allow,

doesn't state otherwise.

I argue that paragraph 19 was done.

It was substantial compliance because he did,

he did let us know what he wanted to do.

I don't, like I said, I don't think that's disputed.

But doesn't that read out paragraph 22?

Well, you know, I would argue that RSA 564B1-112

argues that the trustee's intent

is with respect to beneficiaries is paramount.

So I think that the execution requirement

is a procedural requirement,

but once if we can determine the trustee's intent,

that's paramount.

Meaning the grantor's intent.

I'm sorry, the grantor's intent.

The email for your argument would be,

could substitute for a formal execution?

Yes, that would be my argument, Justice.

I mean, and as long as we could prove,

and I'm not saying we could prove

because we never got to that point

of doing even doing discovery,

if we could prove that the grantor's intent,

I'll try not to mix those up,

the grantor's intent with respect to the beneficiaries

is paramount so that the execution

is a mere formality because of paragraph 19.

To me, they kind of contradict each other,

but I think the law is on my side, Your Honor.

But that's a legal issue, isn't it?

Not an issue that would be developed factually

with further discovery or summary judgment pleadings.

I don't agree with that because

the grantor settler apparently had conversations

with many people in the trust, including my client.

None of these people were deposed, none of them,

none of them were on the record,

including Attorney Stephen Burke.

I wasn't able to talk to Attorney Burke

because of the client privilege,

which my client could not waive.

So I don't know what Attorney Burke would tell me

about what the settler's intent was.

And you don't have any preliminary drafts

from Attorney Burke's file.

All you have are the emails.

The emails, that's correct.

Unfortunately, Mr. Douglas passed away

before that could happen.

Could emails themselves without any draft documents,

assuming it was clear what was intended,

could they substitute for the drafted amendment?

That's our argument.

Our argument is that if we could establish

what the grantor's intent was,

and if we could establish substantial compliance

with the terms of the trust,

then the emails could be enough.

What is substantial compliance with the requirement

that there be an execution of a document?

Either it's executed or it's not.

Well, if it were executed, I wouldn't be here.

So substantial compliance to me means that there's,

and it's clear and convincing evidence is the standard,

that the settler of the trust

complied with the terms of the trust

in order to establish his intent to amend the trust,

which in New Hampshire,

as long as the trust doesn't require it,

it does not need to be even a writing or an execution.

But it does require it here.

Requires execution.

Well, to me, that's not,

it's contradicted by the paragraph 19

that says that he can amend the trust

as long as he gives notice to the trustee.

It doesn't say anything about an execution regarding that.

And since the paragraph 19 comes before paragraph 22,

I would argue that the paragraph 19,

as long as that's complied with 22,

the formality of actually getting the amendment signed.

But this amendment hadn't even been produced

in an agreement.

There wasn't a document that set forth the amendment.

Was there?

There was a draft email by Attorney Burke

to Mr. Douglas, the grantor settler.

And, but even more important to me,

there's a very comprehensive email to Attorney Burke

by the grantor settler that lays out

how he wants to change his trust.

And we would argue that that was certainly,

that would certainly show his intent

of what he wished to do.

And it even says in the amendment

that he has very few time left.

He died with a matter of days of sending that email.

It wasn't, it was certainly not a lot of time.

Had he sent that detailed email and signed it,

could that be sufficient?

Yes.

If he had done that, it would have been sufficient.

So in this instance, the attorney sent back,

here's what I think you want.

And then my understanding is the final email

was back to the attorney saying yeah,

but with these sort of changes.

That's true, but the changes had more to do with just,

they didn't have anything to do with changing beneficiaries.

They had to do with more about the grammar

and the way he wanted the document in writing.

It had nothing, he didn't change beneficiaries

in that email.

That third email didn't change the substance.

It was a substantive changes.

It was just how he wanted it written

and how he wanted changes made more dramatically

than anything else.

And it's clear and convincing evidence of intent, correct?

Yes.

Not clear and convincing evidence of execution.

Clear and convincing evidence of the settler's intent.

Which again, my client and myself would argue

that was enough with that email

because it was so specific.

It was a very detailed email.

And also argued that the court committed

reversible error when it found that

the writing wasn't enough

because the trust was too complex.

And I don't agree that the UTC provides that.

It doesn't, I don't think it matters

how complex the trust is as long as the intent

is clear as far as what the settler wanted to do

with the beneficial interests of the trust.

It may be a complex drafting issue,

but the settler's intent could be quite direct.

I would like this to result in that.

And then it may take the attorney

some pretzel drafting to get there.

And what we're asking for is just the case

to be remanded back to the trial court

so we can get, we can sort out the evidence

which we've never been able to do.

We got, again, this was lost on a motion to dismiss

before I completed any discovery.

So that's why, and you know, well,

but that's how it happened.

So even if this court were to find in my client's favor,

it's still going back to the trial court.

It's, if a client was still in the respondents,

they will still have a chance to object.

They'll have a chance to depose who they want to depose.

And maybe then it may even be lost on a motion to dismiss.

I'm not conceding that,

but we didn't even have that chance.

This was all done before any evidence

was put in the court at all or by any counsel,

as far as I know.

Looks like I still have time.

You don't have time for this.

I will submit it.

Thank you.

Attorney Syracuse Hellman.

Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,

and may it please the court.

I'm Benjamin Syracuse Hellman.

I'm the special trustee in this matter

appointed by the probate court

to represent the interests of the beneficiaries

who'd be harmed by the purported Third Amendment.

And I'm willing to take questions

at any time that the court has them.

So I think it's, the trial court's dismissal

should be affirmed because the petitioner

failed to allege facts from which the court

can conclude either, A, that the method of amendment

contained within the trust was substantially complied with,

or B, that the facts and circumstances

constitute clear and convincing evidence

of the grantor's intent,

that the email correspondence

constitute a Third Amendment to the trust.

The governing statute is RSA 564B 6602C,

which provides that the settler may amend

or revoke a revocable trust,

either by substantial compliance

or by any other method

manifesting clear and convincing evidence of intent

if the terms of the trust do not provide a method

or they don't expressly prohibit methods

other than the methods provided.

So I think we just need to distinguish

between the substantial compliance

and the clear and convincing

as they're really two different options.

Here, method of amendment is set forth

in paragraphs 19 and 22.

Paragraph 22 says the amendment is effective

when it's executed by the grantor.

And paragraph 19 requires the filing of notice

of such revocation, modification,

change or withdrawal with the trustee.

And it is undisputed

that the amendment was never executed.

And we would submit that the amendment

was also never filed with the trustee.

We have an allegation

of a non-specific statement of future intent.

There was a question earlier

about what was the means of notification,

email, phone, or otherwise.

It wasn't pled.

There's no allegation as to when,

by what means or what the content.

There was notice was pled, not the means.

Advanced notice of an unspecified future intent

to amend was pled.

So that would pass the bear pleading standard,

would it not?

You would argue, Your Honor,

that it has to be notice of the content

of the amendment, the requirement in the trust

in paragraph 19.

Does it say in paragraph 19

that it has to be detailed notice?

It does not use the word detailed, Your Honor,

but it says the filing notice

of such revocation, modification, et cetera.

And our argument is that an unspecified intent,

future intent to modify the trust doesn't qualify.

And part of why it doesn't qualify

is because the trustee needs to know

what the terms of the amendment are

in order to be able to carry them out.

And it could have been done easily here.

The trustee could have been copied.

If we accept their argument

that the email could constitute an amendment,

the trustee could have easily been copied

on that email or could have been forwarded to that.

If the trustee had been copied on the email,

that might have been sufficient notice of the content.

For the notice requirement, yes.

I still think we have a problem

with the email of the amendment.

Is that a factual inquiry?

How has that really evaluated

on a motion to dismiss basis?

Your Honor, the emails were submitted

as part of the petition.

So they may be considered and were considered

and by the trial court in ruling on the motion

to dismiss.

Similarly, do we have a definition of execution?

Does it have to be a signature or a mark on the paper?

Can it be some other

some other acknowledgement, if you will, verbally or by email?

We would argue that execution requires signature.

Paragraph 22 makes reference

to the amendment being effective

when executed by the grantor,

notwithstanding the signature

that the trustee is provided for.

It's a direct reference in the same sentence to signature.

So the trustee has to sign

and the grantor only has to execute.

We would argue that the execution requirement

by the grantor includes a signature

and the reference in that sentence is to...

How does that relate to the friendly trust attitude

of our trust statute?

Well, Your Honor, I think the trust code

tries to strike a balance

and I think 6602C does strike a balance

between the days of your when you missed half a word

on your signature and the whole thing was thrown out,

notwithstanding the intent and a desire to still ensure

that when trusts are being amended or modified

that we know what the intent is,

that there are some safeguards for authenticity

and veracity of what's happening.

6602 allows some flexibility,

obviously a matter of amendment,

but it still requires that compliance be substantial

and we would submit that amendments can deviate

in administrative or ministerial details

and meet that substantial compliance

as long as those deviations don't go to their authenticity

or the purpose for which the requirements exist.

There can't be wholesale rejection

of the methods described in the trust

and we'd still have substantial compliance.

For example, in Kirschbaum,

a case from the Massachusetts Pellet Court

that we cite in our brief,

the grantor executed in a state planning document

in the attorney's office before a notary

declared his rationale before the witnesses

and the trustees were present for the execution

and the lawyer then said,

should I store the amendment in the vault?

And everybody, the trustees,

I guess didn't say anything,

but they were there and it got stored in the vault

and later on someone challenged it and said,

well, it was never delivered to the trustee

and the court said, come on,

the trustees were present when this happened

and we're gonna find substantial compliance

with the delivery requirement

in effect the trustee waived it.

That's not the situation that we have here.

We don't really have any compliance.

In fact, numerous red flags that meant the process.

Why not vet all this out at a hearing?

Because your honor,

it was the obligation of the petitioner to plead.

They do not,

the petitioner doesn't get to not make a case

and then get to discovery to discover all their evidence.

The court requires,

the case law of the court requires

that the petitioner make a case

that if the allegations alleged were true,

could be susceptible of relief.

Yes, I don't think we have that here.

We also have your honor

in terms of evaluating both substantial compliance

and we'd submit when we get

to the clear and convincing evidence standard,

past practice.

We have a two prior amendments

which not only were done in writing,

but at least the one that's in the record

includes the signature of the trustee on the amendment.

And they were prepared for-

The signature of the grantor, right?

Yes, it absolutely includes the signature of the grantor

and it includes the signature

of the trustee acknowledging the filing requirement.

Is that an exhibit to the complaint or the petition?

Yes, I believe your honor

that the second amendment, yes,

and my statement was an exhibit to the petition,

I think exhibit three.

Yes, so that was also before the court

in its consideration.

During COVID, arguably,

given some of the emergency provisions,

there might not have been in-person signature requirement.

During COVID, the emergency provisions

allowed for remote signing, acknowledgement.

I don't know that they, and video acknowledgement,

but I don't think they dispensed

for the requirement for signature,

certainly not for something to be acknowledged

to be notarized.

The trust itself also was signed in 2016,

so that was obviously well before COVID.

There were red flags in this case

indicating the process followed

did not fulfill the authenticity seeking purpose

of the required elements.

They did not substantially comply.

One is the grantor never spoke with

or met with as a state planning attorney

during the process.

The email was prepared with the assistance

of an interested party and proposed beneficiary.

That's actually alleged,

there was a question about that in counsel's argument,

that's alleged in paragraph 11 of the petition

that the grantor informed his trust protector

of the changes he planned to make,

and she assisted him in drafting the email

to his attorney, Steve Burke.

The body of the email itself

doesn't actually direct the changes.

There's a letter, and the letter dated the same day

is not referenced in the email,

even though the letter was attached to the email.

The letter is also unsigned,

and there's significant changes

to the estate plan that are requested.

So we submit the facts and circumstances.

The letter includes the name of the writer.

It's just not signed, correct?

Correct, Your Honor.

So shifting on slightly from substantial compliance,

I'd like to talk about under 6602C,

an amendment can also be made

by clear and convincing evidence

if the trust itself does not preclude

other methods of amendment.

And we have here a written trust instrument

that expressly provides for a method of amendment,

as we've discussed.

There's a no-content clause that prohibits

bringing a court action, such as this one,

to set aside or vary the terms of the trust

as amended at the grantor's death.

We would submit that that is evidence

of the grantor's intent to allow

for other methods of amendment.

There's no other specific conclusion

of amendment clause in the trust document?

No, Your Honor.

We would argue that paragraph 19

in providing a method for amendment

and paragraph 22 in requiring execution,

when you read the trust document as a whole,

that the trust instrument does not anticipate

that other methods of amendment would be permitted.

But yes, we would acknowledge there is not a sentence

saying other methods of amendment are prohibited.

The trial court did, however, take into account

the undisputed prior conduct of the grantor,

which was to execute a written document,

to require the trustee to acknowledge it in writing,

and to carry forth this directive

that the amendment shall be effective

only when executed.

The grantor in the past always complied

with the strict formalities of paragraph 19 and 22,

and he didn't ask the drafting attorney

for anything different.

The emails said, I'm requesting the preparation

of written instruments.

We have an acknowledgement in those emails

of the grantor's awareness of his illness.

It mentioned specifics about his serious health issues,

and said time is of the essence.

I'm unable to speak on the phone,

and I don't have energy to meet with him in person.

But what it doesn't say is,

is there another way to do this?

What if I die before the amendments are signed?

Can this email constitute my amendment?

Can we jump on a phone call or a video chat

or something where I make sure that you know what I want,

and so we can reach an agreement

so I can make sure that this happens before I die?

There's not that in the emails.

Well, he expressed concerns about his health,

that he wasn't able to come in physically to meet,

and he was having trouble talking even on the phone.

Absolutely, Your Honor, he does.

He doesn't then take the next step of saying,

can this happen in some way other than the way

that it's always happened in the past,

which is the preparation of a written instrument

for signature.

What was the nature of the amendment?

I've forgotten.

Was it to include beneficiary for a specific sum?

The proposed amendments, I should say,

were quite substantial.

It was to add four separate beneficiaries,

one of which was the person who was assisting him

in drafting the email,

and none of which were relatives of his.

So in effect, the existing trust essentially

had five family member beneficiaries,

and so he was divesting them of half of their interest.

And we've been speaking sort of informally about the trust,

but what I would point out is there are actually

multiple trusts here.

The letter alone references 11 separate trusts by name,

and the email from Attorney Burke references

some 20-odd different trust instruments

that were in effect at one time or another.

So we're talking about quite a complex

and interdependent estate planning scheme.

So wouldn't substantial compliance need to be measured

in light of some input from Attorney Burke?

Your Honor, we would submit that the substantial compliance,

that the court can decide it based on the record

before the court,

that there are the two key requirements of execution

and filing with the trustee

that facially neither of those was complied with.

Also, moving on to clear and convincing evidence,

if the court concludes that there was not

an exclusive option to amend the trust,

then we're in the box of their clear

and convincing evidence of intent.

And I think intent, and we have to look at the petition,

does the petition plead it?

Intent require intent to amend,

intent to amend by the method employed,

and intent to amend the manner expressed

in the proposed instrument.

And so the key question the court must ask

in evaluating that is what was the intent of the grantor

when he allegedly sent those emails?

Did he intend for those emails to be the amendment?

And we would submit clearly not.

The trial court correctly found that the allegations

in the petition that the grantor

in effect amended his trust by email

couldn't meet that clear and convincing standard.

Moreover, those allegations affirmatively demonstrated

that the grantor intended to amend his trust

via future execution of a written amendment.

That's what he asked his lawyer for.

There was no declaration or statement within the emails

that the email thread or final email

was intended to serve as an amendment.

The petition does not allege that the grantor

when he sent those emails

intended his correspondence to be an amendment.

There was the clear expectation

the attorney would be preparing a written amendment

and the grantor did not deliver

as we've talked about any substantive notice

what the amendment was as was required by the trust

and as was always the grantor's prior practice.

So essentially the argument from the other side is

well even though we all know from what we're seeing here

that if the grantor hadn't died

amendment would have been prepared

potentially revised further.

The lawyer would have verified capacity

and absence of undue influence

and all those other steps we typically go through.

And then the amendment would have executed or not.

We know that process would have happened but for the death

and essentially the petition is requiring

is the grantor intervening death is an event

that makes what otherwise not a valid amendment a valid one.

I do see my time has expired.

Thank you very much.

Thank you very much.

The case is submitted for adjourned.
