This is case 2821-0369, appeal of Caitlin Winton-Nower.

Winton-Nower.

Winton-Nower.

Good afternoon, attorney LaFrance.

Thank you. May it please the court. Good afternoon.

My name is Jim LaFrance.

I represent the appellant and the claimant, Caitlin Wittenower.

I anticipate my argument today will be brief.

I intend to talk about a few key points and then sit down.

But I'll obviously try to answer any questions that you may have.

This appeal is not a dispute about what the worker's,

pertinent worker's comp law provides or what it should be.

We submit the law is well settled.

The question presented in this appeal for your review and answer

is whether the compensation appeal board applied the pertinent law

to the evidence that was presented at the hearing.

The evidence is Ms. Wittenower's medical records and her testimony.

You have all that evidence and can apply the law to that evidence.

But don't we defer to the CAB?

Excuse me, I'm sorry.

Don't we defer in terms of assessment of medical records

or competing experts?

Yes.

The appellant wants to argue that Ms. Wittenower has a heavy burden

in this appeal because of deference to an agency's findings.

We assert that the standard of review in this appeal is entirely de novo.

We assert the appeals board asked the wrong question

and thereby did not apply the proper legal test.

And that is purely a legal question for you to decide.

The essence of what you're asking us to do is to find as a matter of law

that the second onset of disability was due, in your words,

at least in part to her work injury.

You're asking us to make that factual finding or the finding

to which we defer to the CAB on?

It's fairly extraordinary.

Your Honor, we submit that the question that the CAB decided

was whether or not Ms. Wittenower's neck pain in September 2020

when she had a recurrence of disability,

whether that was related to the August 2019 work injury.

We submit that the proper question that the appeals board should have asked

and decided and which you can decide based upon a review of the record

is whether Ms. Wittenower's shoulder injury,

that she had suffered in August 2019 had ceased

when the doctor imposed work restrictions again in September 2020.

There's a secondary, dealing with the standard of review again,

there's a secondary issue about whether the appeals board imposed

improper burden to prove a second incident at work

after Ms. Wittenower returned to work.

That, again, is a de novo review.

The recent decision, the appeal of a state of Dozier

where there was a question whether or not the appeals board

had applied a but-for test, it's essentially the same thing here.

Did the appeals board impose an improper burden of proof?

This court can review the appeals board's order and decide that de novo.

I think it's important also to make clear that you have all the medical evidence.

There was no doctor's testimony.

There was only Ms. Wittenower's testimony and the appeals board

found her credible and a good historian.

So there's no deference to credibility questions between medical experts.

You have all the same evidence as the appeals board.

But you would be asking us to re-weigh that evidence de novo

giving no deference to the CAB, right?

Yes, I believe that's the correct standard of review.

And it seems to me that that's not what the law provides for.

We're not supposed to do that, de novo.

Well, if there's only one reasonable conclusion

that can be reached based upon a review of the record

that a reasonable fact finder could reach,

then case law appeal of the state of Dodier,

as well as I believe it's the COTY decision,

state that this court can decide the matter just as well as the appeals board.

Yeah, there certainly are cases where we've said that,

Dodier obviously is an example.

So you're saying that the record here, we can review it

and it's that clear so that we don't send it back.

Because it seems to me you're saying,

well, the board applied the wrong burden

and the board asked the wrong question.

Normally we would say, if we agree with you,

okay, here's the right burden, here's the right question.

You do it again.

But you're saying that the medical evidence is so clear

that as a matter of law there's only one conclusion that can be reached.

That's in favor of your client.

That is correct.

I agree with your statement completely.

We assert that the proper legal question

that the appeals board should have asked

was whether the August 2019 work-related shoulder injury

had ceased in September 2020

when her treating doctor imposed this...

So under the construct that Justice Bassett has laid out,

what are we to do with the October 22nd 2020 note

from Dr. Gouma saying at this point

that the shoulder itself does not seem too bad?

It says it's not too bad.

It doesn't say that it has ceased,

which the Dean Foods and Hisco analysis would say,

would be the situation for decision

and what we say the appeals board should have considered.

And I think really what you have to look at

is the totality of the record

when Ms. Wittenauer first was imposed work restrictions.

That was September 3rd, 2020.

If you review Dr. Gouma's office notes from that date,

there's no reference at all to any neck pain.

It talks about shoulder instability.

And if you review the medical record,

I say review the last six months of 2020.

And there is that one statement in October 2020

that she referenced.

But I believe, again,

that a reasonable fact finder would conclude

that the shoulder injury had not ceased.

When she returned to work around Memorial Day 2020,

she was not able to perform the duties in the stock room.

As she had in the past.

And so they gave her different duties.

She was still attending physical therapy in September 2020

to rehabilitate the shoulder when she was taken out of work.

The records are clear and it's also her testimony

that her shoulder remained extremely painful during this time.

She had restrictions in motion.

There's a reference in the record to inability to reach above her shoulder.

There was weakness.

Dr. Gouma's records indicate she still had shoulder instability

despite the surgery.

In July 2020, Dr. Gouma's had indicated

that she has permanent injuries.

He imposes new restrictions only eight weeks later.

So we say the question is not whether the neck pain

was related to the work injury.

We contend that the evidence supports a conclusion

that the neck pain is related to the work injury.

But we understand there's deference given to the appeals board

on that question.

And that was not a question that really needed to be decided.

The focus should have been whether the work-related shoulder injury

had ceased.

And I just referred to that medical record that we believe

there can only be one reasonable conclusion.

The shoulder injury had not ceased.

The disability that began on September 3, 2020

was due at least in part to the work-related shoulder injury

and therefore Ms. Wittenauer was entitled to indemnity benefits.

That's my short and simple argument.

I'll give you one question.

Where does your burden shifting error fit into this analysis?

The burden with respect to asking or looking for a second work incident.

That's how you've articulated it in your brief, yes.

Yes.

Again, perhaps again asking the wrong question,

the appeals board was looking for an incident for neck pain

or something like that when we were saying

our claim is recurrence of our shoulder injury.

And that's why we are claiming disability benefits.

We said the neck pain was radiating from the shoulder injury,

but again, we didn't feel the appeals board

needed to decide that question.

If there's any other questions,

I'll be glad to take them on.

Otherwise, I'm finished.

Thank you.

Thank you, Attorney Salomon.

Good afternoon.

Excuse me.

May it please the court?

My name is Matt Salomon.

I represent Nike Incorporated

and the Carrier Corvelle in this matter.

This matter essentially breaks down to two major questions,

and that's all been laid out in the briefs.

There's the question of whether or not the compensation

appeals board had sufficient evidence on the record

to find the claimant had no changing condition

with regards to her compensable workplace injury.

And there's the question about whether or not

there was an impermissible burden shifted

or put onto the claimant to prove a second workplace injury.

With regards to the first issue of the sufficiency of the evidence,

there is the compensation appeals board,

as you can see from the evidence that's been submitted here,

had more than sufficient evidence to determine

the claimant's left shoulder injury had resolved.

The very least was not the cause of her disability

as of the onset of her new alleged disability

after Memorial Day of 2020.

It didn't actually conclude that the shoulder injury had resolved?

No, it did not resolve.

It was not asymptomatic.

That was an error on my part here just now.

But the medical records do show that the claimant's shoulder,

while it did have some symptoms,

and I believe it was achiness in the shoulder

from overcompensation from some residual instability

based on the September 3rd, 2020 note from Dr. Gumas.

Despite that, Dr. Gumas,

who was the claimant's primary medical provider for this injury,

did not feel that that was sufficient to take her out of work

with regards to the shoulder.

It wasn't until September 25th, 2020,

where Dr. Gumas started noting something

that might have taken her out of work

and did take her out of work,

and that was perispinal musculature pain,

as opposed to the bicepital tendonesis,

which had been the diagnosis for her left shoulder this entire time.

Dr. Gumas moves forward,

and he actually doubles down on this division between the two,

and that the left shoulder is not the cause of disability.

On October 22nd, 2020, where he notes,

most of the problem really appears to be in her neck

and around the periscabular and trapeziol musculature.

At this point, the shoulder itself does not seem too bad.

There's no argument here that, other than my error previously,

that the claimant's left shoulder injury had entirely resolved,

but based on the medical record before,

the Compensation Appeals Board had sufficient evidence

to determine that the disability had not ended

or had not begun at that point.

But that statement that you just read doesn't say

that the neck pain was attributable to the shoulder situation.

It does not say that the neck pain was not attributable,

but the Compensation Appeals Board had that evidence

before them.

They had the option, based on the entirety of the medical record,

to determine that the neck pain and the shoulder pain

were together of part and parcel to the same injury.

They did not find that.

They found that based on...

How did they distinguish the two,

given their close proximity, you know,

like the leg bones connected to the knee bone

and like that song we all learned as a kid,

they're awfully closely aligned?

Of course.

Well, they did not, of course,

use their own medical opinion,

but they did rely significantly on the medical record before them,

the medical record.

If you look at the history of the degree of treatment

here between the original date of injury

and by the time we get to the CAB hearing on this,

the left shoulder had been extremely detailed

in all of its treatment.

Dr. Gumas had gone out of his way

to very clearly lay out all of the treatment,

all of his findings.

It's been very clearly documented.

The Compensation Appeals Board was not able to find

similar documentation for the left neck.

In fact, we didn't see any mention of the left neck pain whatsoever

until September 25th, 2020.

There is, and if I can just paint...

Report to Justice Hans Marconi's point,

pain in either location would have the same genesis

in the neurological component of the neck.

Wouldn't it not? Would it not?

It could. I'm not a medical expert.

I can't speak necessarily whether that would be the case,

but the Compensation Appeals Board

was the organization that had the discretion

to make that medical finding based on the medical fact.

But there was no medical record.

Sorry, there was no Compensation Appeals Board

is not a medical professional either,

and there was no record that differentiated the two.

Was there...?

Respectfully, I think I disagree.

I think that Dr. Gumas' October 22nd, 2020 note

that seems to separate where the problem is.

He was well within his ability to say

that this issue did stem directly from the left shoulder.

He did not note that.

He said that it was most of the problem appears

to be in her neck and around the periscapular

and trapezole musculature.

He could have said it was linked,

but he didn't say it was not linked.

He didn't say it was not linked.

No, but I would argue that at the Compensation Appeals Board

the claimant did not bear her burden of proof

to show that there was a link based on the medical record

and the medical evidence that was on file there.

The claimant does argue that the carrier

has misled the Compensation Appeals Board

to show that there was a difference in those.

But again, with all the evidence that was available there,

the Compensation Appeals Board was well within its

ambit to make that determination

based on the medical record available.

They could have said that the claimant

had met that burden.

They could have read into that,

and I think we would still be up here

and the carrier would be appealing.

But in this case, the claimant had the burden approved

to show that this was connected.

The medical evidence submitted,

the claimant did not meet that burden of proof.

There is some question with regards to this shifted burden.

The claimant contends that Compensation Appeals Board

shifted the burden impermissibly

to show there was a second incident

between the return to work on May 25th, 2020,

and her alleged disability as of September 25th, 2020.

There are several quotes that are cited in the claimant's brief

that she argues is the result

of the Compensation Appeals Board

impermissibly to another workplace injury.

Initially, I would say that merely questioning

into the existence of a second workplace injury,

especially while exploring the question of factual,

I'm sorry, legal causality

with regards to the changing condition,

makes this a perfectly appropriate question

to ask in the first place.

Legal causation, as we know,

the degree of exertion necessary

to make the injury work connected,

which depends on the health of the employee.

Here, the Compensation Appeals Board

reasonably inquiring into the degree of exertion

that might have been necessary to cause

any of these symptoms that were currently being alleged,

especially given the lack of sufficient medical evidence

showing the neck was part and parcel

with the original workplace injury.

The claimant testified at the hearing

to a return to work on May 25th, 2020.

She did testify that she experienced pain

and could not continue her stocking position

as she moved over to the cashier position at that point.

She did complain of some pain

which Dr. Gumas again said

was some residual instability and achiness

in the left shoulder.

Despite that, the claimant was arguing,

was stating that she had worsening pain in her neck,

which is, again, not something that was reflected

well in the record as a previous workplace injury.

So the incongruity here of any workplace symptom

that the Compensation Appeals Board noticed,

they were well within their rights

and well within their ambit to question

whether or not there was any particular factual

genesis for these new complaints

given the lack of medical fact justifying them.

So what was the genesis of the new complaints?

There was none that was able to be found.

The Compensation Appeals Board was able to find

no evidence of a second workplace injury.

It was not something that the claimant's success

or failure hinged upon,

but they weren't able to find that.

They were not able to determine.

It's not entirely clear based on the opinion I'll grant

whether or not the claimant satisfied

the legal causation requirement.

The Compensation Appeals Board, in their decision,

actually explicitly says only the medical causation element

of this workers' compensation case

has not been met by preponderance of the medical evidence.

The most they have to say about the legal causation aspect

is that it's in question.

So right off the bat, it's not entirely clear

even if they did shift the burden impermissibly here

that it makes any difference to the outcome

because the medical causation claim

simply wasn't met in the first place.

With regard to that, I still don't believe

that factual causation was...

any burden was impermissibly added

given that factual or legal causation rather

simply was being questioned.

I don't think that there was any argument

and I don't think the facts or the law bears out

that there's an impermissible burden shift

as a result of inquiring into that

given that legal causation is one of the elements

that needs to be met.

I believe I have covered everything I have.

I'm certainly happy to answer more questions,

but this seems like a pretty straightforward case

from the carrier's perspective.

All right, well, thank you very much.

Case is submitted.
