This is case 2021-0423, state of New Hampshire versus Ernest Justin Blanchett.

Please proceed, counsel.

Good morning, may it please the court. My name is Brad Davis, and I represent Ernest Justin Blanchett in this interlocutory appeal.

We were before this court nearly four years ago in 2017 advancing these arguments as to the meaning of the phrase where the actor is employed as it's contained in RSA 632A Roman numeral I.

The disagreement persists. As the court had indicated, there's two facially plausible definitions of the meaning of the phrase where the actor is employed.

We are facing this definition again. Mr. Blanchett was indicted in 2020 for these offenses going back to 2014, where the indictments now read that Mr. Blanchett, who was a deputy sheriff at the time, was acting as an agent.

Acting as an agent for the county correctional facility.

I had filed a motion to dismiss in the Superior Court, arguing that the statute that we're analyzing, which again has been amended recently to correct this problem.

And that was this court inviting the legislature to address that issue, which they certainly did and made it very, very clear it applies to anybody that maintains the custody of an inmate.

However, Judge O'Neill did certify the question. One of the things we were arguing is how do we define this phrase for a jury if there's two possible interpretations.

And there's two ways to answer that question. First being that, well, the phrase is ambiguous and that it would be void for vagueness.

And there is, we don't know what the definition, what the legislature intended.

The other is the argument that I've been advancing, which is the interpretation that the legislature in the context of this statute was thinking about employees of the correctional institutions.

Because that's the phrase, the correctional institution where the actor is employed. The common understanding of employment is where you earn your wages.

You provide work, you get paid.

Sure, but the distinction here, correct me if I'm wrong, is that your client was working at the direction of the jail as opposed to the court.

In this new case, that's correct, right. In the Hillsborough case, it was clear that the court issued a transport order that's well documented.

This is a slightly different circumstance because the court's not involved.

We don't have factual findings because the case hasn't been tried as to what is the process. I think we all agree there's no written policy.

My understanding is there may be now. But at the time in 2014, it was just an informal practice between the two agencies because, you know, the Department of Corrections.

Same with every county, I think, frankly.

Excuse me.

I think it was the same with every county.

Yes.

Yeah, that's my understanding.

That being that the jail of the prison doesn't have the staff to transport inmates to and from out of facility visits.

They have such authority to do so. I'm not 100% clear on why this informal policy exists.

I mean, I can only speculate. I mean, the county sheriffs are well trained.

They're certified police officers. They're equipped to, you know, take someone outside the walls of a correctional institution and maintain custody of that individual.

So I would imagine that they have the resources to do it and they've done that.

But again, that's just speculation. I'm not sure of the history of the practice and how it came about.

The court in 2017 looked at the legislative history.

So I think it's already well settled that this definition or this phrase was ambiguous at the time.

The legislative history supports the definition that it's the traditional employee-employer relationship when they're talking about where the actor is employed.

What type of history is that, though?

The legislative history is, I mean, specifically what I look at is when it was House Bill 105, the 2003 legislation, which is the law that we're reviewing here, is, and I believe it's in my brief in some of the testimony.

There's a quote in here that the analysis, the bill is not entirely accurate. It is aimed primarily at probation and corrections officers.

Primarily?

Primarily.

Not exclusively.

That is correct, but the term they use, probation and corrections officers, because the concern is these are the people that have the day-to-day contact with an inmate.

Perhaps, but you can see, don't you, that the legislature certainly would not condone this type of behavior.

This is something that this particular statute was intended to prohibit. Is that fair to say?

It's not really whether we believe this type of conduct is appropriate. I think we all agree that it's not.

The law, they never contemplated law enforcement officers that would do transports in situations.

They were only talking about corrections facilities, secure psychiatric unit and juvenile detention facilities, the places that they identified.

The other thing is the Ann Rice letter, during that legislation, that also, she's the one that suggested, inserting the phrase where the actor is employed because of a hypothetical that was a concern.

And specifically that they insert that language at the end of the paragraphs dealing with correctional officers to further clarify that point.

So we see them specifically identifying correctional officers, not law enforcement officers or individuals maintaining custody and control.

So your interpretation would extend to a counselor that actually comes in and provides services on behalf of the facility to inmates?

With the way the statute was written, it wouldn't. There's been further amendments to deal with actual education settings.

One of the things I was looking at recently was the legislation when the law was changed. So in 2018 it was House Bill 1564, when we developed the new language, which simply is just anyone that has direct responsibility for maintaining the

detention of the victim by virtue of the victim being incarcerated. So it applies to law enforcement.

And the introduction or the statement of intent looks at our case state versus Blanchett. And in the state of intent this bill strengthens and clarifies the current law governing custodial rape.

State v. Blanchett overturned a conviction. The Attorney General's office told the committee that in that case they described facts.

The Supreme Court ruled the law is written only applied to Department of Corrections employees transporting a prisoner and set aside the conviction.

That's their interpretation. But what is more enlightening is the warden, Michelle Edmark, wrote a memo that's contained in the testimony sections of the legislation.

And clearly the new bill was necessary to protect individuals from the care and custody of law enforcement. So now we're seeing the term law enforcement being used, not correctional officers.

The current law is inadequate to protect the rights of individuals detained or in a custodial status if they're not under the direct supervision of a county jail or state prison. This bill corrects those issues.

Specifically the current version of the law is not applicable when the New Hampshire Department of Corrections or county jails really pushes authority of a person in their care and custody to the sheriff's office, police department, court officers, and transport companies.

So here we have the head of at the time the largest correctional institution saying the old law doesn't apply to the sheriff's office. The new law is designed to correct this and make it more broad in order to strengthen it.

That is, you know, a very strong interpretation. But using the lens of void for vagus law, that clearly a person of ordinary intelligence has to have a reasonable opportunity to understand the conduct it prohibits.

And here I don't know how Mr. Blanchett would understand the definition of where the actor is employed.

But your point is that he wouldn't understand that he was employed by the Department of Corrections.

Correct.

At any point in time.

Right.

Because it's...

And in this case, it was the county corrections institution and the county sheriff. So it's slight variation on the prior case.

It is. But, you know, by statute the sheriff's department is separate from the correctional department within the county.

Yeah, they're both run by the county overall.

Overall, yeah, they're within the same county, but there's statutes that delineate the two. They're not under one governance, if you will, or under one director.

They have separate, you know, county sheriffs versus the superintendents of the jail.

So there's a clear...in the context of the statute, if we have this court saying there's two facially plausible definitions, both sides have advanced,

we don't know which one it is, and I know the court didn't have to go any further to determine which definition applied to the statute.

But now we have the legislation or the legislators themselves saying that the old law didn't apply to the sheriff.

But they were saying, oh, look, we've read that case. So, you know, it's been interpreted it may not apply, but that doesn't necessarily mean that they didn't intend to apply an earlier legislature when they adopted it.

I mean, why would a legislature adopt this law consciously carving out the types of persons who would give rise to the risk?

Well, the only reason to amend it is because it wasn't clear, but back with that original...

Well, just to be sure, you can sometimes amend it to clarify that that's exactly what we meant. Why would we ever have created this loophole?

Yeah, I don't see anything in the legislature saying, hey, this is what we intended back with the old law.

I think it was the law needs now include these actors or potential actors that we didn't think about.

I don't see anything in the original legislation of any discussion about law enforcement officers in general.

I just think they never thought about that law enforcement officers, you know, deputy sheriff, state troopers, all transport individuals that are in custody because they were only talking about correctional institutions.

Because that was the concern was the consent issue.

If you have somebody that has this total control over somebody's lives, you know, such as correctional officers, day-to-day contact, the risk of relationships developing and inmates doing what, you know, they want to be able to get civil privileges that we may take for granted.

And there's no statute that applies specifically to sheriffs or state police or those who would transport.

There wasn't at the time, only the new legislation because it's broad enough to say pretty much anybody that's maintaining detention of an inmate is now subject to this.

Or no ethical prohibition or, you know, some other way to enforce that obligation of those transporting.

Right. So that's the new law. It's very, very clear. It's very, very simple. It now covers.

But I think they never thought of the problem about law enforcement until this case and realized that we need to have a law that now encompasses all law enforcement.

But at the time, the statute that Mr. Blanchett is charged for is specifically directed at correctional employees and the legislative history supports that.

And I think what's very interesting is the individuals interpreting the old law saying it didn't apply to him, which is why we need to rewrite this law.

So it covers law enforcement officers.

We don't owe that any difference, though. Any more than we owe the trial court difference in this situation, right?

Right. But it sheds light on if, and certainly if this court at the time in 2017 identified, you know, this disagreement and it needed to be clarified as far as the intent with regard to the meeting of the phrase at issue, the legislature had to do that.

So how would a person of, you know, average and ordinary intelligence understand the meaning of the old law if it had to be rewritten, if this court identified two plausible arguments?

So I think it's clearly void or in the context of the statute, the legislature meant, you know, the traditional employees of the correctional institution, not county sheriffs.

And that would be the definition. Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you very much, Mr. Davis.

Ms. Woodcock.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Elizabeth Woodcock, State of New Hampshire.

I would just point out that as my colleague here was talking, he was talking about the letter from the warden, the warden of the Department of Corrections,

and said that the warden had read this to accept county employees from the sheriff's department.

The warden must have read a different opinion than I read because this court's original opinion in this case said that the situation that was presented to the court in 2017 was in contrast with one in which,

and this is a direct quote, either the county jail or the state prison interested the defendant with the task of transporting the victim.

That's what the court wrote, and that's what happened here.

The defendant was asked to transport the victim consistent with the county jail's obligations to maintain the health of its inmates to the dentist appointment.

He did it. He didn't just kind of show up and say, let's go for a ride.

He did this at the request of the House of Corrections, and if this court follows its own language in that 2017 opinion, his actions are covered.

Isn't that ticked it, though? Are we bound by that language?

Well, you're not bound by it in the sense that it's precedent or that it's the law of the case, Your Honor.

It wasn't the issue either.

Pardon me?

It was not the issue at the time.

No, it was not the issue at the time. I acknowledge that.

But I think that what the court was doing at that point was kind of setting out the parameters of what the court thought the law covered, and it thought the law covered this particular instance.

I think that it's not as if, I've struggled with this a little bit, because it's not as if it's the law of the case because it's a different, obviously it's a different case, except that it's the same people and it's the same situation.

And so the guidance that the court set forth in that particular opinion, I think, is worth considering in this case, certainly the court set it forth.

It was obviously an unpublished opinion, so it's not precedent, but the court didn't choose its words randomly and looked at the hypotheticals that this could cover,

and then suggested that a different situation in which the county jail rather than the court had directed the defendant to act would be sufficiently different to be covered.

I'm not sure how the court can ignore what it wrote just four years ago.

But isn't there something to the argument that putting aside how we might have posited the situation, somebody in the defendant's position here would look at that statute and think employed means you work for somebody.

That's the common understanding that most of us have.

Well, I think that that's true.

And I remember Justice Delaney's four years ago talking about using her broom and employing her broom.

So there are a lot of different meanings of the word, but he was employed.

He was directed to pick up this prisoner and bring her to the dentist and bring her back safely.

And that was consistent with the obligations of the House of Corrections, and it's consistent with what he was employed at that moment to do.

Does that read out the word where, where the person is employed?

No, I think it does not.

And the reason for that is that if you look at the definition we cited in our brief of where, it's the place or situation in, and he's in the situation of transporting this prisoner.

I mean, I think it would be a different matter if you, if this was just pure courtesy.

I will.

Oh, sure.

You're getting close.

Right.

I'm going there anyway.

Yeah, go ahead.

I'm going there anyway.

I'll just take this person with me.

Right.

But in this situation, they had an agreement granted, not reduced to writing from what I can gather.

But they had an agreement that the Sheriff's Department provide transportation for the prisoners and it was long standing.

And as the case we cited in our brief points out, it's a common law obligation of the Sheriff's Department to transport prisoners.

The point is it's not exactly a courtesy, but it clearly, I think everyone is on board in an agreement that it was custom.

And it is custom throughout the 10 counties.

Right.

Right.

And so for the defendant to somehow believe or have the understanding that he would not be covered by an obligation to treat prisoner who he was transporting with ordinary duties of care and responsibility.

Are there any other statutory or rule based or ethics based prohibitions on the conduct?

I don't.

I'm not sure.

I know the answer to that.

I'm trying to think.

At least standards and some other governing situation, regulation, governing sheriffs or police officers.

When this came up, when I did this work on this case five years ago, I remember asking the people in our office if there was some sort of, you know, maybe there's something out there that will a regulation or something.

I was seeking that and I got an answer that was very disappointing to me.

And so I did not prevail in the case.

But I think under this circumstance, it is really significantly different based on the fact that the House of Corrections has an obligation to the prisoner to make sure that the prisoner's health is taken care of.

And the sheriff's department has a longstanding relationship to provide the House of Corrections with the means of carrying out that obligation.

But you acknowledge he's not employed by the facility.

He's not paid by the facility.

There's no contract between the two entities that regulates their relationship.

How do we get beyond that?

Well, I don't think that you need to have an actual financial relationship or a contract or something of that sort to be employed to do a particular duty.

If I were to look at my job description, Donovan, I'm sure I do lots of other things that are not in it.

I haven't looked at it in a long time.

I fear what I might find I was now doing that I was not hired to do.

But the expectation is that if I'm hired by the state of New Hampshire to be a lawyer for the Department of Justice,

I will conduct myself in certain ways that are not specifically enumerated in that job description.

And I think that this is a similar situation.

The tradition or the common practice has been that the people, the deputy sheriffs will transport prisoners.

If this matter were to go to trial and the state were put to its proof,

I'm not sure that there would be additional testimony that would establish what that particular job description or duty is,

and whether it's through custom or through duty.

Evidently, Judge O'Neill didn't want to go that route, though.

He didn't feel that it should be tried.

That's why he agreed to put it here.

I'm not sure that he agreed that it shouldn't be tried.

I think that he felt, you know, honestly, this is a situation in which both the victim and the defendant have gone through one trial.

And I think that the trial court was trying.

It wasn't purely a question of judicial economy, if I can read into the court's view.

It was, do we really want to put everybody through this again if ultimately it will go to the Supreme Court

and the Supreme Court will find that it cannot find that this statute applies.

That's how I read it as well.

Pardon me?

That's how I read the court's ruling as well.

Yes.

So I think it was, I don't know whether trial courts can be considered compassionate,

but I think that's what the trial court was trying to do in this case.

I think they can be.

Well, I do, too.

You asked us to look back at our earlier non-presidential order.

And if we do that, and if we agree with ourselves that it's susceptible to two reasonable interpretations,

isn't that the end of the ballgame for the state?

I mean, if there are two reasonable interpretations, doesn't the defendant prevail here?

Well, I think that in this particular instance, given the court's comments,

and also given this common law, there are combination of factors that were not present in this, the previous case.

I think the most significant one, in my view, and the one that was hardest for the state to overcome,

was the fact that the court had directed the sheriff's department to transport the prisoner.

So the sheriff's department was not working for the House of Corrections.

It may have been, it probably was working for the House of Corrections when it brought the prisoner to court.

But after the court had issued the sentence and said, I direct you, I the court direct you to bring the prisoner to the New Hampshire State Prison for Women,

the defendant was no longer acting at the direction of the House of Corrections.

And that clearly was not covered.

If the court has no further questions for me, I would ask that the case be submitted.

Thank you.

Thank you.

The case will be submitted.

The court stands in recess, and we'll be back momentarily for the next case.
