This is case 2021-0543, Christopher Andrews et al. versus Kiersaard lighting precinct.

Good afternoon, counsel.

Good afternoon, Mr. Chief Justice, members of the court.

My name is John Cronin. I'm here arguing on behalf of the appellant, Chris Andrews, and his family.

This is an interesting case in the world of property rights and adventures in short-term and long-term rentals.

Look at this particular case. I'll tell you what it's not. It's not a working stiffs case.

It's not the Portsmouth. It's not the Laconia matter.

And we're not stating or we're not arguing that the community does not have the right to regulate short-term rentals by a naturally tailored and properly adopted zoning ordinance.

What we are saying is that this particular case, and I know there are a number of issues raised in the Notice of Appeal, and I want to focus on the structural issues.

It's a situation where you have a kind of odd community, a lighting precinct that was giving some power to zone back in the 50s.

It's noted that they've never adopted a planning board, and I think that may be another case that's coming up before you.

Nor a master plan.

Nor a master plan.

They adopted a rather simplistic zoning ordinance back in the 50s.

That progressed over a period of time. Early on, they recognized allowed uses such as tourist cabins, ski houses, motels, various uses like that.

And then in the 80s, those uses went away as a matter of right, and were introduced only through the special exception process.

They again were reintroduced later on in the 80s versions of this ordinance when appears this issue, this zoning issue that restricts what we say short-term and permanent long-term rentals.

And we think that's totally inappropriate.

This comes to the court on a long history study in 17, where a ZBA member was unhappy with the conduct of some people renting a home.

And this particular area, the Mount Washington Valley and the Ski 93 area, I know the state has promoted a lot to come and spend your money, ski, buy tickets, go to restaurants, buy clothing.

And there's been a long history of people renting for vacations and so forth.

The Andrews have brought up their children in that area, wanted to introduce them to the skiing and the joys of the valley, and bought a home.

At that time, it was pretty common, as was testified by the broker, Dan Jones, former real estate commissioner, that brokers would market these home with representations that look at,

you can afford this, the taxes are X, the expenses are Y, and you can subsidize it by rental income.

In fact, the ZBA chair was a rental real estate broker in the area and the record reflects that he had marketed such properties and there was no issue.

When Mr. Riebelesti had some concerns, there was an issue that surfaced about we need to do something about short-term rentals.

It's not good for the locals. There's nothing in it for the residents. These out-of-state peoples come, they buy these houses, they rent them and they drive up the prices so our families can't afford to buy them.

And that kind of got a ball rolling on these short-term rentals.

Surprisingly, despite knowledge of many people renting their homes throughout the KLP, they targeted four people to issue notice of violations.

Two that we represented that the Gleasons and the Andrews were out-of-state, as was one other. I can't speak to the fourth.

The Gleasons getting tired with the process and the expense as it progressed on sold their property and their case was non-suited.

The Andrews not only have one home, but they have two homes and both of them they use for school vacations, summer vacations, and in the off times they rent them to subsidize their properties.

At a meeting, an annual meeting of the KLP which is in the record the issue of how we can stop these short-term rentals to current off the chair of the ZBA said how can we do that if it's not addressed in our ordinance?

Is it something that we can do? We've never enforced it before.

And there's a comment from Council saying well you can still enforce it without a lot of discussion or any discussion for that matter.

Going into the case and the proceedings at the ZBA, our primary position was this is an administrative loss issue.

Look at you've had an ordinance in place and you've had single family houses that have been rented on interim basis for years with no enforcement.

You have members of your own family that continue to rent these houses without any enforcement.

And now you're selecting a small group of people to prohibit them from doing what others are allowed to do.

The response was well-

So just to pause on administrative gloss, what was the ambiguity in the zoning ordinance?

Well when you look at the ordinance as a whole which I think is important, in the advent of it you have defined uses.

All way number one was residences and farms.

And then as you progress starting at the record, we're going through 50, they have tourist cabins, motels, ski houses, etc.

And that section about owner occupied and operated, we believe relates to those types of residents.

Those multi-type motel touristy where you have transient guests coming in in numbers, not a single family house.

And when you look at the ordinance

A single family home is residential property.

There's no doubt about it.

So how do you square that interpretation?

By looking at the ordinance in its entirety.

Then reading out owner operated.

I mean I'm not understanding of construction.

Well I think you have to look at the ordinance to give plain and fair and ordinary meeting.

How would you ever rent a single family home while you're still living in it and operating it?

You're not operating or managing a single family home as a rental in the same way you would a tourist cabin or a motel

Where you have a staff that's working at the desk, checking people in, checking people out.

All residential properties except single family homes.

Is that the way you're interpreting this?

I'm interpreting that it applies to the business type residences which were separately identified as allows uses in the zone.

And to read it otherwise you would have a global restriction on rentals, a complete prohibition.

Now the trial court focused only on short-term rentals, but the language is for transient and permanent guests.

So are you abandoning the arguments they had before the trial court that there's no rational basis for short-term rentals under the trial court's interpretation?

I'm not tending to abandon an argument.

I think under this scenario, I'm saying that if they had a proper ordinance, if they adopted one today, they restrict short-term rentals under the existing ordinance,

which I think they took language and forced it to get a desired result. It doesn't work.

There is no rational basis.

If you look at the rational basis on health safety and welfare to permanently prohibit someone from renting a single family home, there's no rational basis for that.

You can talk about and say, well, you want to have a peaceful or quiet community.

I mean, I know in my community that some people that lived in houses that for a long, long time that are more of a menace to the health safety and welfare community than any particular resident.

No matter how you read this, what's transient? Is it the dictionary definition that means one night?

What's a permanent guest other than my 23-year-old college graduate? I can't think of one.

I don't know. Is your 23-year-old child who is maybe living in New York comes home for the weekend? Are they a guest?

And can they not sleep at home unless you're there with them and operating what they do and how they do it?

It doesn't seem to be a rational or a logical conclusion.

So, you look at the history of it and the unintended consequences here. You have a lot of realtors.

I thought some of them might show up as amicus saying, hey, wait a second here because if we outlaw all of these properties from being rented that we marketed, we're going to have some consequences for this.

When you look at the whole totality of the bundle of rights that you get with home ownership, rental is a very important one, especially in tourist locations for people to try and subsidize and operate their properties.

It seems like that's a policy argument. You said earlier, yeah, if the entity wanted to prevent short-term rentals, they could. They just haven't done it here.

That's correct.

So you're making a policy argument about why they should allow short-term rentals, but that shouldn't be anything that we concern ourselves with, should it?

For the policy, it may be for the future. But for now, where there's been no restriction on them whatsoever, until this recent element out of the ordinance and applied to a small...

So can there never be a test case? Do you have to bring it against everybody in the community who might be in violation?

Well, you wouldn't have to bring it. You would only have to bring it against the people that were notified.

Or at least send a notice. You can't stand idly by. And if the court's instruction is that we're going to uphold this, the direction would be that you can't just do it to four people because they live out of state.

You have to apply it globally.

And the ordinance here is in discretionary enforcement. And I know there's some law that says that a zoning board or a zoning official has discretion to enforce.

The language in the KLP ordinance says that the ZBA shall enforce the terms of the ordinance. It's not discretionary to say, let's pick out the folks from Massachusetts and let our family and friends go about their business.

So you take a law like this, the one line, which again we've argued is overbroad and vague in its purpose and its definition.

You're going to hurt a lot of people. Not just the four people are here because they're going to have to enforce it against all others.

Looking at some of the other arguments that we raised, you know, at the ZBA process, we talked about member Robleski and some of the happenings that went on.

Was that raised before the board?

Yes, it was. And Mr. Robleski was a member of the ZBA. Prior to our hearing, he had conversations with his son and a brother-in-law.

Where could we see in the record that it was raised?

Excuse me?

That it was raised on a timely basis, the issue of bias. Where in the record?

Well, the other question is when did you learn of that conduct? Is that something that you would have known before the hearing?

Probably not in the hearing. We attempted to do discovery, as you will notice, and we got some limited discovery and got a lot of different documentation there.

I will say in the hearings process itself, we had some concerns about Mr. Robleski's conduct, and we do raise it. I can't give you the exact page now.

I mean, the town is arguing that it wasn't timely raised, and obviously, you know, the importance of that needs to be raised at a time when the board can take sufficient action to address it.

I understand that, but I think there's some circumstances that are so clear and in the juror's standard.

And one of the hardest things for a land-use lawyer to do is to go into one of these hearings and identify a member and ask them to recuse themselves.

In a jury trial, when I strike a juror, they do the happy dance and want to high-five you because they get out of jury duty.

You ask the zoning board or planning board member to recuse themselves.

They take it personally if you're challenging their credibility, and it can offend other members. It often does.

So in those clear cases where you have a situation where it's so apparent, I believe the court should probably craft in order that if it's known to a member,

they should volunteer that bias and voluntarily step down like you would if you were a judicial officer.

I know it's not unusual for trial court judges to say, come up here, I have this issue.

Do you guys think you should step down or not? And they disclose it.

To go on that hunt in the course of an offer of proof hearing to determine who's biased or not and make a timely rejection,

I know that's been the state of the law for a long time, but that deserves to be rethought because it's not really workable on the front lines of practice.

A judicial officer wouldn't think twice about recusing him or herself from a case brought by a family member, right?

They would not. If a family member had an interest in the case, they wouldn't even take the bench and ask if it was a problem.

They would step down on their own accord. That would be something that I think would be so important to the appearance of judicial propriety.

And I know there's been cases in this court that say maybe the person didn't have any bias and they were completely neutral.

But the appearance of impropriety and conflict is an important factor in the administration of justice.

I want to talk for a moment briefly about the takings piece.

It's a position as we've argued that if this ordinance is held up, it's taking away one of those bundle of property rights without just compensation.

And it's not a narrowly tailored piece of an ordinance that would be similar to that in Portsmouth or Laconia.

But how can you square that statement with your earlier statement that, yeah, if a town wanted to prohibit short-term rentals, they could?

Easy. They haven't done it yet. So if you have a bundle of rights right now in which some people can rent and you have no restriction on it at all,

if they're taking an ordinance that we believe is not applicable to try and restrict that property right, it could be a temporary taking.

You should have an opportunity to flush that argument up with the discovery and factual testimony.

The court basically said, hey, look, your only remedy is money.

And we cited a case in our brief that said, I don't believe that's the case.

If there's a taking of property rights, you can get an order that stops that taking and continue on.

Money in this particular case, the andres are locked in on two properties.

A home that got a mortgage, they got expenses.

Giving them a sum of money today isn't going to solve their problem for the future.

And if other people can't rent it, it's going to have an immediate impact on value.

So we look at that argument and say just to look at it is short-sighted.

The other thing that I want to talk about is, thank you.

Good afternoon. Chief Justice, may it please the court?

My name is Demetrius Sparrison along with Jason Dennis.

It's our privilege to represent the Cure Stars lighting precinct.

We ask that the court affirm the trial court's decision in this matter,

which is obviously a zoning board appeal from zoning enforcement action.

The trial court issued a 44-page order and thoroughly evaluated each of the property owner's arguments in this case.

How do you conceptually square the owner-occupied requirement in a single-family home?

How does that work?

Rent of a single-family home.

Are you referring to the argument that it prohibits long-term rentals?

Well, just any term.

If a rental has to be owner-occupied, how does that work in a single-family home?

Sure, because it will work-

Or transient or permanent guests.

So if I want to rent to guests, my home to guests, I have to be there.

Sure, so separating out the two, there's two issues.

One is short-term rentals, which is the issue in this case.

This case has never been a long-term rentals.

There's never been-

Where does it say short or long-term?

All I see is transient or permanent guests.

Transient or permanent guests.

The standard definition of-

The permanent guest is not a long-term situation.

My grandmother is going to move in and be my permanent guest.

Correct.

We argued to the trial court, and I believe the trial court accepted,

that there's a fundamental difference between a guest and a tenant.

And if you look at the statutes governing landlord-tent relationships,

that bears out as well as-

And I don't have the site off the top of my head,

but the vacation rental statute.

And so the KLP's use of the term guest is important here.

And that's fundamentally what's controlling and addresses,

I believe, the concern raised there,

which is that it doesn't prohibit tenancies.

And the KLP has never, as far as I'm aware, taken any position that it-

It prohibit rentals by charge of my grandmother.

She's moving in, we've got a deal,

but I need the money, and she needs a place to live,

so she's going to pay half the mortgage.

It's an interesting hypothetical.

What I would say to that is that's not the facts

that were presented to the board.

There was no dispute here that a situation like that was-

There was no argument that that was-

It was the reach of the ordinance and its constitutional application.

As applied here, I mean, fundamentally,

it certainly isn't ambiguous on its face.

There may be a-

So I have my house, and when I am on vacation,

I want to rent it to someone who helped me pay,

or I go to the law school,

I want to rent it to someone to help me pay the big

while I'm doing something else.

I can't occupy it and rent it at the same time.

Sure.

So there is-

If you look at the trial court's order

and you look at the ZBA's decision,

it's clear that as presented by the property owners,

they came in before the ZBA,

and they put a bunch of arguments out in front of the ZBA.

None of those arguments related to where the specific line is

between owner-occupied or not owner-occupied.

It simply wasn't raised.

I recognize that there's a continuum there,

and we can certainly come up with numerous hypotheticals

where if the ZBA was faced with the question

they might need to determine is this owner-occupied

under the ordinance.

But that's their province in the first place.

On its face-

So how does property, prospective property owner,

looking at the ordinance, know where that line is

if the ZBA doesn't know where the line is?

Well, I didn't say the ZBA-

Is there a notice kind of,

I'm buying property, it comes with rights,

and this vague ordinance doesn't tell me

what those limits are?

We've recognized, I mean the court has recognized

that the zoning ordinances in all ordinance

do not need to be written in exact terms.

They need to reasonably apprise an individual,

and we've also recognized this

why we have the ZBA process

charging them in the first instance

with interpreting the statute.

There may be a short period of time

where there isn't express precedent,

but the lack of that express precedent

doesn't render the ordinance ambiguous.

In this case, the KLP at the ZBA level

said under the fact presented to us,

it applies.

So buyer beware and title companies be on notice

that the expectations going into a purchase of property

may not be?

Well, the expectations,

there's reference to realtor's making representations.

Obviously they don't have authority to bind a municipality.

But finding property in a vacation rental area

comes with some expectations

and of course increase property values

increases revenue to the municipality.

It just seems like there are some commonly understood

ground rules that I find troubling in this case

when those ground rules shift after the fact.

It's not like there was notice

and a new ordinance goes into place

which specifically identifies the limits

and people can say, oh, well, okay.

For example, you go to some vacation areas,

you need a license to do rentals.

You know, there's a whole regulatory scheme

so you know going in, I buy this property,

I may have to do these things.

It just seems troubling to me

that the rules are changing.

Well, the rules aren't changing.

The ordinance has been in place since 1986

and the area has been used for tourist homes,

which is separately defined,

as well as bed and breakfast,

both of which require those properties to be owner occupied.

But does the ordinance prohibit long-term rentals?

No, we have never taken that position

and I don't think there's any fair way of reading it that way.

Does it define long-term?

No, because it doesn't regulate

long-term rentals in that fashion.

Does it define short-term?

Well, to be clear,

the ordinance doesn't use the phrase short-term rentals.

It refers to transient gas

and it does not define that term.

How many times has it been important?

This is the first time.

It's my understanding and I think the certified record reflects that.

Does KAP have the discretion

just to enforce it against out-of-state homeowners?

Well, there's been representations

that that's what occurred in the trial court's order

after reviewing the certified record.

The court ruled that the plaintiff

failed to present evidence on that issue.

Arguments not evidence.

And the arguments have been proffered,

but the evidence wasn't there presented by the plaintiff

at the level either in front of the ZBA

or the trial court to back that up.

What the trial court ultimately found

was that the KLP

never had occasion to make that decision.

That there were no discreet circumstances

that the plaintiff had demonstrated any evidence for.

That the KLP

looked at a property

owned by a local resident and made a decision

or even thought about

should we enforce or not enforce against this individual.

Isn't it enough to point out

that a local resident

is renting?

It doesn't have to be before the board,

but that a local resident

is renting without

being held in violation,

yet the out-of-state person

is the test case?

Sure.

So I think again on that point,

the evidence underpinning that allegation

isn't really borne out by the certified record.

I believe in the certified record,

there were some print out from

various short-term rental properties.

The court here specifically addressed that

and said that the plaintiff failed

to identify the ownership status of those properties

and whether or not those properties were indeed

owned by locals, as you say,

or out-of-state residents.

But for people that are at issue here,

are they out-of-state residents

or are they in-state residents?

The two parties to this appeal

are out-of-state residents.

Correct.

And I believe the trial court

basically determined

some kind of marketing advertisement

without backing it up

with some kind of deed information

to tie the property

to the local resident.

That was not enough.

The evidence was insufficient

to point to

to establish that locals were also renting.

Correct.

I believe there was just no evidence

of ownership at all.

Certainly,

I can't prosecute the case

for them, right, but I mean,

you could come up with sources of evidence,

deeds, perhaps testimony

or other evidence to demonstrate

that those properties existed.

Separate from that,

in the trial court's order

and the certified record bears this out,

and I believe Attorney Cronin opened with this,

the concern from the community

was recently raised.

And so that's what triggered

looking at this issue in the first place.

We're not dealing with a circumstance

where there's no evidence in the certified record

to demonstrate that

people were repeatedly coming

before the board of commissioners

and the KLP complaining about this,

complaining about this,

and then out of state residents

were the source of the complaint

and then suddenly the KLP took action.

That's not what the certified record shows.

It shows that...

They took enforcement action

rather than amending their ordinance

to address the complaints.

This ordinance, rather than

amending the ordinance

to address the issues.

Correct, because the KLP

believed that the ordinance did address the issue

and regulate the transient

rental here.

Still stuck on ambiguity.

I don't understand how

just the phrase transient or permanent gas

does not render this provision

ambiguous.

Permanent gas would seem to suggest

that

long-term rentals are prohibited.

I would submit

and it should be in the

appendix, it was certainly briefed

by our side of the trial court level

that, again, there's a distinction

between a tenant and a guest.

If someone is living there

and even I believe under certain circumstances

is not paying rent but is considered under the law

to be a tenant with tenants' rights

to the property, they're not a guest

by definition. In terms of long-term gas,

family members, it's never going

to be an issue because that property by definition

is going to be owner occupied.

It would be a odd scenario to have

a non-owner occupied property

with a permanent

non-tenancy, non-rent-paying

guest.

Would completely banning

the ability to rent

a family home be

unlawful?

I don't think that's directly before the court.

My understanding is the court would probably say

it is.

That's where the Chief and Justice Hans

Marconi are going.

That render it vague.

That's not what this ordinance does.

That was the circumstance

that was before the ZBA

and the KLP has never

taken that position.

Frankly, that's a straw argument that was raised

by the property owners that

the KLP could interpret it this way.

They don't.

Frankly, again, there's a fundamental

difference between a tenant and a guest

and I don't think applying

the transient guest

provision to a long-term

renter

bears out on the face of the ordinance.

They're not a guest. They're a tenant.

They have tenants' rights under the law

separate and apart from the zoning ordinance.

One way to look at it.

Do we defer to the ZBA's interpretation?

Well, of course

this court has the ability

to review the ordinance

and make its own interpretation.

There is some level of

deference in terms of how the ZBA

applied the facts

before it to the ordinance.

A lot of the argument both in briefing

and orally is not

borne out by evidence.

Again, on its face

it doesn't address

or regulate tenancies.

If that's the argument being made

by the property owners as to why it's ambiguous

or why it should be struck down

the plain language just doesn't reach

for example

renting a single-family house

on a standard month-to-month lease.

Those people

renting that property would not be guests.

They would be tenants.

Again, it wasn't a direct issue in this case.

Certainly the plaintiffs did not present

any evidence that the KLP

and any other circumstance had taken

that position in terms of interpreting

the ordinance that way.

Well, by the same token in 1985

and whenever you were 55

I can't remember which decade we were in.

Grantian met something quite different

to the common public.

That met someone who's on their way

out moving on.

On their way out of the community?

On their way out of the community.

Moving on.

Again, I understand why there's some

focus on transient.

Frankly, I think the more meaningful distinction

in that clause is guest

because that's ultimately what's

really being modified there.

Which you could never

rent a single-family house.

Because the ordinance

uses rent in the context

of apartment houses.

So we've got renters there.

So because we

use guest when it comes

to single-family occupancy

then you can't

rent a single-family home.

To a tenant.

So one way to look at it is

here's how you would know the difference

between a tenant and a guest.

You approach a guest who's short-term rental

in a community. Maybe they're on vacation for a week.

Maybe they're on vacation for two weeks.

Ask them where they live.

They're not going to say they live there.

Short-term tenant.

I guess I'm just not...

On the procedural due process

issue, what is

your position in terms of the evidence

we should look to

to establish bias on the part of

the board?

And was this raised

in a timely way?

It was not raised and I don't believe it was raised

even in a timely way at the

trial court level in that

the evidence presented was

minimal. Again, the trial court

reviewed each argument

and the evidence that was in the certified record

evaluated meeting minutes

and I believe some emails

and determined that it didn't rise to the level.

I don't have any clarification on that.

I believe it was just

Donovan that may have alluded to this.

My understanding, and I don't have

the site in front of me on the certified record,

is that the allegation

isn't that the ZBA member

raised a complaint about these particular

property owners. I believe the allegation

is that the ZBA son as a member

of a small community

was complaining generally about the

concept of short-term rentals.

To me, that's a distinction with a very real

understanding of the

just being a ZBA member

son doesn't give away your rights

to comment on issues in the community.

I would say all the more reason to be

careful when it comes

to process rights.

All the more reason to be careful.

Is there no code of conduct?

It's a point well taken. He wasn't

the source of the complaint.

That's my understanding. Obviously I deferred

the certified record in the trial court's order

but that's my understanding.

What would be sufficient?

We need to be at least some evidence

of other decision-making

about enforcement and there was none here.

There's literally no evidence that

the KLP at any level

commissioners, ZBA,

ever considered formally or

informally enforcement

against any property and then made a decision on it.

So Rose, when

a member of the community came forward with the concern?

Yeah.

My understanding is that people started generally raising

the issue of short-term rentals.

As happens, commissioners look into it,

start looking at properties, make a decision.

Well, they were looking in North Carolina too.

This is not a

foreign issue.

In that part of the White Mountain.

Sure. None of this occurred in a packet.

It never does.

Does it?

Thank you.

Briefly well, I had to at my rest.

I looked at the record.

I'll direct you to page 116,

the first hearing.

The transcript after the first hearing,

the best I could do after I introduced

myself, the very first thing was I asked

the chairman if he would pull the

board members to determine whether any

had any personal opinions or bias

on this record so I could make an informed

decision on recusal.

The answer from all the members

was no.

So that issue was not disclosed to me at that

particular time.

Also of the 80 properties

that we submitted in the district

that are also rentals,

many of them condos, we got that

information off site such as VRBO

and home away and submitted it

to the ZBA.

We didn't do the research to see whether the

owners of those 80 properties were

all owners, residents of the

community, but one in fact was a

relative of one of the commissioners

issuing the violation notice.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Thank you guys.
