Thank you. Good morning. For the record, this is the appeal of trades or trads. Justice MacDonald

and Bassett are disqualified from the case. The three of us will hear this, and then we

will take a brief recess. Please proceed. This is case 2021-0053, appeal of trades LLC.

May it please the court. Steven Zaharias on behalf of the petitioner, trades LLC.

I'd like to reserve two minutes of time for rebuttal purposes, and I'll take questions at

any time. Yeah, why don't you go ahead and focus right on it? If you don't mind. Sure.

The statute 262-40A doesn't really seem to apply to this fact pattern or this business

plan, does it? It does, Your Honor. 262-40A talks about

whenever an owner or somebody else in lawful possession of private property basically asks

a towing company such as trades to come pick up a vehicle, and that happened in numerous

circumstances with several of these vehicles that are at issue here. Somebody such as

Dan O'Brien Keah for three of the vehicles here called up trades, said, we've got a couple

abandoned vehicles here. Please take these off our hands. Did they notify a peace

officer? Trades LLC did. No, but isn't the owner or the person that's authorized to

possess the vehicle, aren't they responsible for notifying the peace officer?

So it does state that in the statute. However, under agency principles, the private

property owner could authorize the towing company to make that notification on

behalf of the private property owner, which in this circumstance, trades did

make that notification to the police with respect to every abandoned vehicle

that is at issue in this case. So that notification was provided as testified

to by Stefan Conradimitrachy on behalf of trades LLC at the hearing below.

I interrupt you if you want to restart. Go right ahead. No, no, that's totally fine.

If you have other questions, your honor, I'm more than happy to take them. So

why doesn't Massachusetts law apply as opposed to New Hampshire with respect

to the vehicle that was towed from Massachusetts? So there were one or

two vehicles that were towed from either Massachusetts or Vermont to

here. Um, the question then becomes, you know, when does the abandonment occur?

In, uh, from our perspective, the abandonment occurs here in New Hampshire

after notification goes out to the vehicle owner, the lean holder, and

basically nobody wants the vehicle at that point. When the vehicle's here

in New Hampshire and no one wants it, it's effectively abandoned at that

point. Um, Massachusetts, I also want to point out in the legislative

history of RSA 262, um, as quoted by the hearings examiner in his order on

motion on the motion to reconsider, the legislators actually stated that RSA

262, uh, quote, will apply to a resident of another state who

abandons a vehicle here and quote, but they abandoned the vehicle here

in New Hampshire. You're affecting a repossession out of state bringing

the vehicle here. So why doesn't the repossession statute apply?

Sure. If in fact, that's what you're doing. So initially, some of the vehicles

that issue here did start off as repossessions. There's no dispute about

that. Um, I believe that's with six of the vehicles that are at issue on

appeal. However, once those vehicles are towed to New Hampshire or

within, you know, another city or town of New Hampshire, taken to the

storage facility in New Hampshire, um, at that point and after notification is

provided to the vehicle owner and the lean holder saying, Hey, come get this

car. Uh, we towed it from XYZ location. Uh, these fees have accrued with

respect to the vehicle. Come get it. You can retrieve it if you pay us

these fees. If no one comes and gets the vehicle or none of the

communications are responded to in any way at that point, the vehicle is

abandoned here in New Hampshire pursuant to the repossession statute. I'm

sorry. What was it? Can't you auction it as a repossessed vehicle as

well as opposed to an abandoned vehicle? If the, um, requirements under

the repossession statute and regulations are followed. Yes, that

could be a possibility, but there's nothing precluding a towing company

such as trades from following the abandoned vehicle process and instead

repossess a vehicle. Why wouldn't you follow the repossession process? So

it's not that there was one process for abandoned vehicle, right? And

there's another process to repossess vehicles. So

seems to me that the legislature and certainly Department of Safety

have see those things as mutually exclusive. Aren't they? They do

see it as mutually exclusive, but just from a common sense practical

perspective, they are not mutually exclusive. And I'd also note that in

the regulations under safe sea 1900, in order to get a title to a

repossessed vehicle, you have to have both the old title and a lean

release from the lean holder. So if under the circumstances that we

have here, where trades picks up a repossessed vehicle to start off

with, takes it to its facility in New Hampshire, then sends out the

notices to everybody saying, Hey, come get this car, pay these

fees. But then the lean holder doesn't want anything to do with

the vehicle. At that point, it necessarily is abandoned. And

how could trades then obtain the title to that vehicle under

the repossession statute? If the lean holder is not going to

give the old title, isn't going to give the lean release

just basically wants nothing to do with the vehicle. At that

point, it's clearly abandoned, and trades should be able to

follow the abandoned vehicle statute to obtain title to that

vehicle. Otherwise, they're just left with a car that, again,

nobody wants.

You've made references several times to inaccurate facts and

disingenuous representations. What do you think are the most

salient ones and how do they affect this case?

Sure. In our reply brief, we discussed some erroneous facts

particularly as DMV characterized them in their brief and some of

those facts relate to how trades discuss certain vehicles. For

instance, DMV talked about... Why should that help trades? I

mean, practice in the industry. Why should that make a

difference to our analysis in this case at all?

Trades is practice in the industry?

Well, man, that's beyond the record, sort of.

Sure. Well, trades has lots of experienced towing vehicles,

including abandoned vehicles, repossessed vehicles. And I

think that that experience, that real world experience is

applicable here, whereas DMV doesn't have that experience.

And we even noted in our reply brief with respect to some

deposition testimony by Priscilla Vaughn of the DMV. She's the

Bureau Chief of Title at DMV. She doesn't even know how

repossessions work. That's what she testified to. And she also

testified to the fact that there's no central database.

Neither. So why don't you go ahead?

So I guess from trades' perspective, it's important to

distinguish between abandoned vehicles, repossessed vehicles,

but also to know the fact that there is some conceptual

overlap here. And DMV, on the one hand, creates these

artificial silos between repossessed vehicles and abandoned

vehicles and doesn't account for the practical realities in the

towing industry. And that's sort of what trades was getting at

with respect to that.

So with respect to the evidence of the three vehicles that

were towed from the dealership, the hearings examiner came

down as not crediting the testimony of one of the

former employees of the of the dealership and basically went

with the general manager who said, we never authorized trades to

take these cars. And that's that seems to me to be finding a

credibility and a resolution of conflicts in the evidence. How

can we not get behind the hearings examiner with respect

to that fact?

So with respect to certain facts, you know, this court

does defer to factual determinations made credibility

determinations made. But at the end of the day, the hearings

examiner's decision was really a legal determination about, you

know, what constitutes an abandoned vehicle, whether

these vehicles constitute as a matter of law, abandoned

vehicles. And that is a legal determination for this court

to review.

Well, it seems to me credibility determination has a client

been charged with any crimes with respect to those that

property.

I don't want to answer that question, your honor. I don't

think it's relevant to the issues on appeal.

So yes, in other words, yes, but who authorized trades to take

those cars?

So as testified to you by Stefan Conno DeMitracchi, Jason

Asbury, who was the prior general manager authorized

trades to take those three vehicles. And Jason Asbury

also handed over the factory keys to those three vehicles to

trade. Why did they ask trades to take them? Because they were

being they were repossessed vehicles? Is that isn't that

the case?

No, as testified to by Stefan Conno DeMitracchi, those

vehicles were all abandoned. And they were in a section of

Dan O'Brien's lot that housed effectively abandoned vehicles,

you know, vehicles that people didn't want. Now, the fact

that they may have two of them were late model key is

doesn't matter. I mean, people buy cars all the time,

even new fancy cars. Then they lose their job, can't pay for

them. What do they do? Sometimes they bring them back to the

very same dealership that they bought them from and say, I

don't want this car. I can't afford it. You know, that's

just one circumstance, though, that that constitutes

abandonment. And that's perhaps what happened with

respect to those two late model key is at Dan O'Brien Kia.

But with the creditors notified that you were taking

the vehicles,

vehicle owners and lean holders were always notified with

respect to all of the vehicles at issue. And when nobody

responded to those communications, or there was an

express disclaimer that, hey, I don't want this vehicle,

they're abandoned at that point. And then trades can

follow the auction process via the abandoned vehicle

process and can sell the vehicle and then should be

able to obtain the title to that vehicle, particularly

when all forms, all DMV forms were submitted,

any minor issues in those forms were always clarified by

trades quickly.

Did your clients still have physical custody of those

vehicles?

I don't know the answer to that. I know one vehicle was

sold. It wasn't titled, but it was sold to a third

party nonetheless. I don't know with respect to the

other vehicles, Your Honor. So at the end of the day

here, what we have is a statutory scheme and

regulatory scheme that is premised upon what constitutes

an abandoned vehicle, yet there's no definition of

abandoned vehicle in the statutory regulatory scheme.

It's our contention that given that lack of definition,

this court should apply the reasonable ordinary common

meaning of abandoned to the vehicles that are at

issue here. And when this court does so, this court

will see that all 10 vehicles that are at issue on

appeal were clearly abandoned and could be sold

and titled under the abandoned vehicle process in RSA

262 and the related regulatory scheme.

Unless there are any other questions at this point, I

will rest.

No, thank you. Thank you very much. You have reserved

your two minutes.

Thank you.

Ms. Wilson.

Good morning, May it please the court? My name is

Christina Wilson. I'm here this morning on behalf of

the Department of Safety Division of Motor Vehicles.

The purpose behind the abandoned vehicle law is

very simple. Abandoned vehicle services is an

important and necessary service that tow companies

perform because they're taking vehicles from places

where they don't belong. That could be on a private

property without permission in a place that's impeding

access or posing a hazard to the public.

So in your view, can a repossessed vehicle ever

be an abandoned vehicle?

So I think it's important to clarify.

A repossession, a car that has actually been

repossessed with versus a car that has a

repossession order out for it that the bank has

issued. If a tow company has repossessed a vehicle

by order of a lean holder, and that is why they

removed it from a property, that tow company has

never performed abandoned vehicle services under

the statute. And so that tow company can't claim

it as abandoned. That's not to say.

So what do they do when the lean holder doesn't

respond? They say, so this vehicle on our

behalf, please, they do the work and then

they did the lean, the creditor just disappears.

What are they supposed to do with that car?

So when a tow company contracts with a lean

holder to perform a repossession and trade

says that this happened in these cases with

at least six of the vehicles, they agree upon

a price ahead of time. It's an arrangement

between the tow company and the lean holder.

If the lean holder doesn't pay, it's

essentially a contract dispute that the

lean holder hasn't held up their end of the

bargain. And so there's private contractual

remedies. There might be, depending on how

the repossession agreement between the lean

holder and tow company is written, maybe

they've got a storage agreement that would

entitle them to a storage lane, but the lean

holder has never asked them to perform an

abandoned vehicle service. And that's the

key. As Justice Hicks honed in right at

the beginning, 26240A, how does that apply

in this case where the lean holder is

never acting as a property owner asking

for a removal of a vehicle from their

property. So if the lean holder is

asking for a repossession, they're never

asking for removal of an abandoned

vehicle. They're just two different

services. They fall under two different

buckets. If a tow company is executing

that repossession on behalf of a lean

holder, they're not falling within the

statute and the car must be governed by

the repossession laws. It's different

provisions for sale. There's different

rights. You mentioned there's a third

category where the tow company

tows a vehicle that is subject to a

repossession order.

Yes. So this comes up in Trades'

Reply brief. They're overstating what

the hearings examiner and DMV have

decided by saying the interpretation

is that a vehicle that has an order

for repossession out on the car, the

lean holder's order that would be

repossessed, that that vehicle can

never simultaneously be subject to

the abandoned vehicle law. And that's

not what we're saying. You could have

a car that the bank wants to

repossess, but at the same time it's

simultaneously parked somewhere without

permission and might be subject to the

abandoned vehicle law. So it could be

both. It could be both, but what the

relevant question is, why did that tow

company go to pick up that car? Is it

because a private property owner called

up and said, hey, there's a car in

my lawn. I didn't authorize it to

be here, take it away. Or did the

tow company show up because they

found the car and they're acting on

behalf of the lean holder? And the

reason that that distinction matters

is because the abandoned vehicle law

only allows for the recovery of fees

incurred under that statute in

performing abandoned vehicle services.

Not storage fees.

I'm sorry? As opposed, I'm sorry, as

opposed to what other fees. So if you

have fees incurred because of the

repossession, but it's for the

abandoned vehicle law purposes, it's

fees incurred in carrying out an

abandoned vehicle removal or storage.

The storage distinction for the

abandoned vehicle law is because one

company or a law enforcement agency

could remove the car, but a storage

facility or a tow company could

actually store the car. So it could

be one or both. So you have the

issue of who triggered the towing,

whether it was repossession or

abandoned, this car's in my parking

lot, get it out of here. And then

can it change from one to the

other under this scenario where the

mean holder sort of says, oh, gee,

the lien, the costs, I'm just walking

away. Can it become an abandoned

car? So if it's with the same tow

company, we would answer no. If the

reason that that tow company

removed the vehicle and is storing

the vehicles pursuant to a

repossession agreement with the

lien holder, the answer is no. I'm

not going to say I couldn't imagine a

hypothetical scenario where maybe it

could happen. What if that tow

company who ordered the, who

performed the repo dropped it off

somewhere it shouldn't be? Or the

contract, I guess, I don't know,

could a contract allow for? Contract

between the tow company and the

repossession, the lien holder say,

and if you don't respond to us,

you, we all agree the car will be

abandoned and carried out under

this other statutory scheme. I think

it's very unlikely that that would

ever appear in one of these

repossession agreements because

I mean how else would they secure

their costs paid up, you know,

you talk about they have a cost

agreement up front. So how would

they secure payment other than,

you know, to avoid having to go to

court file contract action for

nonpayment? It might be simpler to

just be able to keep the vehicle.

So I can't answer why the

legislature hasn't created that

sort of mechanism for

repossessions, but the

distinction with abandoned

vehicle services is it

contemplates a scenario where the

vehicle owner is not involved

necessarily in the original

tow, they're not authorizing it,

they might not even be there

when it happens, but we need to

stick somebody with that bill and

it shouldn't be the private

property owner who didn't put

the car there. It shouldn't be

the law enforcement agency

that's trying to keep the

public safe. So the statute

says the vehicle owner who's

responsible for that car is on

the hook for these fees and

here's the mechanism to

recover it. So unlike with a

repo agreement where you have a

contract that says I'm going to

pay you $500 to perform the

repo and you have a contract,

that contract doesn't exist.

So this statute provides an

incentive to perform an

important service to the

public and to private

property owners by creating a

mechanism, a statutory lean

right for tow companies to

get paid for performing this

particular service. It's not

any and all tow services like

that. So it's a trade's claims.

Well they claim that property

to the owners of the vehicles

are abandoning the vehicles

and basically conveying them to

trade. Can that happen under

that scenario with that being

an abandoned vehicle or

repossessed vehicle?

To clarify, are you speaking

to the one vehicle that they

say the vehicle owner

voluntarily abandoned?

Right, in Massachusetts.

So assuming New Hampshire law

would apply there, which

statute would you go under?

So assuming New Hampshire law

would apply, what they're

claiming happened is that that

vehicle owner essentially

voluntarily transferred the

vehicle to trades. The vehicle

owner decides I don't want the

car, trades take it away, I'm

authorizing you to tow it.

That's a voluntary transfer of

the car and what titling

laws say is that owner who's

transferring the car to the

new owner, the transfer, has

to surrender title at that

point. If that individual

wanted to transfer their car

to trades, they could have

just signed over title.

But the problem is there's a

lien on the car, so they

don't have the right to

transfer it. So to say that a

vehicle owner can use this

statute with tow companies to

transfer title to a vehicle

without any involvement of the

lien holder, without following

the proper process, it runs

a fowl of the other titling

laws about the voluntary

transfer of vehicles.

And just in the logical

framework of the statute, it

also doesn't fit because it

renders provisions of the

statute entirely meaningless.

And the key about 26240A is

it's not just that a private

property owner is removing a

vehicle from there, causing

the removal of a vehicle from

their property. The car has

to be parked without

permission or apparently

abandoned. You can't park

your own car on your own

property without permission.

As for apparently abandoned,

that suggests as far as we can

tell, this car appears to be

abandoned, nobody's coming

back for it. It suggests that

the person causing the

removal doesn't really truly

know what the circumstances

surrounding the car is, and

that makes sense under the

statute because it provides

a mechanism for vehicle

owners to also challenge

the grounds for the tow to

say, hey, that wasn't

abandoned or hey, you didn't

have sufficient grounds.

So if a vehicle owner is

truly abandoning,

voluntarily abandoning a car,

they know exactly what

they're doing with it. You

don't need the statutory

scheme to protect them, to

provide notice to give them

opportunities to claim the

car. If they want to

voluntarily have their car

picked up and give it away,

there's nothing stopping

them from just calling up a

tow company and doing that.

This statute contemplates

the vehicle owner isn't

authorizing the tow, isn't

calling for it. A vehicle

owner does not need this

statute, nor should they

be allowed to have this

statute to just give their

car away because it violates

the other titling laws.

Turning to the vehicles

removed from Dan O'Brien Keah,

it was truly two versions

of events, essentially, that

the hearings examiner weighed

and assessed in terms of how

those vehicles were removed.

There is no true statutory

dispute with regard to

those vehicles.

DMV did not dispute that

somebody at Dan O'Brien

Keah said, take the keys,

take the car. But the

question is why did Dan O'Brien

if it is, as Trade says,

authorize the tow? Why did

Dan O'Brien authorize the tow?

Was it because vehicles were

parked without permission

or apparently abandoned

on their lot?

That is what DMV

investigated. They've reached

out to Dan O'Brien Keah

and talked to two employees

and could not confirm that

the circumstances surrounding

the removal constituted

abandoned vehicle services.

And so the denial from DMV

said it did not say that

nobody at Dan O'Brien

authorized that tow. It said

DMV was confirmed that

Dan O'Brien Keah did not

authorize the removal of

an abandoned vehicle.

I don't understand why that

fact couldn't be nailed down

somewhere, somehow.

So what if it's, yeah,

what if it's a third reason?

It's not repowed. It's not

abandoned, but it's unwanted.

There is no third reason,

I assume, right?

To see the repossessor

abandoned and they decided

to... Or you could call

a tow company... A property

owner can call a tow company

for a host of reasons,

but it doesn't necessarily

have to be in a statutory

scheme. The engine could be

dead and they could want to

move it to a different

property. There's a host of

reasons why you could call

a tow company.

And if it's taken away,

it's yours, then what?

They should transfer title

with it?

Well, so Dan O'Brien

didn't own those cars

and that's what Jason

Asbury told DMV.

He was confused why

trades was towing it.

He couldn't say whether

they were abandoned

or repossessed because

the bank owned them.

The individual that trades

pointed to to say he

authorized the tow,

that individual told DMV,

something else in the company

told me that the tow

could happen.

I don't know why it

happened. So he is not

the individual...

Does it matter?

I mean, does it matter?

If I own a restaurant,

there's a car in the parking

lot and I want it towed.

So I think that's where

they apparently abandoned

kicks in that...

Right. And if the bank

owns it and they don't

respond, then I guess

I'm having a hard time.

Isn't it abandoned?

Well, so it could be.

So say Walmart.

Walmart expects people

to park in their parking

lot, but all of a sudden

Walmart, the manager walks

out one day and notices

the same car has been

in the same parking spot

for two weeks.

As far as they can tell,

it's abandoned.

Nobody's coming back for it

and they asked for it

to be removed.

There was no testimony

DMV's investigation

didn't reveal anything

like that that Dan O'Brien

expected nobody to be

coming back for these cars.

DMV also spoke to the

vehicle owners who said

they left those cars

in that parking lot

for either trade-ins

or repossessions.

There's nothing to say

that Dan O'Brien didn't

authorize them to park them

there or that Dan O'Brien

didn't know why those cars

were there.

So it's...

DMV reached out to trades

when it originally got

these applications and said

explain to us the

circumstances surrounding

these removals.

And rather than

explain the facts

or who authorized it,

trades simply quoted

the language of 262.40a

back to DMV and said,

this is what we acted under.

Because trades didn't give

any factual information

to DMV, they initiated

an investigation

and they were not able

to confirm that,

even if Dan O'Brien said,

here are the keys,

take the cars,

that it was for the

circumstances contemplated

under 262.40a

for parts without permission

or apparently abandoned.

They could not confirm

that trades performed

abandoned vehicle services

under the statute.

And that's the only way

you're getting the lien rights.

Have there been other

investigations that sort of

defined or have looked

into similar circumstances

where cars are being towed,

presumably under the abandoned

vehicle statute?

And then DMV decides,

well, since nobody explained

why it was towed,

we're going to assume

it's not abandoned.

So do you mean with respect

to trades or just generally?

Generally.

I mean, is this a practice?

So Priscilla Vaughn, who has

worked at the DMV since the 80s,

she's been the head

of the title bureau

for 20 years,

testified during the hearing

that she has never seen

a tow company try to use

the statute the way that

trades has tried to use

the statute.

And that when these started

coming in,

they raised immediate red flags,

concerns it was very unusual

and odd to see these things.

So I can't say for sure

whether or not they've ever

had this pop up before

or had investigation

of similar circumstances.

But she testified,

they review each application

on a case-by-case basis

to make sure that they fit

the circumstances.

So what was trade supposed

to do with these vehicles

that were taken from the dealership?

I can't answer that

because I'm not sure why

the vehicles were taken.

I'm not sure under what

circumstances.

If they were repossessions,

they follow the repossession law.

If they were not repossessions,

then what?

If they were trade ins,

still had a lien on somebody

who didn't wipe out the lien,

then what?

Then what happened?

It's a very hard question

to answer without knowing why.

And that's DMV's big concern.

They can deny, the statute says

shall.

They shall refuse to issue

a certificate of title

if they're not sure what

the proper ownership is.

And if they can't confirm

whether the sale was proper,

if this was truly a proper sale

under the abandoned vehicle statute,

they can't issue

a certificate of title.

And they were unable to confirm

those facts.

So it's on the towing company

to determine really

what's the basis for this tow

and to make that decision

before they take the property.

They need to be able to explain

and point to the individual

and say this is why we came

to pick it up.

If they're going to try

to sell the car at an auction

under the abandoned vehicle

statute, they should be able

to answer quickly.

It shouldn't be this big

complicated issue of what

happened.

They should know why

they were picking up cars.

We truly don't understand

how it is that those three cars,

whether they were trade-ins

or repossessions, came to be

in trades' possession.

Yes, Dan O'Brien, they say,

gave us the keys and said,

tow them away.

But we don't know

the circumstances of it.

And if they're not able to

confirm that, we can't confirm

that they properly had the right

to sell under the abandoned

vehicle law.

What should we do with the one

vehicle that was sold?

So again, we haven't, as far

as I know, DMV hasn't had anyone

try to use the statute, the way

that trades has.

And so they've been trying to

figure it out as they go along.

But Priscilla Vaughn testified

during the hearing that she

would have to work

individually with that owner,

that new owner, because what

happened was trades sold

to a dealership who then sold

to a private individual, at least

with one of these.

And then another one, I

believe, was a direct sale

to a private individual.

DMV testified that they would

have to work individually

to figure out if that person

can have title, if they can

have some sort of bonded title

that's secured by enough funds

to protect maybe the vehicle

owner or lean holder's

interest in the car.

So I don't know exactly.

The original vehicle or the

private owner and lean holder

who didn't respond to notice.

So I can't answer for sure

what happened with those.

And how long would you bond

that for a year, three years?

I think the statute

specifically says how long

the bond shall be held.

I think I don't promise this,

but I think it's four years.

Around there.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Mr. Zaharias, do you have

your two minutes?

Just a couple of quick points.

Thank you.

As you heard DMV concede

in the beginning of her

presentation, a car could be

both repossessed and abandoned.

And that's exactly what we're

arguing here.

And once a vehicle is abandoned,

the abandoned vehicle

statutory and regulatory process

can be followed.

And it can be sold at auction

and then titled via the abandoned

vehicle process.

These concepts are not mutually

exclusive.

And there is a lot of conceptual

and practical overlap

between repossessed and abandoned

vehicles.

And another important point,

abandonment cannot be determined

until the end of the process

after notification has gone out

to the vehicle owner,

after notification has gone out

to the lean holder or anybody

else who might possess an

interest in the vehicle.

After that point, if nobody

responds to anything

or somebody calls up and says,

yeah, I got your letter

and I don't want this vehicle,

whatever those circumstances

are, it's at that point

at the end that abandonment

can be definitively determined.

So for DMV to take the position

that abandonment has to happen

at the beginning of this

process just doesn't make

any logical sense here.

And with respect to the question

about private contract disputes,

we acknowledge that that could

be a remedy that trades could

potentially pursue against

the lean holder for fees

that were not paid

with respect to a particular

vehicle that was picked up

and towed pursuant

to a repossession order.

However, that doesn't solve

the title issue down the road.

So yes, trades might be able

to collect the fees

in a private contract dispute

from the lean holder

that were owed.

But in that private contract

dispute, trades isn't going

to be able to obtain

the title necessarily

from the lean holder.

And that's why we have

this abandoned vehicle process

in RSI 262

in the related regulatory scheme

to enable a towing

and storage company like trades

to obtain the title to a vehicle

that nobody wants.

So with that, we rest on our brief.

Thank you.

OK, submitted.

Court stands in recess.

Thank you for those presentations.

Thank you.
