This is case 2021-0511, city of Portsmouth versus Portsmouth Ranking Officers' Association, NEPBA Local 2220.

Good morning. Justice Hans Marconi will not participate in the argument, but she will be reviewing the tape and participating in the outcome.

Attorney Claus, and I understand you reserved two minutes.

That's correct, Your Honor. Thank you.

Please proceed.

Good morning, and may it please the court. My name is Tom Colossum. I'm an attorney from Nashua, and I represent the city of Portsmouth and the Portsmouth Police Department.

I am prepared to answer questions from the court at any time.

This is an appeal of an arbitration decision brought under NHRSA 542.

If the Superior Court order gives us any indication, or gives me any indication, I imagine that the first issue the court is going to wrestle with is, why should the court do anything here?

It was a very thorough...

The Superior Court had no problem with that.

What's that?

The Superior Court had no difficulty addressing that.

No. The Superior Court dispensed with the case in short order, and disappointingly from my perspective, Your Honor.

I certainly concede we had a very thorough arbitration proceeding.

The arbitration proceeding was consistent with what the parties contractually agreed to in their collective bargaining agreement.

So I think the natural question that was before the Superior Court and is before this court is, why should we do anything here?

If I were here arguing an appeal based on alleged errors of fact, or if I tried to bring such an appeal, I would agree with you.

The level of deference that this court has historically paid to arbitrator's findings of fact is an almost insurmountably high bar.

But that is not this case.

Our argument in this case is, you can accept all of the factual findings that the arbitrator made.

Including the Chief's testimony that after Judge Casavik's order, he would have ordered an investigation into the findings that the trial judge made would not have terminated?

I think you can take that as a finding of fact.

But you would also have to take as a finding of fact the stipulation that was entered into the record that the commissioners said that no, they would have, in the wake of Judge Casavik's decision, immediately terminated Officer Goodwin.

And as between the Chief and the commissioners, the commissioners are the body that decides whether or not a termination occurs.

So why didn't the commission re-terminate?

Pardon?

Why didn't the commission re-terminate?

I think you're honored that they didn't see any compelling reason or understand why that even made sense.

The Task Force report is one thing, and Judge Casavik's decision is clearly something.

I think it goes without saying material differences between the two events.

Well, material differences as it relates to the quality, the quantity of the evidence that supported the under...

The finding here, the determination to terminate, was based on the Task Force finding that there was a personal relationship between Officer Goodwin and Miss Weber that resulted in a significant bequest to Officer Goodwin.

And then that violated significant rules and regulations of the department.

Nothing changed about the reasons for termination when the Casavikia decision came out.

The only thing that changed was there was now a significant evidence that what the Task Force thought was an improper relationship was a grossly improper relationship.

It was much worse than anybody anticipated.

So there was no just cause for terminating Officer Goodwin based on the Casavikia decision alone?

Oh, I think there was, Your Honor. I think there was certainly just cause for terminating him based on that.

So doesn't that under the CBA, which ultimately governs this, give rise to separate rights of grievance and arbitration?

I don't think so, Your Honor. I think that the distinction is that...

I would agree with the Union's argument and where, Your Honor, is going if there were two separate bases for termination.

Let's take a hypothetical. Let's say the employee was originally terminated for absenteeism.

And they went through the process and they advised the employee, you know, your absenteeism is a problem.

We've investigated it. We've looked into it.

And in the course of pursuing the grievance process on the absenteeism issue, they discovered that, oh, by the way, the employee also took money from the till.

If the employer were going to say, that's a separate, distinct basis on which to terminate you, due process dictates that they have to tell the employee that.

They've got to do an investigation into that separate basis for termination.

They've got to give the employee the louder mill rights that attach. That's not this case.

This case is the same reasons for termination that the task force found are mirrored in what Judge Casavecchia finds.

The only difference is it got a whole lot worse.

Judge Casavecchia found, for example, that not only was this an improper relationship due to the age disparity between the two participants

and the fact that one was a police officer and one was a citizen,

but evidence developed in that case that Miss Weber was suffering from dementia.

That didn't change the underlying factual finding that the task force made, which was that this was an improper relationship.

It just made it more improper.

So I would agree that all those due process requirements would attach if a completely new reason came into the picture.

And that's what the cases talk about.

That's what, if you look at the University of Wisconsin case, for example,

that's a case where the employee is originally terminated for misconduct in the workplace.

And in the course of pursuing that grievance, the employer develops evidence that, oh, by the way, the employee also took documents.

In that case, the court said, well, you can't, if you're going to use that separate event as a basis for termination,

you can't spring that on the employee in the hearing.

You've got to give them notice and an opportunity to have due process rights protected.

So I think that's the key distinction here is if we were talking about two separate basis for termination, I would agree with you.

So the plain mistake is there is one basis for termination.

There's one basis for termination that didn't change.

And, you know, like I said, the only difference was the task force, because it specifically limited its inquiry,

didn't get into the question of undue influence, didn't get into the question of cognitive impairment.

The task force deferred those to the probate court.

So it was only when the probate court came out and that evidence or that those facts came to light that the commission said,

this was 10 times worse than even we imagined.

And it was not a material change in the reasons for the termination, but it made the termination that much more clear.

But even accepting that it's essentially the same grounds, what about the equitable circumstances?

It seems that plain mistake being very deferential and the arbitrator has the power under the CBA to take into account equitable circumstances

and creating a remedy, given that and the issues that you've been talking about with my colleagues.

How can we say it's plain mistake for the award to be what it was?

Well, first of all, having looked at the cases and kind of dug in on the plain mistake issue as it relates to matters of law,

I'm not so sure that your case law suggests that you give all that much deference to arbitrator's decisions on issues of law.

It looks like the plain mistake standard is simply looking at the application of the law to the facts

and did the arbitrator get it right or not.

That's the level. I don't think there's much deference at all, frankly.

So in your view, equitable circumstances, that concept doesn't come into play here at all?

No, I'm not suggesting that, Your Honor. I'm just suggesting that the bar isn't as high as you seem to suggest as it relates to questions of law.

I certainly agree that the arbitrator did find, which she referred, well, she didn't refer to it.

The Union has picked up the phrase from Nashville Banner, extraordinary equitable circumstances.

And they've seized on really the one thing that the arbitrator focused on was this alleged denial of the louder mill right

and said that that's an extraordinary equitable circumstance that supports the way that she interpreted it.

I think the fundamental flaw in that argument is that there was no violation of the employee's louder mill right here.

Again, the argument, she was relying in part on the mitigating factors that she found, you know, the knowledge of the command staff about what was going on

and the imperfection of the rules and regulations governing it. I mean, it wasn't just the louder mill factor.

Well, I think that was, I think, Your Honor, it seemed to me that that was the primary argument that she made.

Certainly did fault the command staff and their participation, but to pin a damage award on the alleged misconduct of the employer in this case

begins to sound a little bit like punitive damages. And it doesn't, it's not a measure of damages that would be appropriate in a case like this.

Again, particularly in the context of arbitration, I think in arbitrator's exercise of discretion of equity is the deference we give is particularly broad

and it would seem to be, you know, where our first duty is to honor the contract and the CBA and it's just as Bassett notes,

there's an express reference to the arbitrator to consider the equities of the case.

Well, it's interesting, Your Honor, that express provision talks about her considering the equities in terms of granting a remedy

that precedes the filing of the grievance. That's the language. It's very specific and very narrow.

It talks about her having the equitable right to go before the grievance was brought if she determines that the remedy should extend in that direction.

It doesn't say anything about what happened here, which is she extended the remedy beyond what we said was an appropriate remedy dictated by Nashville Banner and the law.

And you're right. We do have to give honor and effect to the contract, but the contract specifically says that the arbitrator's decision is subject to review under RSA 542.

And that's critical because if that provision didn't exist in the contract, the jig is up once the arbitrator rules. We can't appeal it to this court.

But because that provision exists in the contract, we have the ability to come to this court and say she made an error of law.

And again, I would go back to the cases, the Finn versus Ballentine case, even though the statute speaks in terms of plain mistake,

it looks like this court's interpretation of plain mistake as it relates to errors of law is not a very high bar.

And I would also say this court, on the two occasions that it has had a chance to look at the after-acquired evidence doctrine and apply it in cases,

has specifically held that the way in which in those cases it was a trial court applied or didn't apply the after-acquired evidence doctrine is a question of law.

So I think that our argument is simply she was provided with what the law was. The law was clear. There's no doubt about the fact.

She found that as of the release of the Cassavecchi decision, there was just cause, there was justification to terminate his employment.

And I want to go back.

Just on your point about the two, our two cases, McDeal was an at-will context.

Correct.

What was the second case?

I think it was ACAS Acquisitions versus Presatech.

Also at-will.

At-will.

So the overlay of this contract in the public employer environment doesn't change those analyses?

Oh, I think it does to a degree. I mean, I think certainly it brings in the possibility.

I don't think it means that you can't ever apply the after-acquired evidence doctrine.

I mean, the Union originally made that argument that even applying the after-acquired evidence doctrine was inappropriate in the public sector context.

But the arbitrator rejected that.

And there's a whole host of arbitration and decisions from other jurisdictions that say that's not the case.

But it certainly does bring in the due process element.

But as I said, your argument is due process doesn't apply.

Because he had noticed an opportunity to be heard about the client.

Absolutely.

The louder mill requirement is notice of what the allegations are against you and an opportunity to be heard on those.

He had that opportunity. Nothing changed.

What would our, if we sent him another letter, re-terminating him, what would it have said?

It would have said, oh, by the way, we terminated you originally for having an improper relationship and getting this improper bequest.

Now we got the Cassavecchi decision.

Now we know that it was really improper.

We're firing you again.

That doesn't make any sense.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you.

Good morning.

May it please the court, Peter Peroni for the Union, any PBA local 220.

I'm happy to answer questions at any time.

Could you just pick up on Attorney Clausen's interpretation of the, that part of the CBA where the arbitrator is granted authority to consider equities?

Yeah, it's, the actual sentence is, the arbitrator may or may not make his or her award retroactive to the initial filing date of the grievance as the equities of the case may require.

That suggests to me broad latitude, may or may not.

And it suggests that point says nothing about where the equities may lead going forward.

The arbitrator always would have the right, and it actually happens a lot where, not a lot, but it happens that you have a termination that an arbitrator will say, well, there's no just cause for termination, but I think a suspension to the date of my order is appropriate.

And that's within her, that's within her prerogative.

That's why we pick arbitrators.

Why does it make any sense to have an award of back pay and benefits to the date of the decision?

That's a pretty random.

If she, if she still had the case pending in front of her and she issued her decision today, would it go through today?

Yeah, that's interesting.

And my brother poses a rhetorical question in his brief to the effect of, if we'd moved quicker an arbitration, would that mean you'd get a lesser, we would have a lesser award here because she would have moved everything back, maybe.

Could she have also chosen, so the probate decision comes out August 2015.

The city provided the union notice that they were going to rely on that probate decision in June of 2016, about 10 months later.

Right prior to the time we started the arbitration hearings.

Could she have chosen that date?

Well, okay, we're all sitting here.

I might choose a different date.

I said, go right to the end.

I thought the equities compelled that type of award.

Mr. Clausen in the city said there should be no back pay.

And all that was briefed, all that was in front of her when she made the decision.

She chose to, and if you accept that Nashville Banner says, you, this is, this is a sort of unorthodox situation.

And it has to be decided on a case by case basis.

And it has to be decided based upon the equities.

And I've tried to lay out in the brief what the interests of both the grievance and the union.

The union is the, is the signatory to this contract.

And the union is actually the party to the grievance.

And the union has worked very hard to get just cause into that contract to get all these provisions regarding the process due to somebody when there's going to be discipline.

Of particular note here is this provision that says that all grievances have to be taken up separately.

That's actually provision.

I worked very hard to try to get out of contracts as on the union side, you have situations where you're trying to sort of group everything into a class type of grievance.

And very often management is trying to separate them out.

Here what it did was deprive the grievance of the opportunity to have a separate arbitration proceeding on this, the issue of the probate decision.

And that I have to address this idea that it's one and the same.

The task force decision and the probate decision, it's a matter of a degree.

I don't think the record supports that inference.

The task force decision and I laid out, and it's kind of a, I think it makes the union's point here.

My brief is full of record quotes from the task force decision.

The city's brief is full of quotes from the probate decision.

And the arbitrator weighed all that.

She put them all together.

She absolutely considered the date that the city provided the union notice 10 months after the probate decision.

She considered the fact that this, as Justice McDonald commented, this was not an at-will employee.

This is an employee that comes unlike Nashville Banner.

This was a situation where there had been a wrongful termination of the employee where, you know, we had countless hours.

We were commenting on before we came in how long we've been with this case.

I mean, this went on for three years back and forth over how, given that task force report, why the city just sort of rushed to judgment.

You know, there was a lot of evidence about the media in Portsmouth and the city argued that with this media coverage,

you could never have this person reinstated.

And they fired them based upon a report that did not justify it.

And then the probate decision was issued and we briefed that whole, this extensive briefing.

And by the way, I don't think a lot of that's in the record here.

I mean, you're being asked to sort of take up the equities of the judge's decision.

I don't think you have the transcript or the underlying transcript.

I mean, I don't know how you do that.

But the probate decision, and Mr. Klassen and I have had many arguments outside of the arbitration about this,

ultimately what it says is there was a confidential relationship.

And that the grievant here ultimately didn't, because of that confidential relationship,

there was a common law inference of undue burden.

The grievant did not overcome that common law inference.

In my mind, it was a very technical argument.

There was some commentary about the grievance evasive answers

and the whole hierarchy of the police department's evasive answers.

But it was not the same issue.

It just wasn't. They're different.

But be that as it may, it came into this case.

And if the city wants to go that route and have this Nashville banner type of remedy limit,

then they also get with that the equities have to be weighed.

How would it have played out had the commission terminated again after the Casabecco order came out?

Well, I think that's different.

There would have been a separate grievance procedure and a separate arbitration.

Yes. And there would have been a couple of things there.

The chief testified that they would have done an investigation.

And they would have gone and actually instead of saying, this is terrible,

you didn't overcome your burden of undue influence,

you actually violated this rule, this rule, and this rule.

And we would have said, no, we didn't and had that back and forth argument.

I think we'd be in a different place.

And by the way, we probably would have done it with a different arbitrator.

And I don't know what that means.

And to be fair, Judge Casabecco didn't consider the instructions or advice that Officer Goodwin was getting from leadership.

That wasn't part of the probate case, but it would be part of the termination case.

No question it was part of the termination case.

And I don't believe that was really material, although...

You mean really material to what?

The probate case.

And although the leadership testified and Judge Casabecco did not write favorably about their testimony and what happened here.

But it didn't dispute that advice was given to Officer Goodwin?

No, I don't think there's ever been any dispute about that.

And the stuff we've...the portions of the task force that we cited in our brief make clear that at least with regard to the task force,

their view was that if he had gotten any kind of guidance, he would have never gotten entangled in this.

And that his interaction with the citizen was a result of his...

I think it's his belief in community policing and his general care about elderly folks.

I mean that's what they concluded how he got meshed up into it.

And so...

You appear to agree that the general rule is that the back pay ought to be cut off at the date of the new information's discovered, correct?

I would agree that that's the starting point.

Okay, and then you say, but then we get into the extraordinary equitable circumstances discussion.

So what are the extraordinary equitable circumstances here?

And how should we review the trial court's view of that and the arbitrator's view of that?

Yeah, so the equities that the arbitrator weighed, I believe, and that come through in her award were that one,

unlike Nashville Banner, you didn't have the second procedure.

So the union and the grievance are then relinquishing those rights.

If you don't have a second proceeding, you don't have the louder mill hearing,

which concededly, and counsel pointed this out in the city's brief,

when the task force discipline was issued, we waived the right to a louder mill hearing.

Because at that point, we had had this, what we considered a rush to judgment,

we just wanted to get to arbitration.

That doesn't mean we were...

It makes the point, really, that we had the right.

For that second discipline, based on the probate report, we had the right to that louder mill hearing.

We had notice that didn't come until 10 months later, unlike Nashville Banner.

We had the right under the CBA, remember, you're considering both the union's rights and the grievance rights.

We had the right under the CBA to have a separate proceeding, which we were not getting.

And we had the right, as has been suggested, to actually what would have happened under the practice,

which is there would have been an investigation, not just say,

this is bad, the probate decision's bad, we would have fired them for that, too.

So that's what she was weighing.

And she was weighing the fact, how did this actually happen?

How did we actually end up here?

And part of the reason we ended up here is because this individual got bad mentorship.

That's a finding of the task force.

If he'd been told and actually given good guidance here,

you would have never had this entanglement.

That was her, she had the right to weigh that, however she wanted to.

And this is what she came up with.

So this idea that, and I disagree with my brother about the standard of review,

what he suggested, I think, is essentially a de novo standard of review.

That this court can say, well, I don't like the law.

And, you know, admittedly, some of the, that Finn decision that he cites is,

you know, it is sort of hard to tell there.

But certainly, what Finn reiterated, that you have to find that the arbitrator

manifestly fell into such error regarding the facts in the law that the error

prevented free and fair exercise of judgment, that did not happen here.

That simply did not happen here.

And then I just add one other thing about the standard of review.

I would say it's a deferential standard.

It's also at its zenith here because you're talking about the remedy.

And in, you know, just as recently as February, this court has said,

that's, you know, when you're talking about the remedy, great, I think,

the use of great latitude must be allowed.

And so you have that, and you have a CBA that says that the arbitrator

is going to decide the equities.

And so I think that altogether makes it up.

What are our choices here?

Is it a binary choice?

Either it's the date that the arbitrator set, or it's the date of the newly

acquired information, or can we say, well, you know, maybe it was the date

when the city informed your client or the grievant that it was,

termination could have been based on, they were going to rely on that

second Cassavecchia decision.

I think you can't come to that last conclusion without yourself going in

and doing what the arbitrator is supposed to be allowed to do here,

which is weigh the equities and come up with a date.

So it sounds like that's essentially unreviewable then.

What you're asking, if the arbitrator had said five years or ten years,

we couldn't get behind that.

No, I think that throws out reasonableness.

She hasn't manifestly fell into such error that she's created plain mistake.

That's what I think.

I think when you say, well, the damages could still be running,

it's ten years I think you might find in that situation that there's

absolutely no basis.

Remember here, I was arguing that if you weren't going to put them

back, you weren't going to reinstate them based upon the findings

of the probate court that we should at least get back pay

until the date of the second award, which was 2018.

That was my argument.

And she lays that out, the competing sides.

So I see my time's up.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Just a couple of quick points.

I'm glad that there was discussion about the notice that was

provided about the city's intent to rely on the Cassavecchia

decision because that's important.

That's frankly what distinguishes this case from a lot of the cases

that the union has cited, the Wisconsin Board of Regents case

in particular.

The problem in that case was the public sector employee was

confronted with a brand new reason for termination on the

day of the hearing.

And in that situation employee, public sector employee who has

a property right in his or her employment can say, I haven't,

you haven't told me about this.

I didn't know this was coming.

I didn't prepare for it.

You can't spring this on me at the last minute.

If we had done that, if we had simply come to the first day

of the arbitration hearing and said, we're going to go with

the Cassavecchia decision as well as part of our argument,

then I think the union would have a legitimate due process

claim.

Instead we said well in advance of the first day of the

hearing, this is going to be part of the analysis.

And that's exactly that.

We had a full blown argument in front of the arbitrator.

But that was something like 10 months after the Cassavecchia

decision.

That's true, Your Honor.

It is true.

But, and I mean, I guess that suggests another possible date.

At least that date would make sense, Your Honor.

I agree with the question that you asked.

The date that the arbitrator chose is completely arbitrary.

The only connection it has to this case is it's the day

she apparently finished writing her second opinion.

It's got no correlation to anything in the case.

I mean, she purports away the equities, but how did she come

up with that date?

It doesn't make any sense.

I would, you know, maybe I'm at risk at doing this,

but I think it is a binary choice.

I think you get either what we think Nashville Banner says,

which is the two months, or you get the remedy that she

issued.

I don't, you know, I don't think that the date that she

chose makes no sense to me.

Thank you very much.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Please.

Fourteen reasons.
