This is case 2021-0392, appeal of City of Rochester.

Good morning. Turning over to work, I understand you've reserved two minutes.

Good morning. I'm Tarris O'Rourke, and I'm proud to be before you again, once again representing the great City of Rochester.

When confronting the difficulty of defining what is obscene, Chief Justice Potter Stewart once famously opined,

I shall not attempt further to define it, but I know it when I see it.

Similarly, though we have statutory definitions and standards from case law to guide us in defining a charitable organization,

more often than not, those legal precepts really boil down to knowing charity when we see it.

In this case, the Rochester Agricultural Mechanical Association, or RAMA, fails that eye test.

You know charity when you see it, and RAMA is not it.

The City is able to confidently say this because RAMA is neither a charity in theory nor in practice.

Now what do I mean by in theory?

I mean when RAMA came into existence, did its founders actually create a charitable organization?

Is RAMA formed for a charitable purpose?

According to the IRS it is.

Those are different standards than we have here in the State of New Hampshire,

and actually the RSA specifically says that just because you're found to be a nonprofit by the federal government

doesn't mean you will be a charitable organization for the purpose of a tax exemption.

So does RAMA operate under an enforceable charity obligation, the sine conan of a charitable organization?

The answer to all these questions is an emphatic no.

In 1984, RAMA passed restated articles in corporation.

These new founders of RAMA specifically incorporated under RSA chapter 293A as a for-profit domestic corporation

to be able to transact any and all lawful business under RSA 239A.

Is that dispositive?

It's not, but like anything else on a case like this, it's just a fact that adds up to a conclusion.

Just while you're on the Secretary of State, do you dispute the fact that the Secretary of State listed it as a non-profit agricultural fair?

It says that one of the purposes is for a non-profit agricultural fair.

Does that make a difference?

No, I think obviously a non-charitable organization can conduct non-profit events.

Again, there's a difference between charitable and non-profit, so I don't think that makes a difference.

And a for-profit corporation have a charitable purpose?

I do not believe so. In this case, obviously they don't have a charitable purpose.

Again, for-profit corporations can conduct charitable acts or non-profit acts, but it wouldn't change their character and make them into a charitable organization.

And again, these new founders of Rama easily could have formed a charitable organization if that was its true purpose.

Was it a non-profit corporation prior to 1984?

I'd say it's unclear. Its purposes never specifically were charitable.

They're never specifically directed towards the general public or to what we call here sort of an indefinite segment of the public.

They were always directed internally.

So I mean, we can always assume that in 1984 they were acting to clarify.

Again, they could have formed a charitable organization. They didn't.

And that choice should be respected.

History and facts should not be rewritten to drive a late in the game attempt to receive a tax break.

Rama is a for-profit corporation without limitation under Chapter 293-8 and it should be treated as such.

Further, Rama was not formed for a charitable purpose.

A charitable purpose would be directed towards the general public or a substantial indefinite segment of the general public.

Does it matter that the profits are reinvested in the mission of the organization?

Again, the mission would have to be a charitable one for that to make a difference.

So would it matter if the profits were reinvested in a charitable mission?

Right. So if you were a charitable organization and you made money and reinvested it back into the charitable mission, that's fine.

You can do that and not run afoul of our exemptions.

How do you respond to Rama's argument that you didn't preserve your argument with the respected RSA 292?

The city stated, first of all, I think it's a misunderstanding of who the burden was on from the very beginning.

It's not incumbent upon the city of Rochester to disprove that you're a charitable organization.

It's incumbent on them to prove they are.

So the city's position throughout this has been they are not a charitable organization.

And our position has been based on the fact that the documents that they submitted in this case do not show a charitable organization.

And those documents refer specifically to 293A.

Again, the 1984 article in the Corporation very clearly defined Rama's purpose to, quote,

excuse me, which corporations may be incorporated under RSA 293A.

And the principal purpose or purpose of which the corporation is organized is, quote,

to improve and stimulate agricultural mechanical skills, to purchase land for the use of said organization,

for grading and fencing and improving the same, and to erect such buildings as may be necessary for said association.

So this purpose is directly internally towards Rama, not outwardly to the general public.

And the purpose is focused narrowly on what's good for Rama, not on the general welfare.

So do you dispute that the BTLA can look behind that and look at other facts to determine whether or not they're a charitable organization?

So based on the elder trust factors, you know, you got to get in the door first and they weren't there.

So again, if you're an organization who hasn't formed for a charitable purpose and you don't have a binding charitable obligation,

it's not found in any of your documents, then it really doesn't matter what you do from there.

You don't have to do it.

I think that's what the case law from this court is focused on is, yeah, you can do charitable activities,

but if you're not obligated to do that, you're not a charitable organization.

There's no greater public good in promoting agriculture or mechanical skill that benefits the state of New Hampshire.

That's not how the purpose is written.

I could see an organization that could be formed for those purposes.

I'm not familiar with the 4-H's standards.

I'm sure it certainly reads something like that.

But the BTLA found that it does perform those services.

But they're not required.

We say so or not.

Even if they did, which we again vehemently disagree with.

That's a question of fact.

They were not formed for that purpose.

Maybe not.

And the BTLA made an incorrect decision when they said that they were directed towards anyone other than Rama itself.

So if we agree with you and demand this and then Rama restates their articles of corporation

in a form that you agree with, you wouldn't come back here then.

No, because then they would actually have to perform charitable acts.

When they fill out their application for a charitable tax exemption, they have to say what they're using the land for.

But didn't the BTLA conclude that they do perform charitable acts?

The BTLA concluded that the Rochester Fair is a charitable act, and we obviously dispute that.

As a matter of fact and law.

But Rama's activities aren't limited to the fair, are they?

They use that property for other purposes.

On their application, again, you have to annually file these.

On their application, they've listed some events that have, or perhaps may be according to them,

occurred on that property at different times, but not in the tax year for which they applied for the exemption.

And as again, the theory portion of Rama, they're under absolutely no enforceable obligation to conduct charitable acts.

As this Court stated in McDowell Colony, quote,

the obligatory service requirement relates not to whom the service is provided,

but to whether the organization is required to provide the service at all.

The only foundational document provided by Rama in both its charitable tax application

and in its appeal to the BTLA is its articles of incorporation.

Those articles make no mention of a requirement to provide a charitable service.

More to the point on the articles, Rama's not really required to do anything at all.

As Rama is under no enforceable charitable obligation, it cannot be a charitable organization.

Now, Rama and the BTLA, again, claim that conducting Rochester Fair for a number of years

somehow amounts to a enforceable obligation.

This conclusion, of course, is a misreading of the law and the facts.

Rama's articles of incorporation make no mention of the fair.

In fact, Rama's sole witness before the BTLA testified

the fair predates the existence of Rama by five years.

Further, as I stated earlier, the article of incorporation did not contain a charitable purpose,

so I don't know how the fair could be carrying out a charitable purpose

that does not exist in the documentation.

Moreover, unlike the property of McDowell Colony,

the articles do not oblige Rama to devote its property in Rochester to any charitable purpose.

Rama's articles specifically state that any land purchased by Rama

will be for the, quote, use of set association.

On the other hand, in McDowell Colony, the articles of incorporation of that taxpayer

stated that the property in question would be, quote,

a place for work and companionship of students in all the arts.

So you see the difference is that it's directed outwardly from the organization

to this sort of indefinite segment of the general public

and to advance, in that case, to advance the arts.

To the various agricultural displays, which I don't think you can dispute,

they have them at Rochester Fair, right?

With livestock and agricultural displays and the 4-H,

is that not improving and stimulating agricultural purposes of the city of Rochester,

Stratford County, the state of New Hampshire?

But again, that's not who they're required.

There's no requirement that they have to do it to stimulate for anybody other themselves.

You could see a situation where an organization could simply enjoy farming

and put on a fair for themselves.

And I think that's what we have here.

I know that's what we have.

This organization formed itself as they did not form themselves to be constrained by anybody,

not by the attorney general, not by the city of Rochester.

They wanted to form a for-profit organization,

and they wanted to conduct a fair, but they weren't going to have anyone

tell them when and if they had to do it.

And such a great example is through the years,

they have times they haven't done the fair,

and there's times they haven't conducted chair lacks.

That was within their unfettered discretion.

And it should be.

They're a for-profit domestic corporation.

They're not required to conduct any of these acts.

One of those times was during COVID.

Well, one is during COVID, but not the other two times.

In recent years, actually, they said,

we're not going to have the fair.

We can't make any money.

We're not going to have the fair.

The AG's office didn't come in and say,

nope, you have to conduct the fair.

That's an enforceable obligation you have.

Conserving assets during an economic downturn

might then enable the fair to continue in future years.

I don't recall anything about economic downturn.

That was an internal decision made by their board

that this group, I believe a quote from one of their board

members' time was, we have one foot in the grave.

It's not really the same as an economic downturn.

And this was well passed.

So are you saying that the analysis of whether or not

it's got a charitable purpose depends on year by year.

And if, for some reason, they don't have the fair

in a particular year, you can't look back

to the other 120 years?

I think that, again, it's two sides of the analysis,

the theory and in the practice.

When you file your charitable tax exemption,

we can very well find that you're

formed as a charitable organization.

But if you conducted no charity in that tax year,

that's going to be a problem for you.

And again, unless you have an, you know,

a justified excuse like COVID,

if you just decide we're not going to do it,

yeah, you're not going to get a charitable tax exemption.

What's the basis for that statement?

Right, because when you fill your application

of charitable tax exemption, you have to prove

that you're using that particular property.

I mean, I think we all see a circumstance where

a charitable religious organization could own property

that doesn't really serve the purpose of their mission,

but they're still a charitable organization.

We have a case out of this court where the church

in Durham was renting out its parking lot,

I believe, to students.

The church parking lot.

The church parking lot, right.

And they were denied their charitable tax exemption.

This court upheld that.

Again, the church is a religious organization,

but you weren't using that particular slice of property.

I don't see the analogy to Rama.

Fill that in for me.

Right, so I'm sorry.

The Justice asked if, for example,

the next year they didn't conduct a fair

or didn't do anything charitable,

they denied the exemption.

Of course they could be,

because there's two sides to it.

There's being the charitable organization

and then actually also falling through

and doing the charity.

Well, what if they leave their property open

to the public so the public can use it for dog walking,

for example, and that's an argument that Rama makes?

That's a charitable purpose.

But again, they're not required to do that

and they can close their gate whenever they want.

So in order to be a charitable organization,

the charitable acts that you do

and your charitable purpose has to be enforceable

generally by the Attorney General's office.

It can't just be that we occasionally,

when we feel like it,

open our property up to charitable purposes.

It has to be an enforceable obligation

of that organization.

In this case, obviously, there isn't any

and there'd be no obligation for them to do it.

It seems like all of these arguments collapse down to

there's not an enforceable obligation.

That's your bottom line here.

No matter what else they do,

it's not an enforceable obligation.

So it might look good,

but it's not an enforceable obligation.

Correct.

I think that's consistent with the case law of this court

is we don't want to be giving these exemptions

to people who can stop conducting the acts

at their unfettered discretion.

We want to give these charitable exemptions

to organizations that are required to conduct charitable acts.

And if you're not required to do that,

you can't get a charitable tax.

Can they change the way they carry out their mission?

I think that, for example,

you're talking about the way,

like there's a case about the student loans,

I think you could change the way you do that

but I still think you have to meet your mission.

You can't change your mission

and change your purpose to something else

without going through some formal paperwork.

Instead of having a fair,

you could have outdoor classes or something

free to the public.

Right, exactly.

Thank you.

Prior to the tax year in question,

had the property been exempt?

No, it had not.

Had they ever applied and been turned down before?

They had filed a late application the year before this

and we just explained to them that...

It was untimely.

It was untimely.

Thank you very much.

Good morning, may it please the court.

My name is Marcia Brown from an H. Brown law

and I'm representing the Rochester Agricultural

and Mechanical Association.

Could you do me a favor

and pull the microphone down just a little bit?

I put it up.

Okay, wherever you're comfortable with it.

No problem.

And I am here, our Rochester,

our Rama is here to defend the BTLA's

decision as just and reasonable

because the issue on appeal is

whether the decision was unjust,

clearly unjust and unreasonable.

And the Rochester, the Rama,

is defending the decision as just and reasonable

because the decision in July of 2021

and the order clarifying in August of 2021

together properly applied

the past precedence on exemptions

and also complied with RSA 541A

and was fully, the facts,

the findings of facts were fully based

on competent record evidence.

And I would like to make an observation,

an overall observation that the facts

and circumstances of this case

do not demonstrate that the Rochester

Agricultural and Mechanical Association's

activities and purpose is an outlier

among the past precedence.

As this court has on findings of facts

of trial entities,

the measurement of credibility of witnesses

and the weight of evidence,

the BTLA is owed deference.

Does Rama have an enforceable charitable

purpose and does that matter?

With respect to the charitable purpose,

if I can push back on the city's characterization

of the charitable purposes only

to hold the Rochester Fair,

that's not what the BTLA,

it may have hinted toward that in the decision,

but in the order on re-hearing

it directed itself and said that the fair,

the conduct of the annual fair

helps carry out its charitable purpose

of promoting agricultural and mechanical skills

as to whether it is an enforceable obligation,

I would turn to the Marist Brothers,

Pila Franklin.

It is not, I mean where the city

was limiting the enforceability to the charter

throughout its argument before the BTLA.

The BTLA did not read that statute that limiting,

it is the charter and or otherwise

and to actions taken pursuant to those statements.

So Rama defends that it is obligated

not only under otherwise,

but it is also obligated on the actions taken

if you applied the past precedence.

Such as Marist Brothers,

when it compared the 100 years of Artisan Residence Program,

Franklin had the 55 years of elder care.

These were not directly in the charter,

like the fair is not in the charter,

but the court has held that those

long-standing actions constitute an obligation.

I would like to also overlay enforcement,

there is actual enforcement

to stay within the charitable purpose

of stimulating and improving

agriculture and mechanical skill by the IRS,

which categorizes as agricultural,

the Attorney General's Office,

which has oversight through the charitable trusts unit

and the evidence and the record

shows active enforcement

when there's the emails exchanged between the city

and the director of the charitable trust division

talking about how it is a charity proceeds,

if there are any net proceeds,

if the city were to successfully take the property,

have to go to another charity,

and if there is any taking of the property,

100% of the value has to be obtained.

I can make two other points before another question,

because I had an error in my analysis

of Elder Trust Factor 3

where I included obligation

at the very beginning of that section.

That clearly goes to Elder Trust Factor 2,

Part 1, not Part 3.

And then when I was referring to the grandstand

in an analysis that the grandstand of 4,000 seated,

it was actually constructed to 2,000 seats,

but the underlying argument is still the same.

If you only have stock 120, 130 stockholders,

why would you build a grandstand

that would accommodate up to 2,000 people?

If I also segue to, in the evidence,

the A12 filing does identify the proceeds

that came from the grandstand,

and if you use a $10 per ticket for the grandstand,

you're packing that grandstand in at 1,600 people.

So there is documentary evidence

that the BTLA relied on properly

to show that it was open to the public

in addition to the testimony.

In terms of the obligation,

is that a question of law or a question of fact?

Well, it's facts and circumstances,

but I consider that a de novo issue.

Okay.

And what organizational documents

should we be looking at?

For the obligation.

The organizational documents,

if you were to start from there,

is the articles.

They do not have any bylaws

that expand that.

The original articles or the 1984?

Thank you for directing me to that issue,

because that pertains to Elder Trust Factor 1

of whether it's established.

It is established by statute as a charity

in 1879 under Chapter 152,

which was for the voluntary statute.

It is also, if I use Justice Delaney's

common law citation in the McDowell case,

at the time, advancing education

is a charitable purpose.

And so is the purposes

that are beneficial to the community,

which I guess is open to facts and circumstance.

Was it established as a for-profit corporation?

Because the record suggests that it would be...

Not in 1879.

It wasn't until the restatement in 1984

that for some reason,

they filed under 293A.

My question is, was in 1879,

it was established as a for-profit corporation?

No, no it was not.

There's evidence in the record,

Exhibit 4, which says that in 1932

it became a non-profit organization.

What happened?

That is referring to the new IRS.

In 1932?

Because the IRS code was coming

and you have in 1941

confirmation of the application

of applying for nonprofit status

at the federal tax code level.

So why are there shareholders?

Tough to get...

That was the form at the time.

It talked about under chapter 152

you could have shareholders to fund.

You had to have a pool of equity

to purchase property.

And is there anything in the record

about why in 1984

the new articles of incorporation

were refiled and restated

at the Secretary of State?

No, no there's nothing explaining why

the witness that I had for the present board

does not know why the other board had done that.

However, they do continually file

the annual reports to Secretary of State's office

which note that it is a non-profit.

I've not made much headway in my conversations

with the Secretary of State's office

because I don't know what authority

and I put this in my brief.

I don't know what authority they relied upon

to take a properly formed

152 voluntary corporation

and then say, hey shareholders,

it's for profit.

You can abscond with the money if you sell it.

That's not in practice what can happen.

I apologize, I think I cut you off

but I think you were saying there are no by-laws?

Correct, there are no by-laws.

So if you were looking for the documents

for the obligation I would point you to

the charitable

purpose

that is stated in the articles

that case law

common law puts that into a charitable

or

recognizes that as a charity

then when you apply the

actions taken

you've got a pattern of history that fits

squarely within the prior case law

and then overlaying that

you've got enforcement, active enforcement

and I think it was

Granite State Management talked about how

it would

the obligation element

was met by there being actual

enforcement for the AG's office

and you have that fact pattern here

Rama is not an outlier.

Mr. O'Rourke says that

in this analysis

the focus should be on the current year

not looking back

and if there's COVID and you can't have a fair

then that's

maybe jeopardizes the charitable

status. What's your reaction to that?

There is evidence in the record showing

that they did not hold the fair

at the time of the World War

there was another World War

and then during the pandemic

they did not have it

and then in 2017

they did not have it

because they just had no money

to hold it and I would point

to the A12 that's in the record

that shows that their profits for that year

were $17,000

in the city's brief it talks about

how the

Rama is not devoted

to holding the fair by not

placing five barns. I don't see how

$17,000

can be enough

to fill barns. It has shareholders

who presumably have fiduciary obligations

in this context. Is there ever been

a dividend?

The record shows that there has never been a dividend

and I believe under the

present statute if there are

expenses exceed that they can go back

and tax the shareholders. It wasn't clear to me

what is the record support for that?

There are no dividends of any type of page

to come, our profits are diverted.

What evidence was before the

board on that? That is the oral testimony

and the written testimony of Nancy Gilbert

who has been a long time

she's been a helper, her father was

involved in the fair

and she herself has been on

the board for many years and there is

no record and when you

have the continuity of

the employees being there for years

no one has any

memory of there being a dividend.

The board stated that

it heard evidence during the appeal that

the city had taken active steps to

purchase at least part of the property

for economic development purposes. Does that

have any bearing on any of this?

Well it had a bearing on

scrutinizing its expenses

and my asking why are you filing

annual reports every year when you

should be filing them every five years

under a charity and that led to

well you're not considered a charity

and why are you paying property taxes?

Why aren't you? Pardon me?

I'm sorry I didn't hear you. You're not a

charity and why aren't you paying property?

Why are?

So in response you asked

if there were, what was

the reaction?

I'm sorry I've lost the very beginning question.

So I asked whether it was

relevant, how is it

relevant to this appeal that the city was

exploring at least

purchasing part of the property?

Because it shows active enforcement

which goes to elder trust

factor 2 part 1

that the AG's office

will actively step in

and enforce that there are

no

no pecuniary benefit, no

financial benefit to any of the shareholders

upon the sale of any of the assets.

So it

points to that evidence

and then points to the

reason why

Rama decided to look at

an exemption

because it needs, it's

barely skating by with its expenses

and the city knows that.

And to be clear Rama has been paying

property taxes on the property?

Yes, yes during pending this appeal.

Yes.

If I can just conclude

the BTLE properly relied on

the precedent

in finding that the Rama is

established to improve and stimulate

agricultural and mechanical skill

and not that it is limited to just holding

the fair. And that

establishment is based on

statute 152 and on common

law as I referenced with

Justice Salinas's McDowell

concurrence. With respect to

elder trust factor 2 part 1

and the obligation I think we've covered

that. The BTLE

relied on the enforcement

of the AG's office in its decision.

There was record evidence

to support that longstanding

activity. With respect

to elder trust factor 3

the BTLE properly found

that it was undisputed that the property

was used by Rama

and that

it found that any activities

conducted on the property that do not relate to the

mission are necessary

for Rama to accomplish

his purpose. And I would

on that point say that things like

the carnival that the city disputes

is life blood. It is

necessary. When you look at that

A-12 those revenues are

absolutely necessary. And

if you do the math which wasn't

expressly in the record it

comes out to 16 percent which is

squarely within the 1 percent the 5 to

10 percent

and 7 percent of past

analyses of incidental

using the percent budget

analysis. What is

16 percent of what?

The carnival

brought in or if you

Fiesta shows is rent

of the midway brought in

for that year 16 percent

of the revenues

that Rama received that year.

So Fiesta shows rents

the piece of the property that they use

for. Yes yes and even the carnival

is mechanical and if I can

also say RSA

21

34A defines agriculture

of not just limiting to

weeds and pumpkins and stuff

it also includes mechanical

which is well within the definition

or the purpose of

agricultural mechanical for Rochester

fair and also the IRS defines

agriculture to be

expansive and include mechanical

and

with respect to the last point

of officers and members

driving in a pecuniary

benefit

with respect to the

dollars of free tickets

that is well under the

5900 of Marist brothers

that the court did not find as

pecuniary. It was

reasonable compensation it could be viewed at.

Is it fair for all shareholders

or just the officers?

It's only for shareholders.

How many shareholders?

There are about 120 shareholders

not all of them show up to the fair

as the testimony of Miss Gilbert

explained there are about 40 that are

put the hours

in to put on that

fair so the BTLA

didn't find it

pecuniary, didn't find it

reasonable compensation it just didn't

see that as an impediment to

Rama being

eligible for an exemption and I

appreciate the court's time and

would request that the court affirm

the BTLA's decision as just and reasonable.

Thank you.

Thank you.

This is made to Marist brothers

and what it stood for and I think it's important

to take a look at what actually happened

in Marist brothers.

The Marist brothers articles of agreement

reflecting their bylaws

the object to which this corporation

is established is to offer recreational

and educational services to persons of whatever

race, nationality, ethnic background

state or nation of residence

the corporation recognizing its firms

as traditional affiliation in faith

in the Roman Catholic Church and further

as the corporation shall provide

opportunities to meet primarily

the spiritual, cultural and physical needs of the youth

so then looking at that this court said

the taxpayer had shall

in a charitable purpose both

agreement and its bylaws

and then the taxpayer carried out all manner of

activities over the next 150 years

subject to shall in this case

there is no shall related to a charitable

purpose in the articles and corporation

submitted by Rama

further as to those articles

and corporation

Mr. Chief Justice you asked

should we consider the 1984 articles of the

1870s

the restated articles specifically state

the restated articles and corporation

together with the amendments designate herein

supersede the original

articles of corporation and all amendments to those articles

so the 1984 article of corporation

is the document we should be relying on

and you had some questions

of Rama about

why 1984 happened

in terms of things mean in terms of shareholders

and they don't really have answers to those

and that's a problem for them because the burden

is on the taxpayer

to prove that they should

receive this exemption when they file the city of Rajesh

they have to prove to us

the RSA and elder trust factors

they fail to do that what they provided

Mr. O'Rourke when you got up this morning

you said you know this is

you know it when you see it

this is a gestalt of factors

whether it should be an exemption

so given that it is

of that nature how can we

say that the decision of the BTLA

was unreasonable

all these arguments you're making you made

to them and they made a decision

right because they

obviously failed to consider

the facts on the ground and the law

I think that they also sort of

mistook some of these cases like

Marist Brothers, McDowell, Colony and the rest

they interpret the wrong

they interpret the law incorrectly

and then sort of incorrectly applied

selected facts

to the wrong interpretation of the law

had they followed the law correctly

and applied the facts as they were

they would have come to the conclusion that

yeah this isn't a charitable organization

and what they're doing on the property in Rochester

is not a charitable service

so and again

I can't speak for why they made that decision

but our brief contains

in terms of what goes on the property

six pages of what goes on there

and it's not a charitable

thank you council

the case is submitted
