This is case 2021-0322, State of New Hampshire versus Andrew M. Fletcher.

Before we begin the argument today, the court would like to acknowledge and welcome interns from the United States Attorney's Office, Department of Justice,

the U.S. District Court for the District of New Hampshire, the Federal Office of Defenders,

as well as from the Administrative Office of the Courts, our Circuit Court, our Superior Court, and our Supreme Court.

So welcome, and we look forward to visiting with you after the argument today.

Tony Johnson.

Thank you. May it please the court. Christopher Johnson on behalf of Andrew Fletcher.

The issue in this appeal is whether the court imposed the sentence in a timely fashion.

My plan is first to address the state's jurisdictional argument, and then second to address the application here of the timely fashion standard.

But I'm happy to take the court's questions at any point.

So beginning with the jurisdictional argument that the state makes, this is a new argument on appeal.

And as I understand it, the gist is that the state would win even if the sentence was untimely imposed.

I'd offer a couple of points in reply to that.

First, as a matter of precedent, that conflicts with Almotovar.

In Almotovar, which was the case in which this court adopted the timely fashion standard, that case involved a deferred sentence.

The court would have had no reason to adopt a timely fashion standard if, as a matter of law, deferred sentences are always by definition timely.

And secondly, as a matter of policy, there's no good reason to allow the untimely imposition of a deferred sentence when the court would not allow the untimely imposition of a suspended sentence.

That the difference between suspended and deferred sentences, while there are differences, do not require a difference into how timeliness is treated.

What about the state's argument that this allows the defendant to essentially run the clock?

So that, I guess, I think gets to the second argument, which is the application here of how the timely fashion standard works.

And so my first point with respect to that is I think it's crucial to consider length of the delay and the reason for the delay.

And so if there were a case where the defendant had absconded, for example, or the defendant for no good reason was asking for continuances,

those delays would very clearly be assigned to the defendant as responsible and they would not count. But that isn't what happened here.

But the delays here were to the benefit of the defendant, weren't they?

I don't know that it mattered much. I think the state has sent it to all of them.

And so I think both parties had the idea that they could economize in the Cheshire County proceedings if they waited for the Hillsborough District Court to finish.

But the defendant carries a burden in a deferred sentence of proving, establishing or proving that the sentence should not be imposed.

It's an affirmative obligation by a defendant, right?

I would disagree with that slightly. I think the defendant has a burden in a deferred sentence of sort of going forward and recalling the court's attention to the case.

But I think in Benner this court said, or at least strongly implied, that when it comes to proving whether the sentence, whether somebody who is at liberty should then be incarcerated,

the state has the burden even in a deferred sentence of proving by a preponderance that the defendant didn't do whatever it was.

But you don't get there until the defendant files a motion to suspend the deferred sentence.

Sure, sure. And what the defendant did here, and so this isn't a defendant who sort of hid in the weeds, so to speak, and hoped nobody would notice.

I mean, with counsel, the defense came forward before the end of the period and said, here's the situation.

I'm not going to file that motion to suspend yet because I have this pending charge, you know, to which I'm still presumed not guilty, but it's out there.

And so, and that's why I think both the state and the court and the defendant thought that seemed reasonable.

But getting back to your fundamental question, I think which is, you know, against whom should this delay be attributed, I want to make clear we don't...

Well, let me begin this way. I think crucial to sharpen the focus around the argument is the two-year period beginning in February of 2019 when on the violation of probation the court said,

here's what the new sentence is. It's one year deferred, followed by one year suspended. And so that was February 2019 to February 2021.

We have no complaint in this appeal about waiting for a reasonable time for the Hillsborough District Court to adjudicate the DWI.

And all of the defense requests to postpone that deferred sentence hearing were based first on that good reason, waiting for Hillsborough to finish.

And secondly, all were during that two-year period. And during that two-year period, the defendant is under a condition, an ongoing condition of good behavior anyway.

And so, in some sense, it doesn't, you know, the defendant's not avoiding his obligation to comply with the law because that two-year good behavior period is still running.

But one approaches the outer limit of what is a reasonable delay when the two-year period comes to an end.

I'd agree it's okay to schedule a hearing promptly after the end of that two-year period in February of 2021.

But that's not what happened. We got all the way till June.

Where does the March date come from?

I don't understand the March date to be fair. What happened was in December of, you know, December of 2020, another sort of the status conference is coming up.

And the defense sends an email saying, let's postpone this for 60 days more.

And that 60 days would take us to the beginning of February, which is at the end of this two-year period.

I don't know how they got to March.

I'm glad you raised that email because I read that email. It says a little bit more.

The defendant's counsel is saying the deferred sentence cannot be resolved in less than until the DWI is.

And for that reason, we're requesting a continuance of no less than 60 days.

Right.

And recognize that more may be necessary given the court's scheduling ability.

And is that ability? Isn't that exactly what happened?

This is what I would say about that email. And that is exactly what it says, of course.

So I think first, it's a factual matter, a matter of law, that the defense was not strictly correct when they said you have to wait.

And indeed, eventually, we stopped waiting and they did it the other way.

Waiting for the DWI.

With just bring the cop and have a testimony. So it's not necessary to wait.

And so this is an email. I think the defense lawyer is speaking somewhat more colloquially than they would in a pleading.

With respect to, so 60 days would get right to the end or just about to the end of the two-year period.

And then there's the end more may be necessary.

My reading on that is that, and again, I would understand that in terms of how I understand deferred sentences and good behavior periods.

If a defendant does a bad act on the very end of a good behavior period, the state still gets to litigate that after the end of the period.

Because it takes some time to gin up the processes of the court and to get the ducks in a row and do that.

So when the defense lawyer is saying, look, I'm asking for us to go all the way to the end of the two-year period, 60 days.

And I understand more may be necessary.

And we wouldn't be complaining if this hearing had been held in March after the end of the two-year period, because that's promptly enough after.

But I don't think, and then as soon as it didn't happen in March and wasn't going to happen in March, the court says to the parties, you know, what's your view?

And it's then that the defense objects.

But where's the prejudice? I mean, there's no bad act after February.

Right.

That's an issue. There's no, the bad act occurred in October of 2019.

So here's, so I don't think we have to show prejudice.

And this is what I would say about that is that I think there's three.

So the state finds a prejudice requirement in an analogy to the speedy trial doctrine, where, of course, there is a prejudice problem.

And so I'd offer three differences between this situation and the speedy trial situation that combine to support the conclusion that the state is not entitled in this situation to the protection afforded

by an onerous prejudice requirement.

And so these are the three differences between speedy trial and the current situation.

First, there's a lot less that needs to be accomplished by the state here than in the speedy trial context.

In the speedy trial context, we're talking about from charge to trial.

And there's an awful lot of pretrial litigation and discovery and a lot of things have to happen.

And so it's fair to say in the law and to the state, you know, we understand delays happen.

You know, you're not going to be lose the privilege or the right to prosecute from this delay unless there's prejudice because of how much has to be done.

Here, by contrast, there was very little to accomplish.

This is just a delay within the period of sentencing.

We've already had the original sentencing.

We're at deferred sentencing, and so there's much less for the state to accomplish.

My second point about why we don't need a prejudice and how this is different from speedy trial is much lower burden on the state here.

In the speedy trial context leading up to trial, I mean, the state, you know, faces the burden of proving guilt beyond reasonable doubt at trial.

Here, it's by a preponderance of the evidence.

Much easier burden to meet.

And third, there's less at stake here compared to what's at stake in the speedy trial situation.

At stake in the speedy trial is whether we can get a conviction against the defendant.

And if we take too long, we don't even get our conviction.

Here they have their conviction.

The question is whether they can get the sentence imposed.

The deferred sentence is really a status of conditional liberty.

And he maintained, the defendant maintained the status of conditional liberty.

And, you know, we're down to what is a timely fashion in the context of what we all know what was going on at that time.

And the court says in its order, you know, 90 days given the backlog of the cases was reasonable.

So, and I guess, and that's where we disagree is that it doesn't take a whole lot to prove this the alternative way as we see in the record,

because eventually they did.

They just got the police officer who testified and that was it.

And, you know, obviously none of us needs to be reminded of the inconveniences COVID caused to the court system.

But, you know, this isn't, you know, even in COVID we were having one witness evidentiary hearings.

And so the fact of the matter is this case sort of the, we reached the end of that reasonable period,

the end of the two-year period when he's anyways under a condition of good behavior,

and it still took them from the beginning of February to the middle of June.

And that's the delay.

That's principally the delay they were complaining about because the court's quite right.

I mean, the defense asked for the delay before that up to the end of what would be reasonable.

I mean, it seems to me this is sort of a gotcha moment because the good,

this is what we want is cooperation between the defense counsel and the court and the prosecutors.

And it just seems like it's a sucker punch.

Yeah, do this.

Oh, sure. We'll do this.

And then when you do it, it's like invited error.

Well, I don't think it, I'd say it's not invited error because we are not complaining about the delay

up to the end of that two-year period because, I mean, we asked for that.

I get it.

But it's not a sucker punch in the sense that it's, you know, it is the state knows its obligation,

you know, and they knew about this underlying concern since October of 2019.

So it is 90 days per say too much.

So anytime it's 90 days, that's going to violate timely fashion standard?

Not necessarily.

And I think, I mean, I think I'm not sure it's exactly 90 days because I can't, you know,

we say from early February to middle of June.

And if that's roughly maybe that's March or May.

February 7th to June 9th.

So that might be, but, but I mean, it's not, I don't think this is a matter of, you know,

a hard and fast sort of, you know, it's 90 days is fine and the 91st is too many.

But you agree it's not right to think about this as two years.

Right.

No, that's right.

That's right.

That's right.

That's right.

I mean, I don't think the court should forget that the, and again, while I'm not changing

my argument or complaining about time that we asked for, the court shouldn't forget that

this began in January of 2017 with a plea that led perfectly fairly in January of 2019,

the violation of probation, which then led in February of 2019 to this new sentencing

structure of the two years, one year deferred, one year delayed.

And then we get not only to the end of that two years, but beyond it into June before we

finally have the sentence imposed.

And I think that's part of it.

But again, you know, the principle part where we cross the boundary from reasonable delay

to unreasonable and timely to untimely occurred from the, from the beginning of February

to the middle of June.

Even where defense counsel is recognizing expressly that there is, in essence,

flexibility given the court's schedule.

And that's essentially what happened in scheduling the evidentiary hearing.

Right.

No, I get that.

I mean, you know, we would not be complaining as I hope I'm saying clearly.

I mean, if I'm not saying that hard and fast as soon as February 7th had passed,

it was game over.

You know, the state has some time.

I'm just saying from February 7th to June is too long.

And to be sure part of it was because the officer wasn't available.

And then the court couldn't find a time when the officer was available.

So, you know, and, you know, and given it is true that while everybody was agreeing

and the defense was asking for this, it is also true that the state could have said

at any point, look, we're tired of waiting.

And it could have gone forward on purpose.

Could forward.

That's right.

That's right.

So I'm just looking back at the court order and it talks about March 2.

Everybody shows up in court.

But the defendant informed the court that the DUI was still pending.

So then the court continued the hearing.

So we're not talking February 7th.

We're talking March 2nd.

Everybody's ready to go.

And the defendant says, hey, the DUI hasn't gone yet.

But I, yeah.

And my recollection, though, is that the, you know, I don't disagree with that.

But the last time the defense asked for a delay explicitly was December

asking for the delay into that 60 days.

You know, in March, my recollection is in the courts said in March

invited the parties to address the question of whether the delay was too long.

And the defense did that promptly and said, yes, it is.

I mean, the court, I'll defer to your memory of the, any transcript,

but it says that the court, the defendant informed the court

that the DUI was still pending on March 2nd.

And I don't disagree.

I mean, I'm sure that I don't doubt that the defense said that.

Probably so that there could be more time.

But what I don't think is that the defendants then said, let's delay more.

They just pointed that out.

No, it's like the court continued the hearing to allow the state to marshal its evidence.

Right.

Without the case being resolved.

Right.

And the May hearing that then the state asked to continue because of the officers availability.

And this court has other questions.

It asked to reverse.

Thank you.

Tony Woodcock.

Good afternoon, your honors.

May it please the court.

Elizabeth Woodcock for the state of New Hampshire.

There are two points at which I think this court can consider this case.

The first is that the deferred sentence is a kind of unique animal.

And it doesn't fit into the other analyses of sentences.

When I was reading Judge McNamara's book on criminal procedure,

he talked about this as being a popular way of sentencing people.

And I think that it popular may not be the exact right word,

but one that is used frequently because the court wants to be able to have its own control over defendant.

It comes out as a little bit different animal in that respect from a suspended sentence,

which is statutory.

The second point that I would make.

And so that's why I made the argument at the outset that the court really never lost authority over the defendant,

continuing authority until somebody filed something with the court that said this deferred sentence should be lifted for whatever reason

or concluded for whatever reason.

Is the jurisdiction extended indefinitely?

I don't think it could be extended indefinitely, Chief Justice.

I think that it, but I don't think we're there at this point.

The second point that I make in my brief is that because everybody was agreeing that these continuances should occur,

I think that then you really are in a position where the court is going along with this because everybody seems to be in agreement.

And then it's either a waiver of the time limits or it's invited error.

The reason that I suggested to the court that it consider the speedy trial factors was that I had a very hard time trying to determine

how the court should analyze this, what factors should come into play.

And I'm not sure that given the facts of this case, the notion of prejudice to the defendant should just be dismissed

because everybody was going along agreeing with this.

And if the court had put its foot down and said, no, I'm not going to grant any more of these continuances, you have to go forward.

That would have been disagreeing with what the parties had pretty much agreed on.

And it certainly would have been within its authority to do it.

But it cuts against sort of the culture I think to some degree in New Hampshire of lawyers trying to agree on things

and present courts with less contention.

But she can't agree around a statutory mandate or a matter of law, but that's not what happened here.

Well, I don't think that this isn't a statutory mandate, Justice Hans Marconi.

It is a common law mandate.

And I think that if you continue to say, it's all right, I'm going along with this.

When you think about the underpinnings of the case, what they were doing really sort of made sense as I look at it.

The charge of impaired driving, when I read exactly how that charge was going to be proved,

and granted we didn't have the testimony, didn't go into the results of the blood test or anything like that,

those documents were simply admitted.

But it seemed to me that it could have been a charge that might very well have wound up with a not guilty verdict.

If that were the case, then the defense would go in and say to the court, well, look, yes, my client was charged,

but he was found not guilty.

And I think most courts would say, well, that sounds like a pretty good reason not to go forward with this deferred sentence.

On the other hand, the state is agreeing to this because it really doesn't want to take up the time of the court

with this hearing on a preponderance of the evidence if, in fact, there is going to be, if there's a conviction,

the state can go forward fairly easily.

So I think that what the intent here was to streamline the process a little bit so that the court didn't have to go through

an unnecessary hearing.

I think in that regard, it's always hard to read into people's motivations, other things that are not actually on the record.

But in looking at this, it seems to me that the whole role that the pandemic played plays into this,

because the courts, as this court is aware, the courts were, got to a point where they were very, very backed up

because they were trying to address a lot of different charges and hearings that hadn't been addressed in that time.

And the courts did go in fits and starts.

The trial court says this, you know, I guess the world is coming to an end or everything's going to stand still.

Next week, it was very hard for the courts to predict this.

So again, it's one of these situations in which the fact that the parties are agreeing to this makes sense to everyone at the time.

Assuming we set aside the jurisdictional argument and we're in timely fashion land, when did the two-year period end?

I'm having trouble discerning where the March 7th date comes from.

Do you have any insight on that?

I don't have a lot of insight into it, Your Honor.

I think that it's notable, however, that the court raised the issue of timeliness.

No one else had.

And if the defense, to give Mr. Johnson his too, that the representation made by Defense Counsel was made in an email,

but it was made in an email to the court saying more time may be needed.

And so there isn't nobody saying to the court, you've got to move.

You've got to do something because there is a degree of urgency here.

Instead, no one is telling the court you've got to move.

The court eventually says, well, now I'm not so sure because this time has expired.

Nobody had raised that.

When would the good conduct obligation end?

Well, I think under the way that the deferred sentence operates,

it ends when the court actually concludes the case.

And that didn't happen here.

Now, Chief Justice, you raised a good question.

Is this sort of the myth of Sisyphus?

He will continually try to roll the rock up the hill and have it roll down for time eternal.

And I think that then the consideration of timely adjudication comes in.

At some point, that becomes a problem.

But I think in this case, that shouldn't be the consideration that should resolve this case

because I think that the court addressed the issue as quickly as it could.

That effectively amends his sentence.

I mean, the good conduct obligation would extend beyond the two-year period,

whether it's February or March or January.

That part, I'm not understanding.

Well, I understand the court's view that this would amend the sentence.

I don't think that it really does in this particular case

because if the court had done it arbitrarily,

if Mr. Fletcher had come in and said,

I want this resolved, I want to get this resolved.

And Judge Ruoff said, you know, I'm too busy.

I don't want to have to resolve it.

I'm not going to do it.

I'm just going to continue this until my calendar is free.

That would be a different matter.

But Mr. Fletcher is coming in and saying, wait a second.

Don't do it right now.

We'll keep trying to resolve these other charges.

Wait, wait.

Correct me if I'm wrong.

But the state's not arguing that if this DUI had occurred on March 2021,

that that would have violated a good behavior condition.

Are you?

I think she is.

Well, I think that it could have,

but it's not the situation that's presented here.

The defendant has an obligation.

I find it an odd circumstance,

but the defendant has an obligation to take action

to end his deferred sentence.

And he didn't do that here.

Now, as I appreciate the court's concern,

that this could turn a deferred sentence into life

because the defendant never acts.

And I think at some point the powers of equity of a court

would be to say, look, enough is enough.

But under this circumstance,

he's saying don't take any action.

He's affirmatively asking the court to hold off

for, I think, if we look at the record

and look at what the facts are of the impaired driving,

it's for a good reason.

He has a pretty good chance of sort of beating that charge.

If on the other hand,

the hearing goes forward with this lower burden of proof,

he runs the risk of losing.

If he can go in with an acquittal,

he's on far better footing.

Yes, I understand that he defaulted

on the underlying DUI claim, right?

At one point he did,

and Judge Ruoff did refer to that in his order.

I don't think, and the defendant in this case

is taking him to task for that.

I don't think that he really relied on that very much.

It's really basically a one-sentence.

I don't think that the default was lifted

quite quickly after that.

If the court has no further questions for me,

I would ask that the case be submitted.

Thank you, Your Honors.

Thank you, Counsel.

The case is submitted.

The court will stand in adjournment.
