This is case 2021, 0585, appeal of Colonial Green Products Distributions, LLC.

Good morning, Attorney Harding.

Good morning.

I understand you reserve two minutes.

I reserve two minutes.

Correct.

Good morning.

May it please the court.

Gary Harding from Bernardin Meryl representing Colonial Green Products Distributors.

We're here today because of the Department of Insurance Determination Decision.

And all findings by the Department of Insurance are lawful and reasonable.

And what did the Department of Insurance find?

The Department of Insurance found that the NCCI manuals and rules are not part of the insurance contract.

They also said the Department does not approve one or actually three manuals, one in particular, the performance standards manuals, which is applicable to all insurance carriers within the risk pool.

And the Department also said they do not consider these manuals when reviewing disputes.

And that's it.

The appendix, page 468 of the record here.

And the performance standard manuals.

One of the issues here is part of the NCCI rules states the assigned carrier must issue the policy in accordance with plan rules, state law, and the assigned carrier performance standards.

Where these performance standards conflict with plan rules, state law, or regulations, the more stringent applies.

And what's happening here is NCCI and the insurance carriers do not want to provide Colonial Green with these rules.

Actually, they don't want to provide any rules.

They want to provide them at a cost.

At a cost.

$1,600 subscription for supported contract language.

They should get them at the insurance department.

They do not have all the rules there.

And what the Department of Insurance says is you can't copy all the rules.

You can copy a portion of the rules, but you can't copy the rules.

The insurance department has made at least 100 pages available.

Isn't that right?

They may have, yes.

But they don't have the performance standards manual.

And they don't approve that manual.

And if the rules say the performance standards may have more stringent terms to be applied.

Well, where are they?

I cannot enter the dispute resolution process without all the rules.

I think rules are important.

We got here by rules.

Surely they must be somewhere.

What's your best guess?

They have them.

They do not want to provide them.

I don't know where they are.

I don't know what they say.

I don't know if they allow a reduction in premium because they do not subrogate or things of that nature.

I don't know what's in the performance standard.

Would you get them in discovery?

Would you get them in discovery?

No.

I've attempted to.

And I'm just confused as to if they're not contract language, how do they apply?

Basic contract principles.

If they're relying on these rules to set a modification factor of a 1.55, my client has the right to review those rules to see how they came up with that.

And they don't want to provide the rules.

And the Department of Insurance also said the NCCI rules are not embedded in the contract, but once approved, they apply.

Well, the Department of Insurance doesn't approve the PS manual.

So how can it apply?

And if the PS manual has more stringent terms, how can I get those terms?

It comes down to what the Department has done is interpreting the statute.

They have created a violation of the contract clause because of its interpretation of the statutory framework.

And the contract clause violation goes to both the application of the modification factor as well as the entire dispute resolution process.

And I would like to point out there is a case which I came across during preparation for this.

It's called Smith Insurance Incorporated versus the Grievance Committee.

And this is 120, New Hampshire, 856.

And what the court did in that case was they looked at an insurance statute, RSA 40275, and the procedures established there under and whether or not those procedures were constitutional or not.

And what the court said was it's clear that a sweeping and general delegation of power with uncontrolled discretion, even in a narrow field, exceeds constitutional limits.

And what do we have here?

We have a sweeping and general delegation of power.

Department of Insurance to NCCI.

And what does NCCI do?

They don't provide us any rules.

And actually Colonial Green is not even in privity with NCCI.

I'm sort of getting where you are.

NCCI is not a state actor, is it?

It can be.

They are provided with a mantle of authority here by creating rules, creating the department forms are actually the policies.

I think they did, that entity did violate the contract clause of the Constitution.

Good it?

Well, the interpretation of the statute I think is the violation which the Department of Insurance is doing.

And yes, are they provided with a mantle of authority?

Well, look at the sweeping delegation of power that they have.

And what are they doing?

They're not providing any rules to engage in the process that the Department of Insurance is trying to force Colonial Green into.

And getting back to the Smith case, the contract clause is not a dead letter and does impose some limits upon the power of a state to abridge existing contractual relationships

even in the exercise of otherwise legitimate police powers.

The keyword there is existing.

The client entered into this arrangement knowing that these rules apply.

Where's the retrospective application of a statute or a rule?

Colonial Green never had the opportunity to get those rules.

But the regime existed when you entered into the contract.

Where is the later enacted statute or rule that would implicate the impairment of contracts?

It's the Department of Insurance interpretation of the statutory framework.

When did that occur?

When the Department of Insurance issued its decision saying that the NCCI rules are not part of the contract.

The decision does not impair contracts under the Constitution.

The statute or rules do.

And the statute here.

Section 4, well, RSA 412-5, Roman 5, which creates the dispute resolution process.

And what the Court in Smith Insurance Inc. said that the statute was unconstitutional and an unlawful interference with existing contract rights.

So this is a contract here.

And by the Department's own interpretation of the statutory framework, that creates the contract clause issue.

Now, let's put the contract clause aside.

Let's go to basic contract principles here.

Like, I'm not arguing the rates that are assigned to each individual worker.

Those rates are fine.

My argument is the assessment of the modification factor is unconstitutional and invalid.

It's invalid because the Department of Insurance states the rules are not embedded within the policy.

And the policy states only agreements to this insurance is stated in the policy.

Where in the policy does it say NCCI rules are applicable?

It doesn't.

They provide us with some, our manual language, but they defined our manuals?

No, I think I hit this in my brief here.

Our manuals, what Colonial Green is entering into, is a contract between the insurance carrier and itself.

Not NCCI.

Where does it say in the policy that NCCI rules apply?

It doesn't.

And I alluded to this case, French versus Centura.

There's no incorporation by reference that these NCCI rules apply.

So, if Colonial Green doesn't know these rules apply, then how can they apply to the contract?

Now, there are a couple other issues.

Travelers rolling over premiums.

The rolling over premiums violates the statute and it's a public policy statute here.

The Unfair Insurance Trade Practice Act.

They're placing disputed premiums from a prior policy into a new policy and requesting payment in full

or else a cancellation notice is issued.

Well, the cancellation notice issued affects Colonial's business.

And that cancellation notice is requesting a disputed premium.

So, how that certainly, excuse me, violates the Unfair Trade Practice Act.

Why is it that your client would be entitled to have workers comp coverage without paying a premium?

Oh, he needs to pay a premium.

And the premium is assessed by the worker classification.

There are two different types of premium, one premium, but two assessments.

The first assessment is based on the worker classification code.

The 28814 roofer is assigned 11% on salary wages.

And then there's this modification factor.

That is what is in dispute.

It's the modification factor.

So, did your client pay some of the premium?

Yes.

Yes.

Of its own determination about how much it thought was okay and left the rest unpaid?

No.

The policy, the way it's broken out and the billing, it provides a premium for those workers.

And then there's a separate subsection, the modification factor.

And that modification factor is what is invalid.

So, why, if you don't like the terms of the contract, why not just engage another carrier?

Because the modification factor follows because it's an NCCI requirement, I suppose.

And the modification factor is contained within every work comp policy.

It's based on what's history.

Okay.

Sure, but what's wrong with that?

That's how the industry works.

Right, but if they're not giving me the rules to try and challenge.

You're saying they exist within NCCI?

Yes, Rick.

Why don't you pay the $1,600?

Why is colonial forced to pay any amount for contract terms?

If they're going to say yes, this applies to the contract.

Well, the statute alert you that you can pay all or they've got to provide you with pertinent information for a reasonable fee.

Pertinent information is not contract language.

I'm looking for the statutory requirement of pertinent information.

Pertinent information is not contract language.

I am looking for the contract terms.

And the Department of Insurance is saying, no, it's not contract language.

It's not embedded in the policy, but yet they apply and I can't see them.

Why, how does that work?

That's one of the bigger issues and I see my red light is on.

Thank you.

Turn your fantasy.

Good morning.

I'll be splitting my time here with Mr. Harris.

Okay, please, the court, Nathan Fennesey from Freddie Flaherty representing the National Council on Compensation Insurance or NCCI, as you've heard.

NCCI is a non-profit licensed by the State of New Hampshire Department of Insurance as an advisory organization.

The role they're playing here that we're talking about today serve a different, a number of different roles in states throughout the country.

The role they're playing in New Hampshire that we're talking about today is their role as the plan and pool administrator for the assigned risk market in New Hampshire.

Does it play a significant role in the assessment of risks resulting in premiums?

So we'll get back to Attorney Harding starting to walk through.

So there's two basic elements of how the premiums for workers' compensation is determined.

First is the classification code, which depends on the type of worker, your carpenters being charged a different rate than your salesperson.

That's one piece.

And that's very transparent.

It's very transparent.

Obviously there are disputes about whether one worker should be in one classification code versus another, but there's a process for dealing with that.

The second piece of that is the modification.

It's the experience rating modification.

It's determined based on rules that are submitted and approved by the Department of Insurance.

It's called the experience rating plan manual.

Is it kept secret?

It is not kept secret for a payment of $1,500.

You can have a subscription to the entire library of NCCI, which includes experience rating plan manual.

There's actually, I found out in advance of today, there are ways for you to get individual manuals pay a little bit less for one state versus another.

So these things are available.

And as was mentioned earlier, by statute, there's a requirement, RSA 41227, that pertinent information, if it's requested, needs to be provided.

And if it's not provided, there's an opportunity for an insurer to make a request for a hearing before the department.

And if the department determines that it wasn't provided, they can order that information to be provided.

But there's a very important aspect to that statute.

You only have to provide the pertinent information upon payment of a reasonable charge.

The position that Colonial Green has taken is that the reasonable charge should be zero.

Is there anything less than $1,600 bandied about?

So $1,600 was what the commissioner focused on. That's everything.

On the NCCI website, it gives a list of prices.

If you want one user, if you want your whole entity, if you want one state, do you want multiple states?

So this ERPM for New Hampshire might be less than $1,600.

Correct.

I think it's $150 for one user for one state to have access to the, I think, six manuals.

Is the ERPM submitted to the commissioner for approval?

The Experian Training Plan Manual is submitted to the commissioner for approval.

So isn't that a public document?

Why are you charging people for a document that was the basis for a decision by the commissioner of the Department of Insurance?

So there is a copyright associated with it.

NCCI, like any other reference manuals in the industry, puts significant time and effort into putting those together.

One of dispute arises, relevant pieces of information rules are provided to policy holders,

insured generally if they have an affiliation agreement with NCCI, have copies of these rules.

I want to sort of go back.

I'm sorry to interrupt you.

Sure.

But why wouldn't a simple subpoenaed dukes take and produce the necessary documents in that particular dispute?

Period.

It could.

So to go back to the dispute resolution process, the first aspect of it is actually a non-binding situation.

So to go to the due process argument, it's non-binding.

It's subject to a de novo review to the insurance department.

So from a constitutional standpoint, nothing ventured or anything gained at the non-binding board.

You still have the opportunity to go through the insurance department.

You have an opportunity if you're unsatisfied to take an appeal to this court.

So there's really, there's not a due process issue.

Back to the contract, you know, there's been this focus on the modification.

We don't know what the modification is.

It's in the policy itself.

It's specifically, and I can give you the page, it's on page 111.

It specifically identifies what that modification rate number is.

There's been an allegation that, oh, we didn't know the modification was going to apply to the charge.

There's nothing in the policy about that.

Again, it's in the record.

It's in the policy by endorsement on page 130 of their appendix.

It says the premium for the policy is adjusted by an experience rating modification factor.

It's in the contract.

So I think what Colonial Green's trying to go to is they want to challenge the terms of the contract.

And the way they want to challenge that is to get to whatever the underlying rules are

that the carrier uses to come up with that number.

By which the modification is calculated.

Correct.

All right.

Why not?

Why shouldn't they get, well, if there's a dispute about it, then absolutely they

have an opportunity to see whether the insurer complied with the rules as laid out in the experience rating plan manual.

And that happens.

What my understanding is of their argument is they should be able to get those rules before they ever enter into the contract.

That seems to be the position they're taking.

And what's the problem with that?

Well, they can if they want to pay for it.

The insurers pay a subscription to get that information.

But isn't the argument that they want the information before they go through the dispute resolution process, which is sort of a different argument?

So arguably they've made the point that they want it as part of the audit process.

But the audit process is really not intended to go into the experience modification.

It's really to go into how much, so let me step back one second.

Auditable basis policies, which means you estimate the...

Audit A, U, D, R, T?

Yes.

Thank you.

Auditable.

Yes, sorry.

So at the beginning of the year, you estimate how much premium you're going to have associated, I'm sorry, how much payroll you're going to have associated with individual class codes.

And you pay an estimated premium based on what you're expecting.

Now at the end of the year, it's within six months of the expiration or cancellation of the policy.

There's an opportunity for the insurer to come in and figure out what was your actual payroll for each of those class codes.

And then based on that...

That's the audit.

Correct.

And then based on that, a true up of the premium, either down or up, takes place.

You were late on.

Thank you.

Attorney Harris?

Yeah, please look forward.

My name is Garrett Harrison.

I'm here today representing Travelers Property and Casualty Company.

I'm going to try not to overlap too much with Attorney Fennesey.

The way Travelers got brought into this is in 2019, Colonial Green submitted an application to the NCCI, which is the administrator of the assigned risk pool in New Hampshire.

In the application, it's made clear that WCIP rules apply.

That's the Worker's Compensation Insurance Plan, the alternative name for the assigned risk pool.

Colonial Green, they were applying into the assigned risk pool.

They knew that they had an experience rating that they were dissatisfied, as Attorney Fennesey indicated, when the policy was issued.

It had that experience modification factor.

It also had language in there saying that experience rating is mandatory.

It also had language in there saying that premium for this policy is determined by audit.

And it can...

The premium can be changed depending on changing circumstances.

One of those circumstances in this case was that in its application, Colonial Green had substantially underestimated their payroll.

He estimated the payroll at around $256,000 when the audit was done for that policy.

It came in around $485,000.

That triggered the premium adjustment that Attorney Harding has referred to as rolling over the premium.

I think that's a misnomer.

No premium is rolled over from one policy to the other.

The premium for a subsequent policy is adjusted based upon the experience with the prior year.

Experience by the payroll, the actual payroll audit, and what about modifications?

The modifications are something that are calculated by the NCCI based upon loss and other information that's reported.

Not even so much in this case by travelers, but by the insurance companies prior to travelers.

So one thing that's somewhat important in this case is that Colonial Green has been in the insurance marketplace for years prior to the travelers policy being issued.

They had an adverse experience modification that carries over into when travelers take over the account.

So if they're disputing the audit resulting in an increased payroll and that feeds into the modification factor,

when do they get the information that dictates how those results, the resulting premium are calculated?

Well, to break that down a little bit, as I understand, there's no dispute as to the payroll.

Colonial Green is not saying you found more payroll than we actually have.

They do have an issue with their experience modification,

which incidentally was never really taken up at the insurance department level.

It's referred to the avenue for resolving that.

It's sometimes referred to as the NCCI dispute resolution process.

It's sometimes referred to as the Workers' Compensation Appeals Board.

But it's a statutory mechanism that the NCCI as an advisory organization has to provide some reasonable means of dispute resolution, which they do.

And the New Hampshire Insurance Department has appropriately incorporated it into an available remedy for parties who dispute workers' compensation audit and premium issues.

And if they're unhappy with the result of the NCCI dispute level, then you can get a de novo review at the insurance department.

And that ties in with arguments of due process which have been breached.

So it never really goes to the Workers' Compensation Appeals Board, correct?

Well, I think even the departments have acknowledged the Workers' Compensation Appeals Board,

which I think is the name of the insurance department, is a wholly different entity from the Workers' Compensation Appeals Board of the Department of Labor.

Totally separate thing dealing with totally different issues.

So there are mechanisms statutorily in place in great detail, in my opinion, in New Hampshire for dealing with all of these things.

And for whatever reason, Colonial Green has chosen to pursue this in court with the declaratory petition at the insurance department and with the appeal that we have here today.

So our request would be that you affirm the decision of the insurance department in this case because it's reasonable and lawful under the New Hampshire regime.

And do they, I know that this is really their counsel's issue, but during these well laid out appeals processes, when is their access to the manual that backstops all these determinations?

Well, one thing you'd see, Ron, is if you look at the emails that are in the appendix that are mainly from the NCCI, I think what you'll see is when these issues are raised,

it takes them very seriously and they respond in great detail as to why certain determinations were made and they do provide the relevant portions of those manuals as part of that process.

The issue here is Colonial Green's position throughout this entire process is we want every manual and we want it for free.

And statutorily, we don't believe they're entitled to that and that the insurance department agreed with that and says if you want everything and everything is going to cost you $1,500 to $600,

the insurance commissioner found that was a reasonable fee if that is in fact what you want is everything.

So it has not gotten the dispute part of it to the extent that we get into the weeds on the specific disputes regarding travel, as my client, hasn't gotten into the process yet where that ball is even in play as to what needs to be produced.

So we invest at the department's decision in the matters before it be affirmed.

Thank you, Tony Harris.

Harding?

Okay, thank you.

Well, one thing with the dispute resolution process and rules here is what does the Department of Insurance says?

There are three other manuals NCCI publishes including the PS manual that the department views as akin to manuals of procedure.

The department does not approve these manuals and does not consider them when reviewing disputes between insurers and insurers.

And what's happening here is the dispute resolution process cannot interpret state law.

So how do we go into the dispute resolution process disputing the auditable basis under 41235 when it's supposed to be based on actual exposure?

This whole policy is supposed to be determined on actual exposure.

And the modification factor is one of those issues in which we are trying to get the rules so we can even enter the process.

Because what's the first process to do or the first step in the procedure is to pay, calculate, and pay with a written explanation.

If I don't have the rules to back up the reason why the modification factor should instead of 1-5 be a 1-0, how can I engage in the process without the rules even when I request them for the audit?

And also what the insurance company and NCCI is doing is incorporating vacation, sick, and holiday pay into the premium.

That should be excluded. That payroll should be excluded because there's a precondition to the policy.

The precondition being a work injury. How can an employee have a work injury while on vacation?

Is the modification rate number at page 11 of the contract, as the attorney of Tennessee stated?

That's just the assessment. That doesn't tell us how it's assessed or why.

That's just a 112 of the contract. It's just a number.

We're going to charge you 1.55%. It's not part of the contract.

As far as Colonial's concerned is, if it's not part of the contract language,

where in the policy does it say NCCI rules apply? It doesn't.

So what I'm trying to do is get the manuals. Yes, even before this situation goes into the dispute resolution process

and the relevance, who's in the better position to determine what rules are relevant to its own business practice

and its colonial green? I don't want the Department of Insurance or the insurance company or NCCI telling me

what is relevant to my business practice. Thank you.

Case is submitted. We really are, Henry says now.
