Thank you. This is case 2021-0243, appeal of lossing group at all. Mr. Harding, I understand

you've reserved two minutes. Yes, I did. Thank you. Good morning. May it please the court names

Gary Harding on behalf of the lossing group, third party administrator for the self insured

summit packaging. And summit has done everything that's required under the statute to be

reimbursed its own money. Okay. The fund is funded by self insured and insurance carriers.

So all it's looking for is its own money back for doing what was absolutely right under

the statute. Now in this case, the injured party was hired in 2005. She sustained a work

injury in 2016 consisting of a left arm, shoulder, neck with radiculopathy going down her

left arm. What does summit do? Retains her, keeps her employed, just like the statute

acquires, okay, for second injury from reimbursement. They retain. How does it become second

injury? The second injury, if you look at the term disability, it's subsequent disability

by injury. And disability is, was defined in the appeal of CNA, that it's the inability

to pursue occupation because of the physical impairment. She had severe restrictions. As

of February 2016, she had such severe restrictions that would be highly unlikely that she would

be able to be employed or hired if she became unemployed. That's the first period

of disability. What summit could have done was, okay, you have these restrictions, we're

not going to accommodate you. Go out and fend for yourself, but they didn't. They did not

do that. No one's challenging summit good faith. What they're challenging here is that

the three requirements for entitlement under the second injury fund were not met. How

were they met in your mind? In my mind, if you look at the employer knowledge, now

the statute only requires that in order to qualify under this section for reimbursement,

the employer shall establish by written records. It doesn't say medical records. It says

written records. Okay. Point me to the written records that satisfy that requirement. The

written records were the restrictions provided by Dr. Sinkoff. Ms. Adams's analysis or

vocation rehabilitation reports, which said highly unlikely that she could be employed

because of her disability with those restrictions. That's the first period of

disability. Now, you need to look at this on an objective basis according to

Hartford. You look at it as an objective analysis. Okay. So what happened was for

the employer knowledge is they had those restrictions. They accommodate her dark. And

then by March of 2016, one month after the severe restrictions, Dr. Pallavi says the

condition is no longer related. And Pallavi says, you know, she has severe degenerative

disc disease, spondylitis, which is causing the left radiculopathy. And then says

the fusion would not be related to work. So at that point, the employer knowledge was,

okay, she has this condition, severe spondylitis with those restrictions, and they retained

her in employment. They kept her in employment for six more months. And after that, she

had the surgery for a C5, C7 fusion. Okay. So that's the second period of disability.

Also consistent with the initial injury, correct? The surgery at C5?

C5 consistent. It was an elective surgery. She did not need to go under it. It was

elective according to one of the funds filings said it was an elective surgery. So she

continued to work. I don't think it matters that it's ongoing or continuing because the

statute does not say that. Okay. The statute and CNA says there doesn't need to be a new

discreet injury. It does not need to be. No, there needs to be a disability by injury.

Right. The injury, meaning the first original injury. That's why we have second injury

fund claims. Because the second period of disability arises out of the first original

injury. So they are, and all we need to prove is two subsequent or a disability and then

a subsequent disability by injury. The by injury meaning the original injury. So we

have that. That is greater. The subsequent disability has to be greater.

Right. And I think the C5 through 7 fusion is a greater disability. If you look at Exhibit

Q, which for reasons unknown didn't want to look at Exhibit Q according to its decision.

So what we have here is the subsequent disability is the surgery taking her out of work totally.

And from there, the surgery was denied. Okay. And then there was a compensation appeals board

hearing which did find the C5, 6, 7 fusion related to the original injury.

Right. So isn't that fatal to your claim? No. No. Because there's two periods of

disability. The first period of disability was when she could not find work.

So you're saying the subsequent one is just post-surgery disability?

Yep. The cert. Let me take you to the third. So you're saying that the prior permanent injury

was discreet from the current injury? Correct. Okay. Let me ask you this. What standard

of review are we supposed to apply to the compensation appeals board here?

Whether it's unjust, unreasonable, and legally erroneous, which I think it is, because they

do not use the objective analysis on this. Hartford says, we need to look at this on

an objective basis. So what we're having here is, for example, if you have two

qualified candidates going for the same job, one has a torn Achilles heel previously

and the other candidate does not have any type of injury, who do you think the employer's

going to hire? The one without the injury. That's what the statute was designed. The

purpose of this statute was to have employers hire or retain employees with a permanent

condition. And we're getting far afield when the board and the fund say it needs

to be a permanent impairment. Well, permanent impairment is defined under section 2 as

a condition, a permanent condition which is an obstacle or hindrance to obtaining employment.

And that's what the first part of the disability was. It was a hindrance or obstacle to obtaining

employment, as noted by Diane Adams. Now, there's other case law in which Hartford

recognized the city or the county tracking one from Arizona and a Florida case which

specifically indicates the employer knowledge does not need to be made in a medical sense.

The employer doesn't need to know the medical condition without its permanent. It just needs

to have an inference or mere knowledge of the condition and the subsequent treatment.

And it's your position that the accommodations prove that?

Yes, yes they do. They modified her job from a machine operator to a less than light duty

work job with 10 pound max lifting. So if she went out to the open labor market and said

to an employer, I've got a 10 pound lifting, no repetitive motion. Do you think she's

going to be hired? I don't think so. I think it's going to be very difficult

for her because of her disability right there that she's not going to be hired or retained

in employment. But some did. Some did everything under the statute. Now, and then the FCE, which

was a month after the compensation appeal board decision back in September of 2017, showed

the need for further accommodations. Further accommodations from the initial disability

that she had. Summit now had to further modify. So that shows that the subsequent disability

caused a greater impairment. Does it matter whether the fusion surgery was elective?

Well, it may or may not. I don't know. But certainly it shows that it's not technically

an ongoing disability there. It's a subsequent disability because she elect to go under surgery

knowing probably because the bills were denied. Knowing from the claimant's perspective, hey,

this might not be work related. So from there, what else is there to do for Summit to get

its own money back? Now, there is no requirement for the claimant to be at MMI or have a permanent

impairment in an orthopedic sense. That's not what the statute envisions. That's not what

the statute says. And MMI is just a mechanism, it's maximum medical improvement. It's a mechanism

for the claimant to obtain a permanent impairment award under Section 32. And the legislation

of history when the statute was recodified in 1988 from 281 to 281A, there was testimony

from the prior director of the Department of Labor saying, hey, listen, I want this definition

of permanent impairment put in the secondary fund section of the statute because there's

going to be confusion with permanent impairment award under Section 32. And the statute

of permanent impairment under the second injury fund. So MMI, permanency, and that's what the

board relied on. So the board committed legal error by relying on these two little sections

and not looking at the condition, the permanent condition, the condition or the limitations

that she had from...

Coming out on Section 1, if the order of the statute is permanent physical or mental impairment

from any cause, then there's a subsequent disability by injury arising out of and in

the course of the employment. So you've got disability, subsequent, tied to employment.

Here we seem to have the reverse. Initial disability, linked to employment, subsequent

from any cause, right?

Right.

So are you allowed to under the statute reverse the order?

I don't see it as being reversed by the... being reversed here. The... defined as

any cause or origin, any cause. So that could mean a work-related injury.

Sure.

And that...

But then we need a subsequent disability by injury arising out of. Subsequent. So we need

another work-related disability by injury.

No. No. I don't think so. Because what CNA says is that subsequent disability doesn't

say work-related. The legislature did not say a subsequent work-related disability.

It says a subsequent disability. So we're technically looking at the term disability.

And the first disability is the inability to pursue an occupation. And the second disability

is the surgery taking her out of work. Totally. Okay? And what the CNA... it's why we have

CNA cases. That's why the second injury fund forms the original date of injury, CNA date

of injury. They understand that a CNA claim can arise out of the original injury.

And given the purpose of the statute, it should be liberally construed, not narrowly

construed. It seems to me the board really narrowed their interpretation.

Exactly. And that's what the statute was designed for. A liberal and liberal interpretation

of the statute and narrowly focusing on the word permanent.

Thank you. Thank you. You still have your two minutes. Thank you. Mr. Brown.

So Mr. Brown, why can't we give Summit its money back? Because they didn't meet the criteria

of the statute. May it please the court? My name is John Brown from the Attorney General's

Office and I represent the second injury fund. Second injury fund eligibility is established

by statute. To secure reimbursement, a carrier must meet all the requirements of 281A54. The

Compensation Appeals Board in this case correctly found that the carrier presented insufficient

evidence on all three of those requirements. And a failure to meet any one of those

requirements is a basis for denying the claim. So how does one prove knowledge? Employer's

knowledge. So the requirement of knowledge is that there be written evidence. I know that

the carrier has sort of argued that the board has required medical evidence. But that's

not the case. There's nothing in the decision, in the board's decision that suggests that

that was the standard. They refer to written evidence. Written evidence generally is going

to be medical records, but it doesn't have to be. If somebody applies for a job and somehow

reveals a physical impairment in their job application, then that would be written evidence.

If there was an injury at work. I didn't understand the first time we asked that question.

What is the documentation? Is it just not there? Is that your point? In this case,

it's not that there wasn't evidence there. It's that the evidence that was available

to the employer didn't indicate a permanent impairment. So there were medical records.

The worker in this particular case met with a nurse practitioner five times, met with

her physician four times. Each of those times, those providers filled out workers' compensation

form. One of the check boxes in those forms is, has the person suffered a permanent impairment?

On all of those visits, none of the providers checked permanent impairment. Narrative reports

that they wrote related to those visits also don't provide evidence of permanent impairment.

The board relied on those medical records on the idea that the medical provider

that actually treated her were in the best position to understand what her condition was

and make a prediction about her prognosis. The issue was that she might have had an injury,

but she didn't have a permanent disability. Exactly right. The whole purpose of the

Second Injury Fund is to encourage employers to hire people with permanent impairments,

meaning that the employer knows that from the date of hire to the date that this person

employment ends, that they're going to have the potential that they're going to have to

deal with someone who has a permanent impairment. So that permanency is important. It includes

retention too. It's not just hiring, right? Exactly. Hire or retention, yes, because

this could apply to an injury that happens in the workplace by someone who wasn't.

Any evidence that this condition was going to resolve? Yes. There were a couple of reasons

why there were indications that it would resolve. Number one, as I said, on those workers'

compensation forms, there were no indications that any of the two providers thought that

she had a permanent impairment. Also, as long as she didn't lift more than 10 pounds

or do repetitive motion, were those restrictions, was there any evidence that those would be

lifted at some point? Well, I think there can necessarily be an assumption that because

someone has a workplace restriction that they have a permanent impairment. Virtually all

injuries in the workplace result in some kind of restriction which could carry on for

quite a while. In one of the medical reports, it refers to sort of a persistent that she

had a persistent condition. But I would argue that even a persistent condition is not a permanent

condition. So does an employer have to go out and get a medical opinion that uses the

word permanent in order to satisfy the statutory requirement? No, the statute doesn't require

that, but the statute requires knowledge. And that knowledge can come from a number

of different sources as long as it's in writing. The other option is that the employer can

complete an affidavit either at the time of hire or the time of the injury. And there was

no affidavit in this case. So there's no dispute here, though, that there were accommodations

made? That's correct. Yes. And so why isn't the fact of the accommodation sufficient

satisfy their burden? Because accommodations just show that she had an injury that

needed to be accommodated. It doesn't show that it was a permanent condition. How would

it convey employer knowledge? I apologize. How would the record of this convey employer

knowledge? Or wouldn't it? Well, in this case, I would argue that it didn't convey

employer knowledge because the medical records that the employer had access to didn't

indicate permanency. You know, under other circumstances, there could be documents or

records that show the employer is aware that this person has a permanent condition.

Or the employer could just assign the worker permanently to the light duty or less than

light duty position, and they could get an affidavit from now to the end of time.

This employee will be performing this light duty position. Would that be enough? No, that

wouldn't be enough because there's a whole, there's a wide range of reasons that someone

might be assigned to light duty and not be taken off light duty. I mean, an employer

could determine that, you know, just by coincidence, this person's better suited to

this particular task than the prior task. If an employer says because of this disability

we're recognizing that she's permanently going to be assigned to this light duty

position, that would reflect employer knowledge.

I don't think that reflects the employer's knowledge. I think that reflects the employer's

reaction to what they, their understanding of the situation, but it doesn't necessarily

show that new of a permanent physical impairment, which is the requirement of the staff.

Didn't the employer submit a sworn statement? Isn't that satisfied the affidavit requirement?

My understanding is that the sworn statement is that the employer is attesting to the fact

that these were the records available to us, not necessarily that they believe that she

had a permanent impairment. And of course that's done much later on.

I'm looking at the definition. We're talking about the definition of permanent physical

or mental impairment under 281A214. Is that right?

Yes.

And it says that that means any permanent condition that is congenital or due to injury or disease

that is of such seriousness as to constitute a hindrance or obstacle to obtaining employment

or to obtaining employment if the employee should become unemployed, oddly it uses permanent

in the definition of what a permanent physical or mental impairment is. It's a little circular,

but why doesn't this satisfy that definition?

Well I would argue that it really is not so much a circular argument as it is the

permanent condition is the sort of first requirement, and then once there's a permanent condition

then that starts the second inquiry of whether it would constitute a hindrance or obstacle

to obtaining employment. So I view this as sort of a two-part standard. First, did this

person have a permanent impairment? Second, was that permanent impairment of such seriousness

that it would cause a hindrance or obstacle to employment?

And permanent means till the end of your life?

At least till the end of employment. But in like, yeah I think there's, you could certainly

argue that the permanent means for the rest of your life.

You don't have to use all your time.

Okay.

Can you just address the lack of candor issue?

Sure. Yeah, I'd be happy to. So the board made a comment in the decision about the

suggesting that there was a lack of candor because a page was missing from a report

that was submitted to the, I think it was originally submitted to the fund during the application

process.

It seems a little harsh. I mean there's no doubt that they have the whole report, right?

That's correct because the carrier submitted twice and in one place in the packet it

was complete in the other place it was missing a page. The board made an assumption

about what the significance of that was and made a comment about a lack of candor is a reason

to deny the claim. However, that was an advisory statement. It had no effect on the outcome.

How do we know that? How do we know that it didn't infect the thinking of the board?

Well we can take the, if we could take the board at their word, in the final page

of the board's decision, which is on page 116 of the appellant's appendix, there's a heading

that says decision and then underneath it says the employer has raised a number of challenges

to the special injury fund's coordinator's decision. Based on the employer's failure

to meet the written documentation requirement required by RSA 281A54, the failure to

show a subsequent disability by injury and failure to show a permanent injury, the panel

finds that the carrier has failed to meet its burden of proof. I think the board makes

very clear what the basis for its decision is and this is obviously the sort of final

word on it but even earlier in the, throughout the decision, the board is making very

clear that the reason for the denial is the failure to meet the statutory requirements.

So yes, that comment is in there but the board makes it pretty clear why it is making the

denial and it's a basis of insufficient evidence to prove the requirements of the statute.

Thank you, Mr. Brown.

Okay, thank you.

Mr. Harding, do you need to commit it?

Okay.

Thank you.

What's interesting with the fund's argument is that they're still maintaining the

focus on this permanent impairment. Okay, that's, that's not liberally construing the

statute. Okay, because like I said in other cases, permanency, orthopedic of permanency,

the employer doesn't need to know that. I don't even think the employer needs to

know that it's a permanent condition in a medical sense. How can the employer actually

know if a condition is permanent?

Well, the statute requires knowledge though.

Right, knowledge of a permanent condition, not an impairment as argued by the fund here

under section 32 and that's what those boxes on the New Hampshire workers' compensation

form are. They're MMI, PPI, Permanent Partial Impairment. You can only get permanent

partial impairments once you have reached MMI and the permanent partial impairment is an

award under a separate section of the statute, section 32.

But it seems to me you're asking us to read out the word permanent condition out of the

definition.

No, as, as it applies to employer knowledge, Larson's even says the employer doesn't

need to know the permanent condition in a medical sense. It's impossible.

I'm not, I'm not focused on the employer knowledge component, but rather the first element.

The permanent condition?

Yes.

Well, they understood and they knew that according to Dr. Pallavi's report that she

had generative disc disease spondylitis. The word degenerative, I think that's going

to be ongoing in a permanent condition in a medical sense. So the employer knew or

understood that she had a genitive disc disease in her cervical spine. So I think that absolutely

satisfies the statutory requirement for a permanent condition because of the limitations

that this condition provided were, were assessed. Thank you.

Thank you.

Be submitted.

Courts in recess.
