This is case 2021, 0602 in the matter of Gerard Latterno and Patricia Latterno.

Just a moment, counsel. I need to make a brief announcement that the Chief Justice is participating in this case, not the next one, but in this case, he's simply unable to be here today.

Okay. Having said that, Mr. Fernald, please proceed.

May it please the court. My name is Mark Fernald. I represent the appellate, Gerard Latterno.

I do want to note that I have reserved two minutes for rebuttal time.

Very good.

The parties signed a divorce agreement on June 1, 2021.

The judge of the Milford Family Division signed the final decree of divorce that day and the decree issued that day.

The only substantial asset the parties had was the marital home.

Section 15 of the divorce agreement awards the marital home to Patricia morally.

But only if by September 1 she pays Mr. Latterno $26,500.

Did it say those words? But only if?

If Patricia is able to complete the refinancing of the property and the payment of $26,500 to Gerard by September 1, 2021, Gerard shall vacate the property within 45 days of the payment and shall leave the property in broom clean condition.

If she's unable to complete the refinancing and make the payment by September 1, 2021, Patricia's right to refinance the property and by Gerard shall lapse.

And Patricia shall vacate the marital homestead by September 15 and shall remove from the property all livestock and so on.

Thank you.

Now you need an appeal the first extension. Is that something that we can consider or is that something that you waive?

We did not appeal the first extension.

My client believed she would not get the mortgage by the new deadline.

And so let's just wait it out.

And he was correct.

She did not get the mortgage by the new deadline.

But when we got October 15, she was prepared to pay your client $26,500.

No, she wasn't.

There was $26,500 in escrow and the escrow agreement, which is part of the record says that if she's able to refinance the mortgage, that money will be released as part of the closing.

But she had no ability to refinance as of October 15 or November 15, 2021.

I read her counsel's representations as offering that money on October 15, the day of the hearing.

And your client wouldn't take it.

Is that a misreading of the hearing?

The judge was trying to broker an amendment of the divorce agreement and suggested why doesn't Mr. Luterno take $26,500 now, give her a deed, move out, and the refinancing would happen sometime later, maybe.

And he's the only obligor on that mortgage.

The agreement in the divorce was the things happen together, not piecemeal.

So that's what was suggested by the court.

And you can read the transcript, my read of the transcript, my recollection of the hearing is Ms. Morley did not agree to that suggestion.

Keeping in mind the $26,000 wasn't available to her anyhow because of the terms of the escrow, which is in the record.

So do I understand correctly that what's at issue here is the extension from November 15 through December 23rd?

That's what's at issue here.

Yes.

Not before that.

Not before that.

And the status quo now is the same as it was on December 23rd?

Yes.

Mr. Luterno is still living in the house.

We're waiting for a decision as to who's buying out whom based on the divorce agreement.

They made this agreement, which is probably unusual because they couldn't agree who was going to get the house.

They both wanted it.

So this agreement was she had first crack, but there was a deadline.

She didn't meet the deadline, then it was his turn to be awarded the house, provided he paid her $26,500.

The dates in section 15 of the divorce agreement are an integral part of the property division.

Before September 1, the house is awarded to her if she does those two steps.

After September 1, it's awarded to him, provided he paid her $26,500.

So do we look at it like a contract?

Well, a divorce agreement is a contract, but it's also a final order of divorce and a property division.

So it's much more than just a contract.

But it doesn't provide the time as of the essence in any way, shape, or form, does it?

That's not something I considered, but I believe there are decisions of this court that says if you've got a court order with dates, then those are the dates.

So I believe that court orders are in effect what you said time is of the essence type dates, not flexible dates like they would be in a contract.

But can the trial court amend those dates or those terms?

Not if it changes the property division.

The court changes dates all the time.

I have a case going on now where the wife was required to refinance within five years.

She hasn't done it, and she's asked for an extension.

The court hasn't ruled yet, and that might well happen, but that doesn't change the property division.

That's just changing when the mortgage gets refinanced and my client gets released from a mortgage obligation.

This is about property division, who gets the house, and the dates make all the difference in the world.

So how do you envision the practical consequences of our decision here?

If we affirm or if we reverse, it seems to me either the deadlines November 15th, 2021, or it's December 23rd, 2021.

What's the consequence of us saying it's one or the other, practically speaking at this point?

I think practically speaking, if you reverse the order of the court extending beyond November 15, then what the divorce agreement said that once her time period has ended,

my client has two months exactly to pay the $26,500 and get a deed from her in return.

So that's what should happen now because he couldn't do it then.

He was ready to do it in November, but she and her counsel refused to give a deed.

But if the deadline is December 23rd, isn't it the same?

Because that's all you're saying. It shouldn't be the 23rd, it should be the 15th.

But if it's the 23rd, why aren't we in the same boat?

Well, I think their argument is if the court's allowed to extend to the 23rd, she had a mortgage on December 23rd,

and therefore she should get the house.

And we're saying she was way too late.

Again, the dates make all the difference in the world.

So as of December 23rd, she was prepared to close on the house?

She was.

Refinance rather, right?

Yes.

Are you saying that's still the case today?

Given that interest rates have doubled, and you'll see in the record she doesn't have a lot of income,

I would not assume that you throw this back down for her to try to buy that she'll be able to do it.

We may be back here again because another two months has gone by or three months, whatever,

and she hasn't performed because she can't.

Do the interest rates affect your client's ability to purchase?

At this point, practically speaking.

I don't think so.

I think so.

My client has a higher income, and he's a veteran, and so he's able to go for a VA loan,

which is a much lower interest rate.

He did qualify for a mortgage before.

I think he will again.

But he's the only one on the mortgage.

Is that right?

Currently, yes.

So he doesn't need to refinance it.

He just needs to come up with $26,500.

Yeah, but I think he needs to refinance to come up with the cash.

Okay.

I'm sorry.

It sort of begs the question based on just as fast as questions.

The right thing for us to do here is to inform the trial court that you either did make a mistake

in extending the deadline or you didn't and then remand it to the trial court for the proper resolution.

Yes.

Yeah, I think that's exactly right.

That you should say that he made a mistake in extending and remand for the court to figure out,

all right, what time period does Mr. Luterno have to perform as stated in the agreement by paying $26,500?

And I want to point out to the court the parts in the transcript where you can see the trial court trying to broker a new agreement.

On page 10 of the transcript is where the court suggests that Mr. Luterno should take $26,500 and leave

and just hope the refinancing help happens later.

On page 17, the judge left the courtroom to get his calculator to see if he could figure out whether Ms. Morley would actually qualify for a mortgage or not in his judgment.

I don't know why that was relevant, but he thought it was really important.

On pages 26 and 27, the judge proposed that Ms. Morley pay Mr. Luterno $26,500 and if she was unable to complete refinancing within 30 days,

she would lose the money and not get the property.

None of these things were acceptable to the parties, so then the court just came up with its own amendment on its own,

which again amended the property division, court can't do it, those are the rules of the court, reaffirmed over and over.

I also want to point out that this order that's on appeal came out of a review hearing on October 25.

The review hearing was in a landlord-tenant action that Ms. Morley brought against Mr. Luterno asking the court to kick him out of the house so she could move back in.

So we had a review hearing on the landlord-tenant case, it's page 50 on the record.

The notice of hearing does say it's consolidated with the divorce, but there were no motions pending in the divorce.

So we get to the review hearing to talk about the eviction. Attorney Payne speaks first and makes a motion that the dates be changed in the divorce agreement yet again.

Wasn't the eviction action connected with this suggestion that Mr. Luterno's occupation of the house was somehow obstructing Ms. Luterno's ability to refinance?

They made that argument, but what you see in the record is she had a list of $39,000 of repairs that she believed had to be completed according to the appraiser before a bank would consider giving her a mortgage.

So this wasn't about he was somehow obstructing things, this was about she needed to get repairs done and she felt well if she moved in maybe she could get the repairs done better.

But she didn't have any money so she wasn't going to get any of these repairs done, it was just trying to get them out of the house and that was not ordered by the court.

So there was no evidence suggesting that your client was somehow damaging or denigrating or doing anything to the property to prevent it from being refinanced?

No, and if you look at my motion for reconsideration, I'm trying to think which one it is because there's multiple motions, but I, sorry I lost my train of thought, he was not impeding the inspections.

And the reason why she was able to quantify by $39,000 the repairs necessary is because all her inspectors came in and made their reports, so all of that happened and he cooperated with all of those people.

And I guess the other thing I would say is in my motion for reconsideration I point out that the heating system, the electrical system which she says is faulty had been approved by the building inspector in Brookline when the house was built.

So we don't even understand why there's an issue over those parts of the house but in Ms. Morley's mind there was. Anyhow my point on the review hearing is RSA 458 section 14 says a court can modify an order but only if advance notice is given to the parties.

In this case we had no notice, we were going to be discussing modification yet again of the divorce agreement. And so it's an improper motion and improper for the court to have considered the motion, blindsinding me and my client.

I don't recall you objecting during the hearing. I read the transcript yesterday. Did you object?

I objected to the modification of the divorce agreement in multiple places in the transcript.

But not to the fact that you didn't make this notice argument to the trial court at the hearing?

No, sometimes when you get blindsided you get completely blindsided and you can't remember which rule applies to what and you're trying in the moment to respond to what's going on rather than running through your mental roll adex about court rules and statutes and what might apply.

Which is why we don't do trial by ambush so that someone can prepare in advance the proper legal arguments.

Your red light is on.

Sorry?

Your red light is on.

Oh, thank you.

You still have your two minutes reserved. Mr. Payne.

May it please the court. Curtis Payne for Patricia Morley. Good afternoon. You've read the transcripts so I'm not going to regurgitate what they say.

Do you have time prepared to close on the house?

Yes, she is.

So she has a mortgage in place? She will have? She's approved, I should say.

Yes, Your Honor. Yes, Your Honor. She is. And we were prepared to close on December 23rd as well.

Ms. Payne, do me a favor and move that microphone right. Perfect.

Thank you.

And that's what we're getting to today is that the issue here is whether or not the trial court is able to dynamically address issues that come before it,

especially when there is need for redress.

In this case, the court had a divorce decree with fairly arbitrary deadlines that it thought at the time were reasonable and feasible.

And as things turned out, they were not reasonable nor were they feasible. They were in fact pretty close to impossible.

And I think Judge Derby recognized that at the hearing.

That's correct, Your Honor. And that's, I think the court was well within a sustainable discretion to modify those dates.

It was not prejudicial to either party. It was simply understanding that the market had changed, that circumstances were different,

and that Ms. Morley was not able to perform. So it gave her a chance to perform fairly and she was able to perform. She did that.

But you say it wasn't prejudicial, but it was prejudicial to Mr. Farnold's client?

I think that the only prejudice was that he had to wait a little bit longer to see whether or not she could perform.

But he would have had his turn if she hadn't performed reasonably. He would have had his chance to buy the house.

I think, though, that she was able to show that part of the reason why she couldn't perform was because of Mr. Morley, Mr. Luterno.

He was making it impossible for her to go to the house and do simple tasks like feed her animal. They were blocking the driveway.

They were calling the police at every turn on trumped up charges. They made the service people uncomfortable when they came to the house.

The appraisers didn't want to come to the house. People were beginning to say that we don't feel comfortable going to that house

because we feel like we're being threatened. So she was unable to get what she needed to get done in a timely manner.

So she got the appraisals, but the vendors were concerned about going to the house and performing the work?

That's correct, Your Honor. That was part of why she couldn't get some of the vendors to come there to even give her an estimates.

And as far as appraisers go, that was a different issue altogether because the market was so hot that summer that it took four months to even get an appraiser out there.

So what's the nature of where does the thing stand now? Has the work been done?

It has not been done. All we have now are solid estimates of what needs to be done.

And she was required to put up $39,000 in escrow, which I'm holding in my escrow account, actually $38,000 to have that work done.

And she got approved for a mortgage conditioned on the work being performed or regardless of whether the work is performed?

She got approved for the mortgage based upon the fact that she has the funds to make the repairs.

And those appraisals are still valid today?

Well, you know, I think that that would have to be revisited, Your Honor, to be honest with you.

Sure.

I think all the numbers are changing as we have no construction costs rarely go down these days. They only go up.

But I think those are all things that can be dealt with because at this point Ms. Morley is prepared to buy her.

And let's be clear, this is her familial home. This house was given to her by her parents.

And she added Mr. Litorno onto the deed. So she's just trying to get her family house back.

But I think that her family is prepared to step up and assist her as they have done in the past in any way necessary.

The original agreement, both parties had counsel.

So this idea that the trial court identified that the timing was unreasonable from the get-go.

Is there any explanation as to why such ambitious deadlines were included in the agreement?

If there is, Your Honor, I have no knowledge of it. I have to be.

Oh, was your client represented by counsel when she signed the stipulation?

The divorced stipulation?

Yes, different counsel.

Different counsel.

Not by me, yes, different counsel.

And I'm curious, do you agree that this is the dispute in front of us is more about ownership of the property,

i.e. property distribution or division than it is about the value.

We don't often separate the value of the property in a distribution from that ownership issue.

So do you agree that's what's at stake here?

I believe that's correct, Your Honor. I think that both parties want the house. I think that's right.

Do you agree that there was no notice that this issue was going to come up at the hearing on October 25th?

I'm not sure that you could say there was no notice because the whole point of the hearing was to review the status of the situation.

And had the deadline expired at that point?

I believe that it was about to expire. It had not expired.

Yeah, the court had extended it to November 15th at that point.

That's correct, Your Honor.

So was the marital matter consolidated with the eviction matter? Was that the case?

That was not a case that I was a part of, Your Honor, so I cannot say that was the case.

But the motion to revise the schedule yet again was made orally by you on the hearing on the 25th, right?

Yes, sir. And that was because that was my first appearance in the case.

So I was actually coming up to speed myself with the circumstances.

And I was asking the judge for more time to perform.

And was the review notice issued under the docket number associated with the marital matter?

I believe it was, Your Honor, yes.

And given that this is the only asset that the parties had, what else were you going to review?

That's exactly right, Your Honor. They were trying to figure out whether or not we were going to be able to proceed with the division of the marital asset. That's correct.

There would have been a substantial pay-down of the principal of the mortgage in the intervening 14 months, I guess.

Are the parties prepared to address that?

To address the pay-down. I don't know if that was an issue at the time, Your Honor, to be honest with you.

Well, who was paying the mortgage?

Mr. Eternal was paying the mortgage.

And he's had the sole and exclusive right of the property since October 2021?

Yes, that's correct.

That being the house anyway, right?

That's correct. And that was because of other circumstances.

But Ms. Morley had access to the property. She was able to go onto the property, feed her animals, and tend to the things that she had on the property.

But she was still basically had ownership interest, but she was no longer able to occupy the property.

Pursuant to a protective order?

Correct, Your Honor.

Is that order still in effect?

So do you agree that if we just need to make a decision on whether the trial court aired, do we need to remand it back to the trial court?

I think so, Your Honor. I think in this case, though, that the trial court was wove in its discretion.

I think that they had a basis for changing the dates.

They had a basis for hearing my motion to change the dates.

And they had a basis for the ruling to enlarge the time for Ms. Morley to buy the house.

It all made sense. It was reasonable. It was fair.

And more importantly, I think it was necessary because under the circumstances, she was doing everything in her power to comply with the divorce decree.

But it was being made more and more difficult for her to do it.

So all she needed, in fact, was the time she was able to raise the money.

She was able to get the appraisal. The house came in at the appraisal.

She secured everything she needed to do it and was ready to close.

She had the 26-5 to pay Mr. Latterno. She had the money for the repairs.

And all of a sudden, we are here now arguing whether or not she should be allowed to do that.

And I think that she should be.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you, Your Honors.

Mr. Fernell.

Thank you, Your Honor.

I want to correct some statements concerning the facts of the case that were just made.

The reason why she could not close by September 1 is because she had an appraisal done and the appraiser found the property unacceptable.

That's in the record.

It was nothing that Mr. Latterno did. The property didn't pass.

She needed extra time to figure out what repairs would satisfy a lender.

Second, you will note in the record that there was violence in this divorce by Ms. Morley against Mr. Latterno.

We didn't think she would get a mortgage because at the time she was pending trial in spirit court on felony charges for hitting my client with a pipe.

Ultimately, she was convicted of two misdemeanors.

There was an allegation that this couldn't possibly be done in three months.

I'm a real estate lawyer.

Yes, you can close a mortgage in three months.

There were allegations that the appraisers didn't want to come to the house and the vendors didn't want to come to the house or the repair people.

That's nowhere in the record.

That's made up.

So you should disregard that.

There was an allegation the home was given to her.

Again, that's not in the record.

My understanding is the land was given to her and they built the house.

They were married for over 35 years.

The review hearing was about the eviction and the undercurrent was because he gave her extra time that she had time to do the inspections and get the workmen in and so forth.

So that's what we thought we were reviewing and all of that had happened and yet she still didn't have a mortgage.

But the deadline hadn't passed by that point.

The second deadline had not passed.

But it was clear she wasn't going to have a mortgage because you will see in the record she didn't have a commitment.

She didn't have an appraisal.

She didn't have anything to indicate she had any chance of getting a mortgage.

She was just playing for time to see what would work out.

And finally, Attorney Payne in his brief and today has said well the court had the discretion to change the order.

And there are many times when courts have discretion to change orders but when it's a final property division the trial court does not have that discretion.

And changing the dates changed who gets the property.

The agreement said she didn't do it within three months.

It lapses and then it's his turn.

Change the dates by chance.

Do you have a case on point where property division has been changed in terms of just the time for performance and it's not reviewable or changeable by a court?

I could not find any case like this one.

I looked through Douglas one.

Yeah.

So I could not find anything.

Thank you.

Thank you.

All right.
