Good morning morning. Good morning. See you both.

Joni Gunnay, did he attend to the fire? Absolutely, minutes.

I have to make an announcement. This is case 2021-0464 State of New Hampshire,

versus Justin M. Lamontine. Thank You Clare.

the Chief Justice is unable to be here today

But he is participating in all of the cases, except for those

for which he is disqualified, the announcement having

been made.

Having said that, Mr. Johnson, you may proceed.

Please the court, Christopher Johnson,

on behalf of Justin Lontain.

I've reserved one minute for rebuttal.

The issue in this appeal is whether the court aired

an excluding testimony of what was referred to as the bondage

image that Lontain thought depicted AC.

My plan this morning is, first, to address the question

of relevance, second, to turn to the propensity inference

concern, and third, harmless error.

But I'm happy to take the court's questions as they come.

With respect to relevance, it's worth bearing in mind

that it does set a low bar for admissibility and tendency

to make effective consequences more or less probable.

And it's gauged by the interaction

between the disputed issue and the proffered evidence.

Turning first to the disputed issue,

the question here was whether Lontain knew or should

have known that AC did not consent to the dissemination.

That standard gave the state two options

by which to establish the element, a subjective option

that he knew she didn't consent, and an objective option.

Regardless of what he thought, he should have known she

didn't consent.

So isn't it an objective standard?

I think both, because it's new or should have known.

So even if a reasonable person might have thought

she did consent, if he actually didn't think that,

he's still guilty.

So it's phrased as new or should have known,

and I think they're both.

The state has two options.

They can prevail under either, which

means that the defense has to defeat both or raise

a reasonable doubt as to each.

And in that challenge or in that process,

the defense faced a headwind here

based on the background assumption,

I think that's prevalent in the culture,

that most people wouldn't consent to something like this.

So that's the issue.

Then the question is, what's the evidence?

The evidence here, this image was important

because it constituted a full statement of why

he thought what he thought and why it was reasonable

to think what he thought.

The reason was that he thought from the image

that she had a higher than average tolerance

for the closure of such images.

Despite the fact that she denied that that image was her.

Yes.

So he thought it was crucial to the defense theory

about this that he thought it was her.

But it's also a fact in the case that she denied it was her.

And by the time of trial, the defense

wasn't arguing that he was right about it.

They were accepting that it wasn't her.

The point was that he thought it was her.

That really could have backbired, though, had it come in.

Possibly.

But it was also, I think it was crucial, too,

because without it, he got this headwind,

which the prosecutor in closing, I think, powerfully argued,

like why on earth would somebody agree to this?

This evidence was, as I said, kind of contributed

to why he thought that she did

and why a reasonable person would think that she would

and did.

What was the argument made below

that this was the awareness of the image

as the reason they got into the conversation before July 21st?

Wasn't that the basis for it?

That was part of it.

But it was also this point that the image in and of itself

separate and apart from the later conversation

contributed to Lomontane's thought

and justified the rationality of his thought

that she would and did consent.

Well, I mean, the trial court found that because AC admitted

that she agreed and she consented to the video

and the sexual relationship at that point in time,

that there was no relevance to the image on that basis.

Do you disagree with that ruling?

I do, because that's that if the defense were

trying to prove something about AC, that would matter.

But the defense was because by the time of trial

it was essentially conceded that it wasn't her in the image,

the image doesn't prove anything about her character.

The only reason it matters in the case at that point

is because of thinking that it was her,

that the defendant Lomontane then

engaged in a line of reasoning which contributed

and supported to his conclusion

that she would and did consent.

And I think this gets to the propensity issue,

so I'll move there, which is I think part of what the,

because the trial court did understand

that the defense wanted it for the reason I've addressed

and part of the order was recognize

that the defense proffered this

because of what it showed about Lomontane's

mental operations.

The law prohibits propensity inferences

or juries drawing propensity inferences

and just to be clear, I think what propensity inferences

evidence of a past act from which

a proposition about the person's character is inferred,

from which character is inferred

and a conclusion about a present act.

And here, we're not, as I said,

the defense was not trying to prove

anything about AC's character.

It's not her in the image.

In that respect, this case becomes very narrow

and different I think from a lot of other cases

where evidence of this sort is introduced

or a proffered because it wasn't,

it didn't prove and wasn't offered

to prove anything about her character

and therefore it wasn't being used

for that kind of propensity reasoning.

It was offered to prove the subjective content

and objective rationality of Lomontane's thinking.

And so the case is distinguishable from Zaglan.

Right, because there, I think it was offered

to prove that she did consent.

And here, you know, because it's not her in the image,

just it's, jury's not even gonna go there.

But does the defendant have to prove

actual consent as a defense?

I'm having a hard time thinking

his thinking she consented wouldn't cancel out

the mens rea of purposefully sending it.

So we get to the sort of, if it was sent with consent,

then that gets him off the hook.

But wouldn't that require actual proof of consent

and not what he thought in his mind?

No, I understand and I think that sort of the answer

to that question sort of is best found

in the jury instructions where the jury is told

these are the things the state has to prove.

And you're quite right.

One of the things the state had to prove

was that she didn't consent.

But another thing they had to prove,

and I just quoted it, is that Lamontain knew

or should have known that she didn't consent.

So the idea being if a person both subjectively

sort of actually fits the person's consent

and that belief is reasonable,

then that also is a path out of conviction.

Separate from, you know, so a person who, you know,

even if it didn't consent.

So the jury's required to make the leap

that because someone might have submitted to a picture

of an image of them on the internet

in a state of bondage partially closed

that that leads to the inference that she might have

or could have agreed to her image

whether she's engaging in sexual acts without any clothing.

That's a bit of a leap, isn't it?

Well, I think, I mean, so a couple of things I would say.

So one is that the image that Lamontain released

and was charged with releasing

doesn't show sexual acts.

The sort of, he put together or created an excerpt

of the sex tape that just showed her naked.

And so, which is, you know, not to defend it,

but it didn't actually show a sex act.

And so it was, in that respect,

sort of the image showed a naked woman

in a sexualized setting was like the image

that he was charged with releasing.

And it would have been, I think you're right,

it would have been quite different.

There would have been a further leap

if it actually showed a sex act.

But I think I want to make a point

about kind of the law around propensity.

And that point is propensity inferences

are not barred to juries because they are ideological.

I think all of us make propensity inferences

about each other all the time.

For example, in a self-defense setting,

if there's, if I have information

that there's this fellow walking around conquered

and he's punching people and attacking them

and then I see the person approaching me

and looking a little angry,

my knowledge of what this person has done

in other circumstances will inform

the reasonableness of measures I might take

in self-defense.

But, and so it's not the illogic of propensity inferences

that causes their exclusion.

Indeed, if they were illogical,

law wouldn't care about them

because they would have no power with juries.

It's other considerations, I think,

that are not implicated here.

Principally because, you know,

like the Rule 412 Rape Shield Act is sort of, you know,

I think well-defined and governs

the impermissibility of propensity inferences

around sexual behavior.

The Rule 412 isn't implicated here

because it's not her in the bondage image.

And so the kind of concerns around propensity inferences

are not implicated here.

Both because the defense wasn't asking the jury

to make an inference about her character.

They were asking the jury to make a finding

about in support of Blamontaine's claim

both actually and reasonably to believe she consented.

And also because it wasn't her.

Turned to harmless error unless,

let's go elsewhere.

So three quick points about harmless error.

First, there was not overwhelming evidence on this point.

There was conflicting testimony

about whether she consented

as both defendant and AC testified.

And that is the crucial dispute or his belief

and the reasonableness of our is the crucial dispute.

Secondly, this bondage image wasn't cumulative.

He testified that he thought he would indeed consent

but that testimony is much weakened

when he's not allowed to testify about why he thought that.

And bondage image was important part

of the reason why he thought that

because he thought she had a higher tolerance

for the disclosure of this kind of image.

And so because it's not a higher tolerance,

that doesn't get him much of a defense.

Well, I think it, because it helps

because he's facing this headwind as I've described.

I think sort of the background notion

that most people don't consent to this kind of disclosure

of their sexualized images of their naked bodies.

And so if that's sort of a background feeling

that the jurors have about the culture,

you know, it's something that the state has in its favor.

He needs, this is some evidence from which he could show

that she, to some extent, departs from the norm.

He thought, to some extent,

she departed from the norm in that regard,

whether he's wrong, maybe, because it's not actually her,

but that's not the issue that we're fighting.

And the only evidence that was cumulative to with

was his testimony.

Right.

So he just asserts in his testimony a narrative

about the consent and why he thought it,

but he isn't allowed to explain, you know,

kind of this thing that would help make that claim

that she would, indeed, consent more reasonable.

And that's the problem.

I mean, finally, I know I've had a reply brief on this

and I don't tend to dwell on it much,

but we have raised the issue about the reset standard

and our proposal that the court should adopt

a more integrated analysis when it considers harmless error,

that considers both always and both the other evidence,

but also the evidence alleged to be erroneously excluded.

What is the importance, if any, to your argument

of the fact that the pre-July 21 Facebook exchange

came into evidence, right?

Yeah, so, I mean, that was another thing

that defense wanted in and they got it in, eventually.

And so that isn't part of my claim,

but that pre-July 21st conversation,

you know, it was helpful to the defense, I guess,

but it wasn't enough.

It didn't do what this bondage image would have done,

which, as I've said, is to make this point

about his belief that she departs

from the kind of cultural norm to some extent

in being relatively more tolerant

of the disclosure of images.

There was nothing in that conversation

that kind of duplicated that point.

So the court has other questions.

Thank you.

Thank you.

We still have you one minute if you need it.

Mr. Gagnier.

Good morning, Your Honors.

May it please the court, Sam Gagnier,

on behalf of the state of New Hampshire.

I welcome the court's questions at any time.

Your Honors, this court squarely rejected

the line of reasoning that the defense walks

in the cases of state beam as Agua

and state vehigans.

Does court explain in those cases

that consent to sexual conduct with one person

on one occasion in no way implies consent with another person?

But isn't Mr. Johnson right that Mazzalia

is just irrelevant here because Mazzalia,

it went to the issue of the victims

passed acts and consent to sexual activity prior,

but everybody here agrees that that's not,

it was not the victim here that was in the photograph.

So Mazzalia seems to me to be not relevant.

I don't think it is irrelevant, Your Honor.

The defendant has to acknowledge,

or at least assert that it is not her

to get away from rule 412.

If the defendant agrees that it's her,

the state prevails in arguing it's her,

then rule 412 keeps the evidence out.

But as soon as we step away from rule 412,

then the defendant wants to suggest

that I really thought that it was her

and wants the jury to draw the inference that it was her

and you really believe that it was her

and that supplied your basis

for believing that she consented.

So the defendant's belief for the basis of consent

is the same as the defendant's belief in Mazzalia.

So I don't think the case is irrelevant

and I think most importantly,

the consent analyses and the principles

espoused in Mazzalia and in Higgins control this case.

It is an objective analysis

and consent on a prior occasion in no way

implies consent on a subsequent occasion.

But how is it being offered here

in regards to propensity of the,

regarding the behavior of the victim?

It seems to me that that's not

what the evidence was relevant to

and that's not what the defendant's claiming.

I don't know that I am arguing

that it is relevant to anything

of the victim's propensity, Your Honor.

It's just not relevant to the victim's consent

or whether the victim consented it all

to the dissemination of this image.

That to me seems like a different point,

which I understand.

Yes, so I'm not arguing

that this evidence should have been excluded

necessarily because it spoke to the victim's propensities

but just because it was not in any way relevant

to whether or not she consented

to the dissemination of the charged image.

And because, so you're rejecting the link

as we discussed earlier,

his defense could be a proving that she consented.

But what defense counsel's arguing is

the newer should have known this factors

into whether he had a reasonable belief,

whether he should have known she didn't consent.

So I get that it's not relevant to actual consent

but how is it not relevant to his subjective belief?

So to a response to that point,

counsel said the defense has to defeat

both of those things.

That is not the case.

The defendant has no burden in a criminal trial.

The state has the burden to prove beyond a reasonable doubt

new or should have known.

So the defendant did not have to put on any evidence

to defeat new or should have known.

Even if the state does not show new actual knowledge,

the state can show should have known,

which is of course an objective inquiry.

Further, even on the point of new,

as a matter of law,

because each act of consent is a new decision

premised on current circumstances,

not governed by the past.

As a matter of law,

somebody's prior consent to something

cannot supply you with a belief

that you have their consent on a subsequent occasion

and we're all held to be on constructive notice of the law

and ignorance of that idea of consent,

those concepts of consent is no excuse.

So in your view, it doesn't matter

whether the image was AC or not.

It doesn't come in regardless.

Yes, Your Honor, if it was her,

it certainly doesn't come in under 412

and if it is not her,

it doesn't come in because it's not relevant.

If it was her, I think it would still be irrelevant,

but rule 412 would probably be the basis for keeping it out.

And further consent,

as the state had cited many cases in its brief

in various contexts,

is analyzed in an objective context

in each area of the law in which it applies.

The state cited to the sexual assault context,

simple assault, invasion of privacy,

police search of a dwelling.

Indeed, in state v. air,

this court stated if the victim

objectively communicates lack of consent

and the defendant subjectively fails

to receive the message he is guilty.

And I don't think the standard new

or should have known in 6449A2C changes that.

Accordingly, the defendant's purely subjective belief

that he had the victim's consent

to disseminate the charge video

because he thought he saw some image of the victim

posted by some third party

that we know nothing about on some prior occasion

is just simply irrelevant.

And as I stated, as a matter of law,

I could not supply him with an objectively reasonable belief

or a subjective belief

because of the way the law of consent operates.

On the harmless error point, your honors,

the evidence in this case was overwhelming.

First, the defendant admitted

that he purposely disseminated the image.

He disseminated it to four people,

all of which were coworkers and friends of the victim.

He included a message that makes sure Kyle Roberts,

the victim's new boyfriend, gets this.

He never should have touched my girl

that shows an intense to harass or coerce her.

And then specifically on the issue of consent,

we have the victim's testimony

as she testified ardently

that she did not consent to this

when they made the video.

She said that it was no if, ands or buts.

Nobody was to see it.

The Facebook messages that were entered into evidence

buttress the victim's testimony.

If you read those messages,

it shows the victim really bending over backwards

to make sure that this video is not disseminated.

And every time the defendant suggests

that he's going to disseminate it,

she clearly by her words gets really upset

and tries to diffuse that situation.

Moreover, I think you can look to these circumstances

of the creation of the video

and conclude that she did not consent to its dissemination.

The video was taken privately

with nobody else in the room in an intimate setting

in a circumstance where the victim and defendant

had broken up

and believed they were having sex for the last time.

Moreover, the victim was actively dating

somebody else at the time.

And it stands to reason

that if you're actively dating somebody else,

you probably don't want a sex video with your ex

being disseminated to the public.

So I think the evidence in this case was overwhelming.

Moreover, I think it was arguably cumulative

on the point of consent.

The defendant has contended that he had,

the defendant had no basis to explain

why he believed the victim consented.

But that is not the case.

He testified at length to this agreement

that they allegedly had and specifically said

that was his basis for believing

that he had her consent.

This would have added another point.

I would continue to maintain an irrelevant point

that he says he believed,

gave him the belief that he had her consent.

But the agreement was really the crux of the consent

and he testified at length to that point.

So while I suppose the bondage photo

may have gone to a different theory

and that it's almost more of an implied consent,

it is still cumulative on the issue of consent.

Was implied consent actually argued?

Was that an issue?

It was not an issue, Your Honor.

As something that I think we can pull apart here

is we've kind of talked about whether or not

this was a consent defense.

A notice of a consent defense was specifically filed

in relation to the AFSA charges

but not on these dissemination charges.

So on the AFSA charge,

the defendant has a burden to go up improve consent.

On this charge, the defendant has no burden.

It is the state's burden to prove

beyond a reasonable doubt that he knew.

But Mr. Johnson would say this is a theory of defense

to which he's entitled.

It's supportive of the theory of defense

to which he's entitled.

Sure, Your Honor.

It is absolutely a theory of defense

and he can make whatever arguments he has on that basis

but he does not have a burden to go prove it.

And implied consent to answer your question directly

was not filed as any sort of defense.

And even if it were going back to the principle of Missalia,

prior sexual conduct in no way implies consent

on subsequent occasions with another person.

For all of those reasons,

if the court has no further question,

the state would rest on its brief

and ask that the trial court be affirmed.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Mr. Johnson.

Unless the court has other questions,

I'm satisfied.

Thank you very much.

Thank you.

Submitted.

Thank you.

And we require that the court be cleared

for the next confidential case.
