This is case 2021-0129, Patricia Crowe versus Appalachian Stitching Company, LLC.

Good morning, Tony Brock.

Good morning.

May I please the clerk? My name is Tim Brock. I am the attorney for the appellant, Patricia Crowe.

It's good to be here in person with you guys today.

It's obviously been a little while since I've been in person in a court proceeding,

and I forgot how much I enjoy doing that.

But we are here today because Mrs. Crowe is appealing the motion summary judgment that was granted

by the Superior Court on the basis that the Superior Court had ruled that Mrs. Crowe

was not a qualified individual under the ADA or RSA 354A,

ruling that because at the time that Appalachian Stitching Company determined to fire her,

Mrs. Crowe had not yet obtained a return to work letter saying that she could return with no restrictions,

a requirement that was both discriminatory and illegal in and of itself,

as Mrs. Crowe had been able to perform the essential functions of her position with the restrictions.

What is illegal about the latter half of that requirement?

The fact that that doesn't have any analysis of a reasonable accommodation.

Mrs. Crowe was able to perform the position with a reasonable accommodation

saying you have to come back with restrictions, disregards the law's requirement,

the affirmative actions that must be taken on behalf of an employer.

Is an employer required to disregard a physician's advice to the employee?

It was not the physician's advice that Mrs. Crowe could not work.

Is the two letters from Dr. Reiser saying she cannot come back to work?

It was only after they refused to allow Mrs. Crowe to return with restrictions.

It was because she could not return with restrictions that she sought those letters

from the doctor which she provided.

The restrictions were simply no bending, lifting or stooping for a short period of time.

Are the restrictions imposed by her discharge?

By the discharge from the emergency room, correct.

Were they time limited? No.

They were time limited to a week, correct.

Okay, they were.

So she was in the ER on May 9th.

On May 8th.

And then was out of work for a day, is that right?

She was back on the 12th.

Judge was at ER on the 7th.

She returned to work on May 8th.

And she successfully worked from May 8th through May 12th,

completing all functions of her position.

But are employers entitled to ask for a letter from the doctor clear to work, right?

You don't dispute that.

The doctor did provide a letter.

The letter said, you know, you can work as long as you limit bending, lifting, stooping for one week.

And that letter was provided when?

It was provided on May 12th.

Okay.

Yes.

At that time.

The May 12th letter says Mrs. Crow still cannot return to work due to non-work related back problems.

She remains under treatment.

So we're talking about a different letter at this point.

So she received a letter on May 7th that she did not provide until May 12th.

The discharge summary.

Correct.

And when she provided the discharge summary to the Appalachian Stitching Company's human resources person,

they said you cannot return to work unless you have no restrictions.

You can't have any bending, lifting, stooping, or any restrictions of any kind.

She protests that.

She says, I've been able to do the job.

I've done it the last several days with no bending, lifting, and stooping.

Can I engage in an interactive dialogue related to the restrictions?

They say no.

She goes to her doctor.

He gives her a note clearing her to be out for a week,

hoping that he'll be able to lift all restrictions after the week as she recovers.

And there was no communication of the employer after that?

That's not correct.

Her doctor reached out on the 19th, requesting FMLA,

further leave related to that.

And then once she received a letter saying the FMLA was denied,

Mrs. Crow reached out on the 23rd or the 24th saying, please let me return to work.

I'll return to work with no restrictions.

She received no answer to that besides the termination letter on June 1st.

These are all facts that were well before the trial court.

Why is it that the trial court aired and finding that your client was not a qualified person

for purposes of the ADA?

Sure.

The reasoning was that because she had not yet received a note clearing her to return,

she was not a qualified individual.

That is the wrong analysis.

If that was the analysis, then any...

Is there a case report for that statement?

There's several cases that go to that, Your Honor,

and they all relate to the fact that a leave, a medical leave,

is a reasonable accommodation for a disability under both RSA 354A and the ADA.

If a medical leave...

I understand that they might be that, and I agree with you,

but how does that make her a qualified person under the act?

Because she could have eventually received a note

releasing her to return to work with no restrictions.

She was seeking to do that.

She needed more time for that.

That's what she was asking for.

It was a reasonable accommodation to extend that time to address that.

If she had...

It seems you're basing a lot of your argument on the fact that she had this note from the seventh

and that she actually was back at work for four days until the 12th,

and then she was sent home at that time

before the letter from Dr. Reiser appeared?

Correct.

She was sent home, said,

you have to go to the doctor and get cleared of all restrictions.

Her doctor said,

I can't clear you of all restrictions at this time,

so what I will do is I will provide you with a note releasing your week.

So what you're saying is that the sequence matters here

and the fact that she got this ER note, gave it to her employer,

and it worked for four days.

Asking for accommodation did not receive them.

That makes her a qualified individual, regardless of what happens after that.

Well, she worked from May 8th to May 12th

with the restrictions that her doctor had imposed on her.

She was not bending or stooping.

That matters in dispute,

but there's been lots of evidence produced by my client,

that the trial court ignored and skipped

the end when she was forced on a medical leave.

At that time, that's what shows she was a qualified individual at that time,

which the trial court completely ignored.

The trial court had no analysis of whether she was a qualified individual

when she requested the initial accommodations of no bending, lifting, or stooping.

Instead, the trial court focuses on the accommodation she requests of time off

so she can meet the requirement of no restrictions.

It is that that they improperly ruled

that because she had not yet received a note

clearing her to return to work with no restrictions,

she's not qualified individual,

which, again, if that were the law,

any time anyone was out with a leave for a medical condition,

they would be not qualified,

and their employer would be free to fire them immediately

because anyone who is suffering from a condition

that hospitalizes or momentarily prevents them from being able to do

the essential functions of their job,

according to the trial court's analysis,

could immediately be terminated.

That's not the law. Leaves are a reasonable combination.

And what authorizes the employer to require the employee

to come back with no restrictions?

There's nothing that authorizes the employer

to require them to come back with no restrictions.

They're a sliding scale,

like if there are some minor restrictions

that can be accommodated,

I mean, who and when does that discussion or analysis happen?

Or did it happen here?

It didn't. That's the problem, Your Honor,

is that the company refused to have that analysis

or have that conversation with her.

She was saying, hey, I'm working. I've been successfully working.

I asked my supervisor, you know, under oaths,

she admitted that she was successfully working

during that time period.

Let me go back to work.

No people with restrictions can't work here.

That was the company's policy.

That's what she went to go correct with the doctor's notes.

And that is what, skipping to the end,

are ignoring three quarters of compliance case

that the trial court based their decision off of,

again, misdictating the law

and that, you know, leaves are reasonable accommodations

and there was no undue burden analysis applied to this.

Were the, was what the employer did

or her supervisor, Ms. Dumay,

what she did from May 9th to May 12th,

a reasonable accommodation in your view?

Yes.

And she successfully completed all functions of her job

with that. They had no problem with that.

But wasn't then she, your Mrs. Crow,

a qualified individual by disregarding the instructions

on the discharge note from Littleton?

That's, that is not what Mrs. Crow is alleging.

She's not claiming she disregarded the instructions.

She claiming she followed the instructions.

She did not,

That's a genuine issue of material fact, right?

Exactly.

That's your argument, right?

Exactly.

A jury should determine that.

She's claiming she was able to do the job

bending, lifting and stewing.

That has been put out there.

There's evidence that supported including the fact

that her supervisor admitted she was performing the job

successfully during that time period.

The Appalachian Stitching Company disputes that.

Okay.

But that's something that a jury needs to determine.

The trial court tries to address this saying

while the essential functions are set by the employer.

That's true in that the functions are set.

She's not claiming,

Oh, I really didn't have to use the hot glue machine

or I didn't really have to do X, Y or Z task

that was assigned to me.

She did all of the tasks.

Simply, I can do it without bending, lifting and stewing.

That's her assertion.

So did the nature of the work that she did

between the eighth and the 12th change at all

either by her own volition or by some accommodation?

Not really, Your Honor.

I mean, the one thing she asked for is

it routinely involves going between standing

and sitting positions.

They pretty much did that anyway.

So, you know, she may be slight flexibility

on whether she's standing or sitting,

but as admitted in the record,

she did all of the functions of her job.

So there were no issues with how she was working

from the eighth to the 12th.

Rather, it's this factual dispute

of whether she was in fact bending, lifting or stewing,

which, you know, her assertion

and as in the record, she wasn't.

She was able to do it without bending, lifting and stewing.

And that's a factual question, jury must decide.

All right, any other questions?

You don't have to use all your time.

I think, yeah, I'm getting the yellow light now.

I think I've said my piece,

so I thank you so much for taking the time

to listen to me today.

Good morning.

My name is Gary Burt,

and I represent Appalachian stitching the appellee

in this case.

I've got to admit, I think the court

is now going to be required to go back

and look at the record very closely,

although it's just as Hicks just said,

Judge Bornstein already did that

because what was represented to you right now

was factually inaccurate.

Let's go back to what happened here.

She texted her HR person on the seventh

and said, I've been at the hospital with my father,

my husband, and I'm going to take the day off okay.

HR says, fine, but bring in a doctor's note

or have a doctor's note sent.

She comes in on the eighth,

does not present the doctor's note,

even though she obviously has it

because the discharge obstruction is dated on the seventh.

She comes back on the ninth,

again does not bring the doctor's note

despite HR's request that she present one.

Is there a timing requirement?

Is there a time limit?

For her to bring the note.

I think, yeah, as an employee,

if your employer says I need to know

that you're okay to work.

They allowed her to stay at work without the note.

Does that imply they don't bring it tomorrow

or by the end of the week?

I don't think it implies anything other than the fact

that she purposefully withheld the note.

She knew what the note said.

The note said no bending, stooping, or lifting.

The essential requirement of the job...

Wasn't that factual that maybe she left it at home?

Maybe she forgot it?

Maybe she was...

I suppose you could draw that assumption if you wanted to.

But the essential functions of the job

were lifting, moving freely,

bending, et cetera.

Is there any dispute that she did that during those five days

or that she did not fulfill those functions?

I don't think that's the issue.

The issue is whether a doctor told her not to

because then placing the employer

in the horrible position of either accepting

what the doctor says true

and possibly causing more injury to her

or, more importantly, injury to a co-worker.

There was a doctor's note that said she could not perform

the essential functions of the job

that she withheld from the employer.

And once the HR person saw that on the...

10th, I believe it was, or the 12th,

she said, you've got to get a note

clearing you to return to work.

As I read this, looking at Judge Bornstein's findings

of material...

He says the material facts show that on May 9th,

the plaintiff told Jume, I guess, her supervisor

that she'd been diagnosed with sciatica

and she would need to sit for a limited amount of time.

And it wasn't until the 12th that there was a letter

saying she should stay out of work.

So what happened is on the 12th

she gives the supervisor, the HR person,

the discharge note, and then apparently goes

to either the ER or Dr. Narik to its office

and gets a note from him to try and get back to work.

After she's been sent home.

I'm sorry?

After she was sent home.

Yeah.

And she gets a note from Dr. Reisen.

He says, no work.

He doesn't even qualify any longer.

He says, no work.

And then seven days later, he sends another note

saying, I'm still holding her out of work.

Oh, by the way, she might qualify for FMLA

and we have to explain to him that she doesn't.

So was there any accommodation taken

between the 8th and the 12th?

No.

She continued to work under the

misrepresentation quite frankly

that she could meet the essential functions of the job.

Well, but it says here that she told her supervisor

that she would need to sit until the pain was relieved

and she could go back to a standing position.

But isn't that a factual allegation she's making?

Yes, but the ER note said,

no stupid bending and lifting.

The employer gets to set what the essential functions

of the job are.

The employee doesn't get to do that.

The employer gets to do that

and that's the case law quite clearly.

So when the employer says to be an assembler,

you have to be able to lift freely, move freely,

bend, et cetera.

And you get a doctor's instruction saying,

you can't do that.

Then you're not performing the essential functions of the job.

So at that point, if she had brought the letter in

and the time would be able to send her there,

would the employer have the ability,

was the employer required to make an accommodation for her?

I didn't quite understand the question yet.

So if Ms. Crowe had brought the letter

to the HR representative on a timely basis,

was the employer at that point

required to provide her with an accommodation?

The discharge note you're talking about?

No, because she's not a qualified employee

because under the law, a qualified employee

has to be able to perform the essential functions of the job.

And the discharge note precluded her

from performing what the employer said

were the essential functions of the job.

We don't want jurors, certainly don't want judges,

to be deciding what the essential functions of any job are.

The employer sets those in the workplace.

And these functions, by the way, have been set forth,

I think since 2006 or something like that.

Does it matter that she had performed

the essential functions of the job

since her hiring a year before?

Did she before this incident perform the essential functions?

Does that matter at all?

No, because now a doctor said you cannot do it.

The doctor didn't say she cannot do it.

On the 9th, the doctor just said there's a limitation.

You can't, you can only sit for a limited amount of time.

No, the doctor.

That's what that says from the discharge summary.

The discharge summary says no bending,

stooping, or lifting.

For a week.

Right.

And those are essential functions of the job.

So can the employer fire that person

because they can't perform it for one week?

I don't know.

That's not the issue in this case.

The issue here was she could not perform

the essential functions of the job.

She went back to her doctor to get cleared.

He clearly was unwilling to clear her and said no word.

I need more time.

So he put her out for a week or two.

Well, he put her out for one week.

And then he put her out for another week

and requested FMLA or paperwork on FMLA.

She did not correspond with the employer

those next two weeks or a week.

And under their rules, if you don't talk to us

for three successive days as to what your intent are,

we can let you go.

There's nothing prohibitive about that.

Well, she asserts that she did reach out

on the 23rd and 24th.

She said she tried to call.

That's what she said.

But doesn't that present a factual issue

as to whether that actually happened

and what the company did in response?

Trying to call and actually making contact

or do two different things.

That's why I say the record.

That's why I say the record is so important here

because there is no evidence

she actually made contact with the HR.

So does this whole thing turn on I called

as opposed to I tried to call?

If she actually called, but that makes no difference?

No.

You know, honestly, because what's the violation of law?

She is not a qualified...

But if I call the appliance repairman

and I can't get through, I've still tried to call.

But the qualified individual,

she's not a qualified individual still.

So what accommodation do they have to make for her?

The answer is none.

You don't have to sort of hide the ball

and sit back and wait and wait for her

to navigate these rules.

Rules are the rules.

She's not a qualified individual in there

but she doesn't enjoy the protection

of either the ADA or the state statute,

the corollary state statute.

That is the clear law.

That's black letter law under all the cases

that unless you're a qualified individual,

you're not entitled to an interactive dialogue,

you're not entitled to any accommodations under the law.

No good faith communication

between employer and employee.

It's still not a qualified individual.

Absent that.

You don't get any remedy.

Why isn't what happened on,

if it's May 8th or May 9th,

with DuMai sufficient to establish

that reasonable accommodations could be made?

Because her doctor said,

no betting, stupid or lifting,

those are essential functions of the job

as set forth by Appalachian Teaching

and her doctor said she can't do that.

But they didn't know that until

the employer didn't have that information

until the 12th.

She worked from the 8th to the 12th

after communicating with DuMai

that she had the back problem,

sciatica, and she needed some,

she couldn't sit as much as she normally could.

Why isn't that enough to make her a qualified individual?

It may have been for a short period of time,

but once they got the truth, quite frankly,

that she wasn't supposed to be bending,

stupid or lifting.

I don't think she's a qualified individual there.

I don't think this court wants to encourage people

from withholding from the employer

that medical information that the employer is requesting

and allow somebody to kind of gut it out and work,

possibly exposing them to worse injury,

obviously the workers' complaints arise from it,

as well as possibly causing injury to a fellow employee.

Let's assume, let's change the facts a little bit.

Let's assume that a forklift operator

had restrictions about how long

that forklift operator could sit in the vehicle

and operate the forklift, doctor's restrictions.

He doesn't tell his employer about it.

Employer asks him, he doesn't tell him.

Instead, he's driving a forklift

and causes serious injury to some other person

because of those restrictions.

Is that what the court wants to encourage?

That's certainly not what the law says.

The law says you must be a qualified employee,

which means you must be able to perform

the essential functions of the job.

And it doesn't allow you, essentially,

hide the fact that your doctor said you can't

perform the essential functions of the job

and therefore receive the status

of a qualified employee.

That is the issue of whether she can perform

the essential functions of her job,

ultimately a factual determination.

Absolutely not. Absolutely not.

It's the employer

that establishes what the essential functions of the job are.

And then when the doctor says

that I prohibit you,

preclude you from performing those functions,

then you're no longer able to perform those essential functions.

So whenever an employee is placed out of work

by his or her physician,

you're no longer a qualified employee

and they're not entitled to the protections of the ADA.

If the reason for placing them out of work

established or makes it

so they cannot perform the essential functions of the job,

they're not a qualified employee.

The essential functions of the job are unreviewable.

Essentially.

What's established by the employer,

regardless of whether it's reasonable or not,

they're unreviewable.

As Judge Bornstein said,

and frankly I should have just submitted his opinion as my brief,

he said absent circumstances

that do not appear in the summary judgment record,

it is the employer not the employee

who determines essential functions.

And what he's referencing there is if an employer

creates the last moment,

sometimes afterwards, fictitious restrictions

as a pretext for a firing,

those are prohibited.

But that's why...

Is that issue?

But whether the employee can't perform the essential functions

is a question of fact that goes to a jury, correct?

Unless a doctor says no.

I don't think a jury gets to override

a doctor's instructions anymore

than the employer should be forced

to override the doctor's instructions.

It creates havoc in the workplace.

Except here we have her doing the job for four days.

But she wasn't supposed to.

We're not supposed to encourage that type of activity.

Just like in my forklift operator example.

They want somebody to hide the information

of what their doctor said.

They go forward and perform the functions

and threaten harm to themselves.

She wanted to work. She wanted a job.

Isn't that a perfectly understandable response?

The doctor says, oh, you shouldn't go to work.

But she says, well, I can do that.

I need to honor my commitment to my employer.

Well, and then you put the employer at risk

because she's disregarding her doctor's instructions.

And that's not reasonable.

But she was able to do the work, right?

She performed the job.

Whether she was exposing herself

or others to further harm

is the question.

And the employer's not

placed in that wicked, so to speak.

I mean, if she cannot perform

what the employer says

are the essential functions of the job

based upon a doctor's restrictions,

then she's not a qualified employee.

But she was performing the essential functions of her job

as she was overriding her doctor's instructions.

And that, I don't think this court wants to encourage.

And at the end of the three weeks,

the ER says out for a week,

doctor says out for a week,

doctor says again out for a week.

Now she's recovered to a point.

She reapplies?

Reapplies? Absolutely.

Reapplies.

I mean, again,

you can't, in my humble opinion,

cannot impose upon an employer

or put them into the absence choice

of disregarding a doctor's note

and potentially exposing the employee

to further harm or injury

or a co-employee

simply under the circumstances.

That's not the law.

It can't be the law. That would be an absurd result of the law.

She didn't present the note.

Maybe it was because she felt some obligation to her employer.

But we can't encourage that.

The note clearly said

she could not perform the essential functions of the job,

no bending, stooping, or lifting.

And those were essential functions of her job

at that place of employment.

And the employer then was,

frankly, the employer at that point

was acting conscientiously and,

look, you can't work

until you have a note to clear your work.

Wasn't the instruction from the employer,

I believe it was Ms. Wiggett

to the employee to go get

a letter from the doctor with no restrictions,

the equivalent of

exactly what the ADA prohibits,

which is no restrictions

requiring an employee

to be 100% healed?

I don't believe that was the information.

Again, you'll have to go through the record.

I do not believe that that was what

told Crow.

And, in fact,

the doctor's note is she can't work

when she's asked to go back

to get a note to return to work.

She cannot work.

One week, and then the next week,

I'm still holding her out.

That's two weeks.

But it said she could not work.

So we have a situation where

the first note says you can't do

what the employer has indicated

are the essential functions of the job.

Then you have a subsequent note saying

you can't work at all because you've got sciatica.

And we don't know why that note was written, by the way.

There's nothing in the record

but the doctor or otherwise

as to why he wrote what he wrote.

And then you have the second note

where, again, he says

I'm continuing to hold her out of work.

Oh, by the way, can you send me some paperwork on FMLA?

And we have to explain to him that she doesn't qualify.

Thank you, Attorney Burke. Time's up.

Thank you, Council. Case is submitted.
