This is case 2021, 0142 Thomas S. Wood et al. versus town of Raymond.

Good afternoon. My name is attorney Sharon Rondo, and I am here representing the appellants

and the plaintiffs below, Thomas and Donna Wood, who are here with me today. The appellants

filed a petition for declaratory action in the Rockingham Superior Court to have the town

of Raymond declare Audet Road as a classified highway. Their action was dismissed on a motion

to dismiss without hearing and without giving them the opportunity to provide the evidence

and facts and basically make their argument and have their day in court.

But how do you, as a matter of law, get around the release and agreement that was before the

court? What is the legal theory that gets you around that?

I think what gets us around the release is the fact you have to look at the release

in its whole, and the courts generally look at it as a contract.

That's a legal question, right? That's a legal question.

That is a legal question. And paragraph 6 of that agreement indicates that this agreement

applies only to the single use proposed by Audet and no further subdivision or development

of this property is privileged under the agreement. The suggestion is that the town not only repudiated

that agreement, but breached that agreement when they permitted additional development on

the property thereafter. And after the agreement...

Okay, that wasn't in your petition. It is in the objection to the motion

to dismiss. The facts and the petition are that the town maintained the road consistently

for a period in excess of 20 years after the agreement was signed.

Additionally, and that's in the petition of paragraphs 14 and 15, additionally, the state

of New Hampshire provided funds to the town for Audet Road as a Class 5 highway.

Chapter 20 indicates that the town consistently performed maintenance from 1988 and forward.

The town clearly was acting as if Audet Road was a Class 5 highway.

Well, that would seem to me to be perhaps a mistake. It was a benefit to your clients

and their perhaps predecessors entitled, but it doesn't seem to undermine the force

of the recorded agreement that your clients had noticed of.

I think what undermines the force of the recorded agreement are the two subdivisions

that the town itself approved. One in 1989, which is mentioned in paragraph 13

to the objection to dismiss, motion to dismiss, and the plan itself is recorded

in the appendix of page 38. There's a second plan, two years later, after the agreement

in 1999 that's mentioned in paragraph 19 of the objection and is recorded in the appendix

of pages 62 and 63. If you look at the release as a whole, and it says there should be

no further development, doesn't the town, by approving those two subdivisions,

violate the agreement themselves?

And what legal theory, even if that were true, what legal theory would afford your client

declaratory relief? What legal theory would afford your client declaratory relief

in this case?

In this case, they're asking that the Class 5 highway that's been treated

as a Class 5 highway continue to be treated as a Class 5 highway.

The court, the town has...

I know what they're asking, but what theory? Can you cabinet for me?

If the contract is breached, then the contract doesn't exist.

And the town has maintained this road and treated it as a Class 5 highway.

So the release and agreement are irrelevant. And therefore, I mean, they asked for injunctive

relief for the maintenance to continue, which they didn't get.

But certainly, if they've treated it as a Class 5 highway for all these years, why

can't it be determined to be a Class 5 highway?

I mean, you look at the facts of the case, the facts and circumstances of the parties,

and here, granted, the agreement was on their deed.

It was recorded, the agreement and release are recorded at the registry of deeds.

It's public knowledge. However, if in fact the town violated paragraph 6 of the agreement

and permitted additional development, they breached the agreement.

Wouldn't that just be a cause of action for your clients or the predecessors entitled

as opposed to giving you relief on a completely different issue?

I mean, they could have gone into court and tried to enforce that agreement when the town

planned to subdivide that property. That's what the remedy would have been, right?

The predecessor, I don't know what the predecessors' title did at the time.

I don't know what notice, they should have got notice of butters to the subdivision.

But under Tora Mayo, your clients can't be barred from bringing this claim just because

their predecessors may have not risen up at some point in time.

Correct. And really, the essence of your client's claim is implied dedication under

Hershey-Klonsky. At this point in time, that is their strongest argument, yes.

Is that the town basically over by the years of doing the repairs and taking care of the

property, dedicated the road, by our clients and the other four owners on the road, accepting

the town to take what they were doing, repair it, repair culverts.

Accepting money from the state per mile of public code.

So in effect, the town accepted and dedicated it and it's a class five highway.

I don't think the release precludes when a town violates an agreement, doesn't further

development regardless of anyone objects to it or not, and then takes money from the

state to repair it and on their maps they show it as a class five highway.

Twenty years later, say, well actually it was thirty years after the agreement, but twenty

years after the plaintiffs purchased the property, say, oops, we made a mistake.

At the time of this agreement, it was not a class five highway, right?

Correct. Was it class six?

It was. It was not a class five highway.

And isn't there some sort of required procedure in order to turn a class five, a class six

highway into a class five highway?

I think my client's position is that through the dedication and acceptance, it was changed

into a class five highway.

And the dedication is by conduct, right, alone?

Yes.

That's what you're alleging?

Yes.

Conduct alone.

Thank you.

The subdivision approvals indicate that at least a section of the road would be accepted as

public once the development was built.

The plan indicated that there would be a twenty-five foot right of way, deeded to the town.

The town needs fifty feet for a highway.

Audet, by through the agreement, Audet Road was to be a minimum of twenty-four feet,

so when you take the twenty-four feet, add the twenty-five foot right of way, you've got

the fifty feet for a road.

Can you just clarify for me the subdivisions that subsequently occurred after the recording

of this agreement, were they out of the same parcel that was subject to this agreement?

Is this the land that the Audets owned at the time that was being later subdivided, or is

it other property on the road?

I believe that some of it was land that was owned by the Audets from my subtitles.

And subject to this, so it was part of the land described in this deed?

It is not.

It was other property.

That agreement and that deed dealt with the one lot that was given, that was purchased

by the plaintiffs.

So the further subdivision was on a different parcel, owned by Audet or not?

Audet, from my title research, Audet owns some of it.

I don't know about the rest of it.

And it was further in, if you will, along Audet Road, the subdivision then in the

initial subdivided parcel that your clients now own.

The initial subdivision was for a parcel before the clients, the plaintiffs.

The other was behind and around.

So had they been built and those dedication by plan been accepted and built out, you'd

have a section in the middle, arguably not public, in front of your client's property?

Client's property is at the end, so that...

Well, it's always been a road, right?

It's just whether it's a class six road or a class five road, is that right?

It's a private road, yes.

Private road?

Private road.

Or a class six road?

Private road, sorry.

Okay, so it's never been...

This road that we're talking about has never been a class six road.

Not to my knowledge.

I think it's ever been a public road.

So the only lot that's encumbered, as it were, by this agreement is the lot that

your clients own now.

Correct.

And you don't know whether some of the subdivisions were also out of this lot that was encumbered

by this agreement.

You don't know that.

The plans that were recorded after the agreement did not reference the agreement or that it

was a private road.

They just showed Audet Road.

There was a subsequent property conveyed from the second subdivision that did not refer to

this agreement.

It's not in the record I researched the title myself and saw that it was not there.

Just so I understand to the extent that these two additional subdivisions violate paragraph

six of the release in agreement, your position is that is a breach and therefore renders the

rest of the release in agreement void?

Yes.

If the town breached their obligation.

But it's not their obligation.

Paragraph six applies to Ms. Audet.

Ms. Audet cannot further develop the property.

It doesn't prevent the town from subsequently taking a different arrangement down the road.

Well, it says further subdivision and development are not privileged under this agreement.

So it would seem that.

So it applies solely to the single use proposed by the owner, Ms. Audet at that point in

time.

Correct.

And it doesn't allow her to further develop or subdivide the property.

That's the way I read that provision.

Am I reading it wrong?

But if the town permits her, doesn't if the town grants permission for subdivision, aren't

they then breaching this agreement?

No.

It's just saying that this agreement that they're entering to back on in June of 1988

doesn't provide her with a right or privilege to first subdivide the property.

They need to have come to a different agreement.

That's fairly reasonable.

I think it probably happens all the time in municipal government.

But if the statute requires that for a town to issue a building permit on a private road,

they have to enter into this agreement as the town, I believe, has argued in their

objection and motion to dismiss, then doesn't the town also have to

do the same thing for the other parties on the private road?

And if they don't, aren't they burdening this lot with the maintenance and taking care

of a road where they have now allowed other homes to be built, another

subdivide vision added, and added burden on the road.

But there's only one agreement for this lot, and that person is burdened with

having to care for the road.

For the other four owners, the court and the town agree, are they on that road?

The other four owners were allowed full building permits, if you will,

based on their being frontage on a town road.

Right.

Or the other three owners, if you're four or three, four.

If they were permitted building, given building permits with the assumption

that a debt road is a class five highway, then isn't the town precluded

for arguing that it's not?

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Turn around.

May it please the court?

My name is Carrie Roman from Roman Woodson.

On behalf of the Pelley town of Raymond, I just want to clarify a few

things first, and I'm happy to take questions at any time.

The paragraph six in these release agreements, which in the town municipal

world we deal with all the time, is meant to deal with your black

burrow case.

That was a case where there was a question about whether or not the

select men could issue these building permits and these agreements on a

lot by lot basis.

So that's why that provision is in there.

It's meant to say that if just because we've granted it here,

we're not obligated to grant it on the whole road.

That's all that that language is in there for.

And if you look at that case, you'll see that that's the reason for it.

The other thing I wanted to clarify is that under, say, 674, planning

boards grant subdivision approvals on private roads all the time.

And they are allowed to and they often do.

And in this case, they may have, although none of this is before

you, nor was it before the trial court yet.

And wasn't it before the trial court?

Because they granted it as a matter of law based on the release of

motion to dismiss.

Right.

But my understanding is the town was allowed to submit documentation

with its answer, with its motion to dismiss.

So why wouldn't the petitioners, the plaintiffs, be allowed to

rebut that with some of the evidence that they have, which

might include those subdivisions requiring a dedication?

Your Honor, the documentation that the town submitted was

two items and two items only.

It was deed.

And that deed was specifically referenced by page and book number

in the complaint.

So the deed was part of the complaint for all intents and

purposes.

And then the deed itself, which was referenced in the

complaint, references by book and page this agreement.

So those documents don't deal with what may have happened

afterwards.

Correct.

And the question of dedication by action, the Hirsch case,

I mean, wouldn't that require some evidence?

Our position, Your Honor, is that it does not.

And that even considering all of the infer...

So primarily I say that the court couldn't consider that

additional information because it was a motion to dismiss.

But let's put that aside for a minute.

And for sake of argument, say that the court could have

and did properly consider all of that information.

That was submitted by the plaintiffs.

And although the motion to dismiss states otherwise in the

motion for reconsideration, which the court denied,

the court said denied for all of the reasons stated in the

town of Raymond's objection.

And my objection specifically laid out that none of those

additional documents, even if considered, are relevant.

So the court considered that argument.

They're not relevant for three reasons, Your Honor.

And this is the legal principle of this case that I

think controls everything here.

In order to get outside of those four corners of that

release and agreement, you either have to have ambiguous

language.

And here I argue that language is not ambiguous.

This is a release and agreement under 674-41 that towns

use all the time and tracks the language of the statute.

But moreover than that, in the plaintiff's objection to the

motion to dismiss, Appendix 32, paragraph 11, they state

that the agreement is unambiguous.

So that's not disputed.

This agreement in release is unambiguous.

Help me here.

If there's a road and there's an agreement in the middle of

the road for one lot, it will remain a private road.

And then the other two ends of the road become public

through subdivision or layout or something.

You're telling me that that person in the middle can

never seek a declaration or a layout for that section of

road.

It has to remain private forever?

No, Your Honor.

In my world's absence some extraneous circumstance that I

have yet to encounter in my 16 years practicing municipal

law, you would never have a situation where you have one

road, public, travel on a private and then public again

if the two ends that are now public were made public

by maintenance, which is the argument here.

That's the argument here.

And that's also why it's important.

If they're laid out through a subdivision and accept it and it

gets built, that would be a dedication of that section.

If there was a statutory layout, I suppose there could be a

circumstance where you have a layout of part and a layout

of another and you ignore that middle.

But legally, I don't know why you would do that, but you

could.

Could these folks ask for a layout of a section of road

or would the town move to dismiss that?

There's a petition layout process.

And it requires one petitioner.

It would not be barred by this road agreement.

No, because this road agreement is, it would not, your

honor, because this road agreement says that they are

releasing the town from the obligation of maintenance and

that it's a private road.

And their entire argument is based on maintenance and that

the town is obligated because of past maintenance to

continue to maintain the road.

If they're going to do a statutory layout petition, that

is a completely different process not based on maintenance,

your honor.

And that's, oh, go ahead, your honor.

I was just wondering, you were making a point of ambiguity.

My memory is, yeah, my memory is that they did raise

ambiguity in the motion for reconsideration.

And if they did, would that be sufficient to get these

facts and documents in that the trial court didn't

consider?

If you agreed with them, yes.

But I, two things, one, I would hope that this court would

agree with the trial court that this document was not

ambiguous because there are thousands of these written

just like this right now all over the state.

And they're based on the statute.

And they're based on a lot of, you know, attorneys kind of

putting it together, that language.

But if you look at Appendix 32, paragraph 11, the

plaintiffs appendix, it states clearly that this

is unambiguous.

So I'm not sure about that reference, your honor.

You were making.

Page one, third of the other two.

The other two is that the only other way to open up this

agreement and look at the town's actions, because that's

what I'm saying, is that we look at this agreement and

this agreement only.

All of these other actions are irrelevant because the

second point is you can only open up this agreement and

look at the town's actions if there's an estoppel.

And that's something that the plaintiffs have argued,

right, that there's, the town is a stopped from

arguing that this is a private road, that this is not

a private road, and they're also a stopped from

having the obligation to maintain it.

But as this court has held many times before,

estoppel requires reliance and it requires to their

detriment.

So here you have their deed, which specifically

references the agreement that says this road is

private, and then also in their appendix,

91, there's a planning board letter on their behalf

from 2006 where they say it's our understanding

this is a private road.

So they cannot argue detriment or that they

were unaware of the facts.

They are arguing that the town's conduct made this a

Class 5 road, but they have no estoppel here.

They can't meet those elements.

It's a matter of law.

There's no fact finding that has to be done.

Prescription, or is that your third point?

Well, so prescription, although those facts aren't

yet before you, they can't meet prescription

because under the 231 statute, you have to

have 20 years of adverse continuous and public

use before 1968 or 1967.

And in their petition, the earliest use and

maintenance they allege is in the 1977.

Does that block their claim under the Hershey

case?

In my opinion, for prescription, yes, but not

for implied acceptance and dedication.

Right.

So again, implied acceptance and dedication,

your argument is, is barred by that agreement.

That's right.

We don't even get into it because there's

no ambiguity.

So once you have an agreement, no matter what

the town does, accepting money from the state,

taking care of the road, whatever, you have

this agreement and so you can never have

implied acceptance and dedication?

These petitioners, because they took this

property with express understanding of this

agreement, cannot get outside the terms of

that agreement.

I'm not saying that someone else couldn't

on the road, but these petitioners signed

a release and they're living in the home

that was built as a result of this release.

So ironically, if the town wanted to, if it

gets remanded, they could file a counterclaim

saying, you've repudiated the agreement,

you accepted this building permit and now

you're suing us saying we're obligated

to maintain the road.

And they've kind of turned that against

us, which brings me to my third point

quite easily, that they've argued

repudiation.

The first time I saw that, your honors

was in their reply brief, but I will argue

your point nonetheless.

They argued that the town's actions have

repudiated this agreement and therefore

it's not valid.

So I heard today for the first time that

paragraph 6 of the agreement, they

repudiated that, but I think I've

addressed the reason for paragraph 6.

It was not to say that the town can't

ever deal with other properties

separately.

But also, in order to repudiate

an agreement, as your honors know,

there has to be an obligation that

that party who's being accused of the breach

has not fulfilled.

That's the repudiation.

Either we're not making payments

as we're supposed to or we're doing some

sort of action that says we're not

fulfilling our obligation.

And here, the town fulfilled its

obligation.

They granted the building permit.

The act of repudiation that they're

complaining of is the town giving them

the benefit of plowing the road.

Now, that's either a mistake,

we haven't gotten into the record yet,

or it was a courtesy, as you know,

from living in New Hampshire that happens a

lot, but it's not a repudiation of the

agreement.

And based on the allegations and the

arguments they've made, in my review of

the case law, this is an agreement

and a release.

It's a contract.

It's not ambiguous.

There's no estoppel because there's

no detriment and there's no

reliance, and there's no repudiation.

Those are the only three legal

principles I can see to look outside

the four corners of this document.

And I think that's one of the

actual clarifications.

Did other landowners on the road

sign agreements and release

similar to this?

I do not know one way or the other,

Your Honor.

I did a cursory search at the

beginning of this case, but our

records, I mean it's, there may be,

but I don't know.

I can't answer that one.

I can tell you though, Your

Honor, that some of the plans

that were recorded, specifically one

of the plans that was recorded

and referenced earlier, in

1989, notes, that's when the

plaintiffs were talking about the

strip of land that was conveyed to

widen the road ultimately.

That was a subdivision that never

happened, but that was the

purported intent.

But now it proved it on the

condition that there be a strip

of land to widen the road?

Those facts are not before this

court or the trial court.

I don't know that, Your Honor,

that was approved by the

planning board.

Yes.

But the select board are the ones

or the town meeting are the ones

that can make a road a road.

The planning board can just set up

that process as you know, but that

plan notes Audet Road and it says

status unknown.

So although I can't tell you right

here now if there are other, there's

only four other properties and only

three have buildings on them, or

maybe there's four, five and four

have buildings on them.

That plan says status unknown.

But we know that they

receive building permits.

They must have.

I don't agree it was a private

road or somebody considered them

to have frontage on a town road.

Not necessarily, Your Honor.

Unfortunately in my world,

building permits are granted on

class six and private roads

without a finding that it's

on a town road and it just, it

happens.

So that's not allowed under the

law.

I don't agree with that.

I don't agree with that.

I don't agree with this or it just

happens.

It happens and it's not supposed

to happen.

But there may be the agreement

here.

I just don't know.

Shouldn't the trial court have

permitted the plaintiff and

plaintiffs an opportunity to

amend under RKC, RG versus

Barnes, particularly given the

unusual procedural

setting of this case where the

plaintiff has a reference to the

deed.

First, Your Honor, I respectfully

disagree that it wasn't part of

the pleading because the book and

page was, I mean, this is a case

where...

The deed was referred to by

book and page but not the

agreement.

And then the agreement was in the

deed by book and page.

But answer your question, Your

Honor, I don't see what amending

the complaint would have done

because if they had argued

it was ambiguous because they

have already stated that it's

not, which I think is correct.

It's not ambiguous.

A stop-all, they couldn't

allege accurately a stop-all

given that they took the deed

knowing it was private and

given this subsequent letter

which is in the record at 91

saying that they believe it to

be private.

And the repudiation argument,

like I said, the only way they

could amend it to change

is that none of them apply as a

matter of law.

The facts don't matter.

It's almost as if you had this

road agreement for a private

road.

Let's say the town, let's say the

record showed that they did zero

maintenance, nothing ever.

But they still, these plaintiffs

still wanted to come before the

trial court and say for reasons

that I am alleging this is a

town road for, you know, for

whatever...

The town is accepting money from

the state based on mileage

and allegation.

But there's no allegation of

maintenance or anything like

that.

And then you come forward with

this agreement.

This agreement says it's a

private road.

And it was signed and it says

binding on the errors on the

successors and assigns, which

is the plaintiffs.

And it also says that they

are forever released and

discharged from an obligation

to maintain it.

So we don't even get to the

town's actions and outside of

that agreement, you don't even

get to the town's actions.

You're not precluded from

challenging the status of the

road.

The agreement talks about who

maintains.

But it doesn't prohibit them

from challenging, again, the

status of the road, whether

there might have been a

future or a subsequent implied

dedication.

Your Honor, the...

We...

It's my position that that's

one of...

May I answer the question,

Your Honor?

Yes.

That that's one of the

main reasons why the town

is obligated to continue

maintenance.

There are so many ways to

create class 5 roads, but in

this case, it's all about

maintenance.

And that agreement forever

discharges the town from...

Again, as against these

plaintiffs, from the town

to the town to the town to

the town to the town to the

town to the town to the town

to the town to the town to

the town to the town to the

town to the town to the town.

Your Honor?

Yes.

Those are key decisions

ultimately from plaintiffs

for maintaining the road.

So you can see where it's a

chicken and the egg type

situation.

But in order to get the

class 5 status here, there

has to be maintenance proven

arguably we...

But there has

to be one, and acceptance

writing, which is all

by maintenance, that's what

they're arguing.

a little bit, at least to me,

there's a little bit more to their claim than just maintenance.

Respectful, Your Honor.

I say that you shouldn't even get there

based on the agreement.

I just have two factual questions.

Were any of the subsequent building permits

or subdivisions out of this parcel?

No, Your Honor.

Okay.

And does the town map,

how does the town map list this road as a private road?

We don't have an official town map under the statute.

We have tax maps.

The tax map does show it as a class five road.

However, there is one of at least two other,

if not three other roads in town

that are currently in dispute

where the tax map is an assessor going out

and doing that type of,

that's not the town making a determination

that it's a class five road,

but the town tax map for tax assessment purposes

shows it as a class five road,

erroneously in our opinion.

Thank you very much, Council.

Case is signed.

Well, I think.
