This is case 2021-0350, State of New Hampshire v. Ian Boudreau.

Good afternoon. Turning Johnson, I understand you reserve one minute for rebuttal.

Yes, thank you very much. May it please the court? Christopher Johnson on behalf of Ian Boudreau.

There's two issues in this appeal. I plan to focus on the first, the court's answer to the jury question.

My plan is first to make a couple of points about the law.

Second to make a couple of points about the question the jury asked.

And third to make some points about the answer the court gave.

But I'm happy to take the court questions at any point.

So beginning with the points about the law.

The law established the duty on the part of trial courts to answer questions,

to meet jurors where they are, to dispel confusion and eliminate misunderstandings.

The trial court here, I think, are taking...

How would you enforce the meet jurors where they are requirement?

You know where they are when they ask you a question.

And so the duty is to answer that question.

That's not accurate. You know somebody in the chamber said something that produced a question.

You don't know anything more than that if you're a trial judge.

Well, but I think this court's case law establishes...

When you receive a question, you have to answer it.

The reason the trial court gave the answer it did,

was it articulated this worry about a back and forth or a semantic discussion.

That worry was misplaced.

But when it comes to the standard of reasonable doubt,

our case law is very specific about what trial courts can and cannot do, right?

Sure, yes, yeah. But nevertheless, I mean, there's two principles that I think are in play here.

And one is what is the definition of reasonable doubt?

And second is what does a trial judge do when they get a question that asks,

is finding that he did it more likely than not sufficient to convict?

Would an answer no have been adequate?

I think so.

And is that what the council is looking for below?

The council offered a couple of options, and one was a no,

and another one is a little more elaborated,

but to identify them more likely than not standard is associated in the law

with preponderance of the evidence.

And that is a standard of burden of proof, but it's not one here.

It's either version.

Wouldn't a no, just the simple no, have added to the confusion?

Not necessarily.

I mean, and here it gets to the question of the court seemed to worry that if it gave an answer

that provoked a follow-up question, that would be a problem.

And I don't understand that concern.

This is the opportunity that trial courts have to, when the jury asks a question,

to help them to answer it, to dispel the confusion,

or to eliminate a misunderstanding if there is one.

And here the question the jury asked was different from the question they'd asked for

and required a different answer.

The state suggests that the second question was sort of a renewed effort

to quantify the beyond a reasonable doubt standard.

I'd make two replies.

First, I disagree.

This question sought a yes or no clarification.

It didn't ask for a full-blown alternative definition.

But secondly, even if the state is right,

that they were still trying to get at a quantifying reasonable doubt,

the court should have answered.

Even all the more so, the court needed to dispel that misunderstanding

and by all means don't quantify beyond a reasonable doubt

at the preponderance of the evidence standard.

Secondly, this was not an ambiguous question.

The jury asked, used the words more likely than not,

the words that the law has crafted to describe preponderance of the evidence.

They might as well have asked,

and what would we say if they had asked,

is a preponderance of the evidence burden sufficient to find them guilty?

The court would have had to say no.

And this is functionally the same question.

But even if it's ambiguous, even if, you know,

that take your point, Justice Hicks,

we're not necessarily sure what all 12 minds are thinking in that room.

Granted, granted.

But the court's case law says, even if it's ambiguous,

this is one possible interpretation of the question.

Is some juror in there thinks that the improbable is unreasonable?

And that's just not the law.

Finally, with respect to the answer the court gave,

it didn't dispel the confusion or eliminate the misunderstanding.

There's no reason to think that having their attention directed

for a fourth time to the standard instruction on reasonable doubt

is going to clarify a misunderstanding

that had somehow persisted and survived

after the first three times they'd heard that instruction.

Beginning of the trial, in the general charge,

and the answer to the first question.

At some point, you have to tell them more

when they keep coming with questions.

And for this reason, I think you can't rely on the presumption

that jurors will follow jury instructions and therefore follow the law.

When they ask a question that bespeaks a misunderstanding of the law,

you can't presume that they're going to follow the law.

If the problem is with the jury instruction, how do we resolve that?

I don't think there is a problem with the standard jury instruction.

Except here, clearly it was misunderstood.

It was misunderstood, but I mean,

I'm not here saying that the court needs to change the standard instruction

to dispel every conceivable misunderstanding any jury could ever have about it.

I don't think that's possible.

And it would make the instruction far too long.

Fair enough. The instruction is fine.

We're not criticizing the instruction,

but from time to time jurors struggle and they ask a question

that bespeaks that maybe for this group of 12 people,

the standard instruction, we need a little bit more help.

And when they ask a question that communicates

from bodies of misunderstanding,

the trial judge has to give them that help.

And you can't be confident that they applied the appropriate standard.

When they put forward this hypothesis and get an unhelpful answer,

what we must conclude is that they were left thinking

that this is a matter of individual judgment.

If I as a juror think that the probable is unreasonable,

that's okay. The judge didn't say no.

And that's the concern here.

I mean, that's all that we have.

Unless the court has other questions.

Can you see this as a structural error?

Yeah, the state hasn't raised harmless error,

and I think rightly so,

because if the definition of reasonable doubt was undermined in this way,

such an error can't be harmless.

And how have they raised it?

On page 25, it says harmless.

They're raising it as to the second issue, not as to the first.

And I think harmless error is sort of an issue-by-issue analysis,

because when one argues, when the state argues harmless error,

they talk about the error and why it was harmless,

and they don't do that.

Rightly, I think, for the first issue, because it is a structural error.

And your second issue?

So the second issue, I'm prepared to be satisfied to leave it

as it stands with the brief,

unless the court has questions about it.

Thank you.

Good afternoon.

I want to start first by addressing Chief Justice Donald's question

that he asked Attorney Johnson.

Wouldn't the answer no add to the confusion?

I argue it would add to the confusion.

It would add to the definition of what beyond a reasonable doubt is.

The answer that the court gave is probably the best answer

the court could have given,

and the trial judge referred the jurors back to the instruction.

And there can be no ambiguity or no addition in her answer.

There can be no one can say that she's adding to the definition

by simply referring back to it twice

in answering both questions that the jury asked.

And I think this court would be hard-pressed to rule

that the trial court aired by answering the jury's question

by not veering from the instruction,

which this court has explicitly instructed trial courts to do

when answering the juror's question about reasonable doubt.

As the court is well aware,

the standard to review this instruction

is a sustainable exercise of discretion,

and this court also has to review the answer to the questions

from the perspective of a reasonable juror.

So it's not necessarily a reasonable person or reasonable attorney.

It would be what a reasonable juror would think

or believe in receiving those answers to the questions.

And both answers that the trial court provided

explicitly directed the jurors back

to the original definition they were provided.

If they have further questions or further ambiguities

or wanted a yes-or-no answer,

they could have asked a third question to the trial court

saying, could you answer my question yes or no,

or they could have offered some other quantification

of beyond a reasonable doubt to try to pin down the trial court,

but they did not do that after the second question.

After that second...

I might have figured it was fruitless.

That is possible.

And they might have still been stuck with what they perceived

as a very confusing pack of words.

And what do we do with that

if the jury did not understand what their charge was?

So while we can't speculate

how confused they were not in the room,

mostly because we don't have a question

where they're saying I'm confused or a statement,

but to the extent they were confused at some point,

they resolved that confusion because they did reach a verdict.

This was not hung jury by any sense,

and in fact it was a split verdict,

meaning they did come back not guilty on some of the charges

and guilty on others.

So that indicates that they were able to resolve

whatever issue they had with the instruction

and apply the beyond a reasonable doubt standard

as instructed to every element of every charge

and come back with a decision

guilty on the AFSAs and not guilty on the CSAI charges.

Do you agree if this was error, it was structural error?

I do agree, and that's why I've not raised the harmless error argument

for this particular argument.

But the second argument you're both arguing

is a harmless error analysis.

Yes. I'm arguing that the court can get...

Well, my initial argument obviously is that it's not preserved,

but if this court finds that that issue is preserved

and the record is sufficient, then that error was harmless.

But before we get to harmless error,

I do think this court should consider

that there is a lack of record here

for this court to decide the merits of that issue.

And that's because as we see from the remit case

and even the couple of Powell case,

which is the first circuit case that remit follows

in making its ruling,

both of those cases had a very specific record

for the defendant's answer

to a police officer's question about providing a statement.

Right. And here, so going to that issue.

Yes.

The mention of the defendant's silence

happened during the police officer's testimony

before the state knew whether the defendant

was going to testify or not.

That is true.

Can you have this preemptive sort of impeachment thing going on?

So I think in this case,

we don't know that that was a express invocation

of the Fifth Amendment right because there's no record

for the trial court to have decided that issue

because that objection wasn't raised.

I don't want to qualify it as the correct objection.

But the Fifth Amendment objection was not raised

to that testimony.

The only objections were raised were initially hearsay,

which we all know a defendant's statements are not hearsay,

and a 403 analysis.

And even that 403 analysis was pretty bare.

There was no specific argument made

about why that was overly prejudicial.

The defense just argued it's prejudicial, period.

The trial court gained an understanding

of what that testimony would look like,

and the state equally sort of just said

it's more probative than prejudicial.

And the trial court...

His silence was more probative than prejudicial.

Right. His pre-arrest, pre-Miranda silence

before he knew there was an arrest warrant

and before he was arrested.

What's it probative of?

Well, Your Honor, I don't think

you have to reach that issue in this particular case

because they've raised on appeal a Fifth Amendment argument

to exclude that testimony.

So the 403 analysis is not before us?

No, Your Honor, not based on their brief

or what they've raised in there.

I wish I had an answer to the question.

If it's a Fifth Amendment challenge, though,

is it structural or is that harmless?

Your Honor, based on the remit case,

this court has held that while

a Fifth Amendment violation would be a constitutional violation,

this court can still analyze that violation

under the Harmless Error Doctrine.

And if you look at the Coppola case,

which is cited in Remick, and I have the site,

I think it's 878 F2D 1526,

that case says that for most constitutional violations,

a court can use a harmless error analysis

to look at the trial as a whole

and determine, based on all of the evidence

that was admitted,

is that constitutional violation that occurred harmless.

And granted, that case is a first-market case,

but it is directly cited in the Remick case.

And this court has not overturned

or clarified Remick at all that I could find

since Remick was issued 20 years ago.

But initially,

before we even look at the merits of the Remick analysis,

there is not a sufficient record here to determine

if there is a Fifth Amendment issue

because that objection was not raised.

So this court does not know the explicit statement

that the defendant made.

Well, there was no statement.

We don't know.

Well, he gave no statement to the police.

You're correct. There was no back and forth.

What happened?

You say there's no record to give us context.

Correct. There's no record to give you context

about what he said when he was asked

if he wanted to provide a statement.

So one officer said he declined

and just wanted paperwork and wanted to leave.

The other officer said he did not provide a statement.

We don't know what his specific words were.

Well, I know that the office...

Until closing argument when it was a focus

of closing argument,

comparing his testimony during this trial

and these references to...

he didn't give a statement previously.

That sort of...

I don't know, imbued the lack of statement

with some context.

I think it was a point that was made in closing

but was not a main focus.

And I say that because that argument encompassed...

as a smoking gun.

That might be true

in earlier statements of the closing argument

but the paragraph that explicitly talks about that,

it simply reads,

the defendant did not provide a statement.

That is his right to do so.

So the state again pointed out to the jury

that he had a right not to provide that statement

and then he did not.

And then the next sentence was simply,

he did then testify before you

and provide you a statement here at trial.

And I think that's an important distinction

in Remic because in Remic,

the defendant did not testify

and in this case, the defendant did.

So if the point of that Fifth Amendment doctrine

in Remic is to prevent the jury

from drawing some sort of negative inference

of the lack of a statement,

this defendant did provide a statement

for the jury to consider

when it was deliberating

the charges brought against him.

And the idea of this preemptive impeachment,

not knowing whether the defendant

was going to testify or not.

Or they had the opportunity

to make it relevant, if you will.

Right, but at the same time,

defense did not object either time

and make an argument was

my client's not going to testify.

And neither time did the defense

make an objection and say,

my client said this when the police

asked him if he wanted to make a statement.

So there was no information at any point

in the trial about what he said

or did not say to the police

when they asked him for that

if your honor has no

if the court has no further questions,

I would move just briefly to the harmless error argument.

If this court finds

that this was a violation of the Remic

rule, that error was

harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.

There was both overwhelming evidence

in this case of guilt and there was all

this particular violation was

inconsequential based on the states

or based on this court's

case law in reset

about what inconsequential means

of harmless error. So there was

this trial was an eight day trial

where there were three child victims

who testified about

years and years of

very frequent sexual abuse.

Given that

these girls testified

this little portion in the state's case

in chief about the defendant's lack

of a statement was overshadowed

completely by these three

children's testimony about

the abuse that occurred against them

and also was buttressed

by the lack of cross examination

about any inconsistencies in any

of the testimony they provided

about the elements of the offenses.

So there was some cross examination

about just general credibility

but nothing specific to

well at the CAC you said this

at the same exam you said this

and at trial you said none of that

existed here for these three victims.

Additionally there was a lot of other evidence

for a child sexual assault

but can we consider the image

given the nature of the verdict?

You can consider the images

because I think they go to

one AP's credibility

and they also go to

sort of the environment

that this defendant set up

in being able to execute these sexual assaults

for as long as he did.

The grooming again was not used at trial

but that's that sort of back

and forth of asking for the images

in exchange for being able to do

things that a teenage girl would normally do

leads to this ability of him to normalize

that conversation about sexual assault

with the children and then perpetuate

that sexual assault when he wanted to.

So I think you can consider it

for credibility.

Even though the jury didn't quite it

and with all the child sex images

is that charges right? That is true yes.

In addition

so there was DNA evidence

in this case the defendant Seaman

was found on purple bedsheets that were

on AP's bed and there was testimony

that the three girls shared

bedsheets while they were living with

while they were with the defendant.

There was testimony from

the defendant's son that he remembered

getting up one night to get water

and seeing AP what he defined as

having sex with the defendant

but it was her having vaginal intercourse

with the defendant.

Both the sane nurse

and Dr. Gonzales who

evaluated the children testified

about the assaults

during their medical examinations

and that testimony

corroborated what the girls said about

what specific acts were done to them by the defendant.

The defendant also

testified and provided some corroborative

information. He did deny committing

all of the offenses but he did

corroborate that

that SP had gymnastics

certain nights a week and that

lined up with both SP and AP

testifying that she had gymnastics

and it corroborated AP's testimony

that he had the opportunity

to sexually assault her while SP

was at gymnastics and they were

home alone.

He also admitted

to joking about sexual things

which is making general threesome jokes

with AP and her friend which again leads

to that environment of making this

all normalized. All three children

referred to the sexual assaults

as laying with them

and all three children talked about

having to lay with the defendant

in order to receive things

or to avoid punishment.

So with that if the court has no further questions

I'll address on my brief.

Thank you.

And likewise unless the court has other questions

I don't have anything further.

Thank you very much counsel. This case is submitted.

The court is staying in brief briefing.
