Looks like you won.

I'm not sure where I po- may it please the court.

My name is Daniel Pomeroy.

Here you go.

We're ready for you.

You're up.

This is case 20201013 in the matter of Kelly Goodwin and Adam Goodwin.

Please proceed.

Excuse me?

Please proceed.

Yes.

Thank you, Your Honor.

May it please the court.

My name is Anthony Hartnett.

I'm a practitioner in Dover, New Hampshire.

I represent the appellant respondent in this case.

I want to jump right into the issues.

The first issue that I briefed was the issue with alimony.

And it's my position that there should have been no alimony

ordered in this case for several reasons,

including the fact that there was sufficient income

and resources for the Kelly Goodwin.

Specifically, the court found imputed income of $1,559 per month

that she should be earning.

It also found, and I'm quoting here,

she can readily earn well more than her imputed income.

She had other resources as well.

She had a half interest in a $400,000 house that was recently sold.

She had a half interest in a $200,000 401k plan.

But is she supposed to be spending assets to support herself?

No, but to the extent that income could be generated from those assets.

Is that instantaneous?

Doesn't it take a while to invest and build that stream of income?

It would be.

However, a 401k is reachable for that purpose,

as well as her half interest in this.

Reachable, but again, prior to retirement age it would impose a penalty.

To the extent that the particular program 401k

or the annuity of $65,000 were available,

she might be able to borrow against it

or avail herself of it otherwise.

But admittedly, it's primary purposes for retirement.

In addition to that, she had a defined benefit plan,

a one-half interest in that under the Hodgins formula.

In addition to that, she had some support from the correspondent

who was cohabiting in the Marital Homestead.

He contributed some amount of groceries and utilities,

which wasn't reported on the appellee's financial affidavit.

Did your client report the contributions from his significant other?

There was a footnote, I believe, that indicated

in the financial affidavit, Your Honor,

that did indicate there was a contribution by Lacey Duby,

according to the record.

And that was very cognizant of having to do that.

But in addition to that, you have child support of $2,460 a month

that was ordered by the court.

In addition to that, she was getting the equivalent of $675 a month

in free health insurance, which was provided by Adam's employer.

And that continues until this case the divorce becomes final.

So what do you say her monthly shortfall is based upon the financial affidavit?

You take the pressure that you dispute the trial court,

the trial court's finding that it was about $3,000 of a shortfall for the way?

I believe that, I'm not sure that I can answer that directly.

The issue, it seems to me, in this case,

is whether she had sufficient assets in order to support herself

in the style to which the family had been accustomed over the course of the marriage.

Do you dispute whether the trial court's finding that the husband had the ability to pay alimony

based upon his financial disclosures?

Well, the problem is that the court inflated wrongfully his average gross monthly income,

which gets me into the next phase here under RSA 458C2 Roman numeral 4.

It's my position that there should have been no overtime included in the calculation of his average income.

Should it then be paid as a separate calculated amount of support?

My understanding is it's either included in income

or there can be a job support order periodically as overtime is earned.

I'm referring to the definition of gross income

and it's simply my understanding in my position that the court incorrectly and erroneously included that overtime

in the calculation to come up with over $15,000 a month.

So overtime income is not the income?

I'm saying that yes, overtime, which is occasionally and intermittent or seasonal

and is not really mandatory. In other words, you don't have to work. It shouldn't be included.

I think what the law is trying to do here is to say the 40 hours per week regular pay is what should be used here.

Wasn't there basically undisputed testimony from many sources that your client was constantly working overtime

and if somebody's constantly working overtime, it's not occasional, it's not seasonal,

and therefore it doesn't fall within the exclusion. So shouldn't it be counted if it's constantly?

The statute is silent on that. It really doesn't talk about

whether it's, specifically whether it talks about the occasional nature or the seasonal nature of it.

And it's my understanding that if it's mandatory overtime, it has to be included because it's part of the job.

But if this is volitional, if this is something that's chosen because of the circumstances of the party,

I think it should be correctly, there's justification for excluding that in the calculation.

Do you take issue with the characterization that he was earning overtime constantly?

It wasn't constantly, it was periodic, Your Honor.

Excuse me?

It wasn't constant, it was periodic. He did the best he could to meet the financial necessity of the family.

My plan was that he was going to try to work ahead and get as much saved as possible and then he could back off in his later years.

Obviously that's not going to happen here. The man's in his mid-40s, he's working heavy construction

and as a matter of fact, quoting the court, it's not reasonable to expect him to be able to work so many overtime hours for the next 10 years

by saddling him with $2,000 a month, again with alimony, rising to $3,000 a month over a period of 10 and a half years.

He'll be paying $324,000.

But it would be free to be able to come into court and say that there's been a change in circumstances and therefore the alimony should be adjusted.

If the court had contemplated, okay, let's look 10 years out, this is what he probably can do, but if he can't, then can he go back into court?

Well he certainly can, but the court is saying here in its own words that it's not expected that he's going to be able to hack this to do it.

He just doesn't have the capability. In his mid-40s, he's a foreman, but foremen do the work of their laborers when the laborers don't show up.

He's out there on bridges and roads at all hours of the day and night in all kinds of weather and it's going to, it's back-breaking work that he's just not going to be able to sustain long-term.

I understand that he can come in and file for modification, but off the bat it should have been some recognition of the fact that this man wasn't going to be able to sustain this over a 10.5 year period of time.

I'd like to cite the case of hampers by contrast. In that case, it was a doctor, an emergency room physician at Dartmouth Hitchcock Hospital, and he was making $13,800 a month.

His wife testified that he had additional income, one half of which was equivalent to $14,800, so you have a combined income of this gentleman, of this doctor, of $28,600.

He owned a million-dollar house. He had a trust fund of $15.5 million, and the court ordered him to pay $2,500 a month for 13 years.

After 10.5 years, which is the length of time that Adam would be paying the alimony, Dr. Hampers would have only paid $315,000, so you have the situation where this workman, this former, is being saddled with more than this doctor is being saddled with.

Well, hampers was a very short-term marriage. There seemed to be a lot of factual differences between your client's situation and hampers.

It was, but the sheer amount of financial ability on the part of the doctor, I think, makes it exceptional.

In this particular case, I think there should be some recognition that Adam was paying more than even this doctor was paying.

I would also say that I'm advocating for this court to recognize that the new alimony law that went into effect January 1st should have been implemented by the court.

Did your client make that argument to the trial court?

No, but it was brought up as an issue, and the court decided that it was not going to do that, I think, erroneously.

It did it incorrectly. I think it should have done it because the legislative objective was to get rid of the old, subjective and inconsistent procedure that courts would follow to determine alimony.

And instead implement something much more like the child support guidelines, which was objective, and it was arithmetic, and it was consistent.

So in this particular case, if you look on page 19 of my brief, you'll see that I submitted to the trial court an analysis under the, or at least in the brief,

I submitted an analysis under what it would look like under the new statute, and I believe we actually had a request for finding a ruling.

I'd have to check the appendix to confirm that.

But the point is that we used regular time of approximately $8,000 child support of approximately $2,100.

Kelly's actual report income on her financial affidavit, which, as the court found, was understated and should be imputed at a higher level,

and came out with a figure substantially less than the figure that the court came up with.

My argument is that it should be reinterpreted and reapplied, the figure should be applied under the new alimony law that went into effect on January 1.

As far as child support is concerned, the issues are the same.

It's our position that the court should have focused on a 29-week period of time from April 12 to October 31st of 2020 and focused on regular time only.

On that basis, the average monthly income comes out to approximately $8,000.

If you want to add overtime bonus holiday time, it comes out to approximately $11,000 a month.

And under the point being that the child support should have been reduced,

and our calculation you'll see on our child support guidelines worksheet on pages 40,

I believe it was 85 and 86 of the appendix indicated that the child support order should be about $2,100 and not $2,460.

As far as the parenting time is concerned, the parenting issue of the court, and I'm quoting here,

said that Kelly had an equal ability to provide the children with nurture, love, and guidance, which is contrary to the evidence.

Its implied finding was that Kelly's adulterous misadventures and her result neglect of her family was only relevant to adultery as a fault ground,

but that was unsustainable as a matter of law.

In fact, Justice Douglas in his treatise on section 14.18, quote,

adultery can be considered and, quote, may disqualify if conducted in an indiscreet and damaging manner.

The evidence that we have is legion to that effect.

On page 23 of the brief, we give chapter and verse of the examples of the bad actions by the appellant or Pelly.

The kids were viewed as feral.

Presumably, all these arguments were made to the trial court, right?

The arguments you're making now.

Yes, I believe they were.

And then the trial court.

How can we say that it's an error for the trial court to have reached a different conclusion on the impact of those behaviors, even if true?

How can we say that the court aired in its 18-page, very detailed order?

Well, I understand that the court has broad discretion in these matters, Your Honor.

However, in this particular case, there are eyewitness testimony by representatives from the DCYF,

Police Department, as well as members of the family who testified about the devastating effects of Kelly Goodwin's adultery on the family and the marriage.

And so he really doesn't discuss any of that as far as I can tell in the context of...

Did the trial court take issue with the fact that your client brought the kids into the middle of this litigation and asked them to testify?

I think the trial court did consider it and faulted your client for asking them to do that.

A couple of things.

They were adults at the time that they testified.

These were factual witnesses.

These things actually happened.

They weren't taking sides.

The court incorrectly concluded that.

They didn't claim of their own free will in order to testify and give their rendition of what happened.

But isn't that a classic determination that a trial court makes as opposed to a Pella court?

We can't weigh the credibility of witnesses up here, right?

Yes, I understand that.

However, it seems to me that the quantity and the quality of the testimony,

and it's all documented in the transcript and referred to in the appendix,

is so significant that it indicates that the court really misperceived the evidence,

misunderstood it, or ignored it.

And therefore, that's error, obviously.

Very hard, Nate.

Yes.

It's a late sign.

Thank you, Ron.

If I might just very quickly...

Your time is up.

Thank you.

Issues will speak for themselves in terms of the brief you're on.

Thank you.

Tony Pomeroy.

Good morning.

May it please the court.

My name is Danielle Pomeroy from the firm of Shaheen and Gordon,

and it is my pleasure to be before you today representing the appellate Kelly Goodwin.

If I may, I'd like to begin with a brief overview of the case for about a minute or so,

and then I'm open to questions.

As you saw in the briefs, there were many issues raised on appeal by the appellant.

However, each of these issues was discretionary in its basis.

They were supported by evidence throughout both the appendix,

the factual record, and through the trial court.

Thus, for these reasons, this court is required to affirm these decisions

unless we find that there is no substantial evidence to support any of the trial court's decisions.

For the reasons further indicated in my brief,

in which I hope to discuss with you today, this is not the case.

There's plenty of factual evidence for the trial court's decision on each one of these issues.

How should the trial court deal with irregular overtime?

Is income averaging something that's permitted?

So, Your Honor, income averaging throughout the years,

prior years is not, but can be served as an indicator of what's expected.

Here, we would argue that it's not irregular income.

The statute provides overtime income can be included if it's a regular element of the trade.

Here, there's plenty of evidence, testimony from multiple witnesses, the appellee herself,

as well as the appellant, that he worked regular overtime hours, dating as far back as 2015.

For these reasons, you can include overtime income

so long as it was a regular court prior to filing,

based both on the statute and the case of Flickner.

For these reasons, we would argue there was no irregular income.

It was regular, it was something that was expected.

It could be included in the trial court found the same.

And if he were to, for whatever reason, as he gets older,

not have that regular overtime income,

then you wouldn't be seeking to impose that for the next 10 years

if there were evidence that his overtime was reduced for a legit reason?

Certainly not, Your Honor.

Justice Bassett brought up the point that modification is an avenue in these cases.

That was what we'd argue would be the correct avenue to address those type of circumstances.

If there's a change in circumstances and the appellant is no longer able to work these types of hours,

and his income does substantially fall below what has been previously,

then at that point the court is certainly within its discretion to order a modification if it's brought before them.

That's not the case, dear.

Income needs to be based on what is presently earned at the time of the decree.

Here, there was evidence to support that the appellant's income was something odd of excess of $15,000 a month.

It was based on both their consideration of the testimony,

the appellants' year-to-date pay stub, as well as his employer's letter which indicated that

his wages would be more indicative of 2019 and 2020 year income earned as opposed to the year of COVID 2020.

Here, based on those factors, the court considered them, weighed the evidence accordingly,

and determined that ultimately the appellant's income was $15,000 a month in excess.

For these reasons, it was within her discretion to determine what, with the evidence accordingly,

and determine what income was.

They did so backed by the evidence, and despite the appellant's cherry-picked analysis of 29 weeks,

there's no requirement for the court to engage in that type of decision-making interpretation.

So now that income has been brought up, it goes to both two issues, both alimony and child support.

Here, beginning with probably child support, the court's finding was, as previously discussed,

that the income was based on the evidence, and it was in support with the child support guidelines.

So it's under silver.

Am I correct?

The rest of this may be irrelevant, but the rest of the assets were divided pretty much down the middle?

Pretty much equitably, which was also within the trial discretion.

Okay.

So their determination after they did find income based on the evidence.

And was their discussion, sorry, I'm throwing you off, but of the application of the new statute,

my understanding is it is discretionary.

Someone may request its application, but the court here declined to apply it.

Yes, Your Honor.

So going to alimony in their discussion, they could apply either the new statute or the old statute

if they found application of the new statute, which was not yet effective, was equitable in doing so.

Here, despite being requested by the appellant erroneously to apply the old statute,

erroneously based on his arguments, to apply the old statute,

the court still engaged in a consideration of both statutes.

They considered application of the old statute.

They consider application of the new statute.

So is the appellant's argument preserved that the court should have applied the new statute?

We would argue that it was not raised until the motion to reconsider.

On that basis, if the court is inclined to consider it because it was raised on the motion to reconsider,

then we would argue, though, that the court still engaged in a discretionary decision

and determined that the new statute was not equitable under the facts and parameters involved in this case.

Even if they were to apply the new statute, which we argue was not the case,

it was decided under the old statute, the 23% versus 30%,

it still does not become more equitable based on the numbers they found.

They found the appellant was making about $15,175 a month,

minus child support in the first instance of $2,460 a month,

determined the calculation between the court's gross incomes, what they attributed to the appellee.

It still comes to about 23%. It does not exceed that.

For those reasons, either under the old statute, which they did apply,

they were well within their discretion to apply under the new statute,

this was not confiscatory award of alimony.

Similarly, cohabitation and its effect on the alimony was,

we would argue, not be quite preserved for this issue as well,

but the court is inclined to consider it because there was testimony about that as well as,

again, raising the motion to reconsider the effect of cohabitation and effect on alimony.

Under the old statute, which was applied, cohabitation does not require alimony

not be granted. Rather, the intermingling of financial funds,

things like that, that's when alimony cannot be provided.

The court in reviewing the statute made a determination that there was need on behalf of the appellee.

That need, they did mention the fact that her boyfriend was not contributing as much,

or if any, to the finances of the home, the household, whether or not he should be

or shouldn't be is another issue not on appeal,

but they determined that he was not contributing, and for that reason, alimony would not be...

Well, and didn't the court indicate it wasn't going to credit either

the party with income that the significant other should be contributing?

It did, Your Honor, exactly.

And for those reasons, we'd argue that the alimony award is well based in both evidence,

well weighed by the trial court, and it's the trial court ultimately,

as you have previously indicated, that has to come to those credibility determinations

and the way the evidence accordingly.

Here, their order presents factual basis for doing so,

whether or not certain bits of evidence,

they found credible and it's well within their discretion,

and they formulated a well-dressed thought out decree determining why they reached those ultimate conclusions.

As far as parenting time as well, this is also a purely discretionary decision.

Despite Pellin's original citations in his brief, which were corrected in his reply,

there is no case law in New Hampshire that provides some type of basis

to say that parenting time is not discretionary,

or cannot be awarded based on one party's acts if a fault-based divorce was not awarded.

This statute does not provide for that either.

Rather, the statute provides what's in the children's best interest.

Here, the court took that, considered that,

and it provided that it was within the children's best interest

to adopt the parenting plan it provided.

This was based on the Pellin's schedule,

as well as the history that the appellee was the primary caregiver in the home,

and it ultimately determined that the parenting plan adopted was in the children's best interest.

It was a discretionary decision, and it should be upheld for those reasons.

The Pellin also brings up the issue of the defense of recrimination,

and whether Ross and Ross should continue to stand.

Ross v. Ross was a statutory determination interpretation of RSA 458-7.

That statute has not changed since Ross has been decided.

It continues, has not been modified in any way,

and it continues to be law based on that.

If the legislator did determine that Ross v. Ross was incorrectly decided,

he would argue that it is not in this case.

They've had ample time to modify or change the statute accordingly.

They have chosen not to do so.

So we argue that you should continue to find that recrimination is a defense

of wrongful action done during the pendency of a divorce proceedings

because the spouse is not entitled to divorce on adoption of the decree.

There is also arguments made as far as the post-separation and amortization payments,

which the court found was not equitable because it was already awarding the Pellin.

His contributions made to retirement assets during the pendency of the divorce,

as well as the fact that he was not paying any type of temporary support orders

during this time when these mortgage payments were made.

These reasons, in its decision to divide property, which is full discretion to do so,

it considered these factors and made the decision that would be not equitable

to award any post-mortage and amortization payments.

Can you help me? Was there a ruling on the motion to reconsider?

There was, Your Honor. And that is provided in the appellee's brief.

I can give you the page if you'd like.

I'll find it.

It was a brief order. It essentially adopted...

It denied the motion to reconsider for the reasons provided in the appellee's objection.

And that is pretty much praising the extent of their decision.

Yeah, it's an order on the back page of the motion.

Your Honor.

And many of these issues were, some were not as previously indicated,

but many of these issues were raised on the motion to reconsider.

The court considered them at trial. They considered them on the motion to reconsider.

They found they had evidence to support their findings.

They found it was not erroneous as a matter of law.

And the Pellin has done nothing more than argue that the evidence should have been weighed differently.

This, in and of itself, is not a basis to do anything but affirm the lower court's finding.

For those reasons, we request the same.

You have formed the entirety of the lower court's finding and proceed accordingly.

Thank you.

Thank you very much, Attorney Calmeri.

Give counsel cases submitted.

Court will stand and brief recess.
