This is case 2021-0385 AZNH revocable trust at all versus the Spinnaker Cove Yacht Club Association, Inc.

Good afternoon, Attorney Sullivan.

Good afternoon. May it please the court?

Can you reserve two minutes?

I'm Attorney John Sullivan. I represent myself and my wife Susan Sullivan as trustees and beneficiaries of AZNH revocable trust.

I've asked the court for two minutes for rebuttal, and I'm willing to take questions at any time.

In the matter below in the trial court, we asked the trial court to do two things.

We asked them to issue a declaratory judgment and injunctive relief that the condominium in question is not an expandable condominium.

And the second thing we asked for was a declaratory judgment and injunctive relief that assessment monies.

Monies that are collected by way of assessment cannot be used to purchase land outside the condominium.

Two separate issues that unfortunately I think the court conflated and treated as one from my reading of the court's orders.

In the court below, the Superior Court found that the condominium is not expandable because it does not contain, the declaration does not contain the verbiage and requirements of the condominium act.

And after that, it dismissed for failure to state a claim.

So we think that that is incongruent. It's untenable. It doesn't seem to square.

Doesn't the definition of expandable pertain only to land that is included within the original design, if you will, or plan for the condominium?

I.e. the development is done in phases. There's a final phase which needs to then be addressed in the condominium documents as expandable land.

That's correct. In order for a condominium to be expandable, the declaration does need to meet certain requirements.

It also needs to refer to land that is included at the origin. It's inapplicable to a later acquisition as I read the statute. Or is that incorrect?

I would respectfully say that that's incorrect because what the act says under section 25 is that no condominium may be expanded except in accordance with the act and in accordance with the declaration.

What's the purpose of RSA 356B42?

That statue is written to allow an association to acquire title. And it does so because if the association is not an incorporated association, just simply an association, they wouldn't have a legal right to hold title.

In fact, they could perhaps take title to land that was designated for expansion but for some reason didn't get expanded. Perhaps the declarant went bankrupt or something like that.

Or take title to a condominium unit within the condominium. Does that answer your question?

But is there any prohibition in the statute to acquiring land not falling into either of those two categories?

Well no, the question that I'm presenting and arguing about is that the condominium declaration is a contract. It's a contract among and between the unit owners.

And so the question is not whether the association can acquire title. The question is whether if an acquiring title, the money that is collected by way of assessment can be used for that purpose.

And it's my position that according to our agreement it may not.

So if it's a gift of land I think as was discussed in the briefs, if it's a gift of land you wouldn't have a problem if somebody gave it to the association.

I don't have a problem with that in terms of requirements of the contract. If somebody wanted to gift the land, in fact in discussions before we even got here, before any court matter was started, I took the effort to explain in writing and otherwise with the association.

You can accomplish your goal. There's another way to do it. But using assessment monies is definitely not available.

If you look at the declaration we think that there's one section, there's many sections that relate to the use of money. But there's one section in particular, it's early on in the declaration, it's section 1101.

We think it's dispositive because it says that assessment money is for cost, maintenance, repairing and managing the property which is to be paid by such unit owner.

And there are other sections of the declaration that are consistent with that.

And the court below said well you know there's nothing in the declaration that says that they can't use assessment money for the purchase of the property.

Well there's nothing in the agreement between the parties that they can use money to buy property outside of the condominium.

So I think the court below perhaps didn't apply the correct standard for contract interpretation.

The contract interpretation would require an evaluation of the contract in all of its terms, not just one particular section of the contract or the absence of some discussion in the contract.

And I think in this case if anybody did look at the contract and evaluate the contract as a whole they would find that in following with the description of assessment there's also as is required by the act an example of what the budget might include.

And the budget and following along that line which you probably don't know is that the association revised their declaration this year in April of this year.

And the terms of the declaration that we're talking about haven't been affected but they restated what a budget includes.

A budget includes water, sewer, electricity, taxes, maintenance, fuel, insurance and a reserve fund.

And that's consistent with the act because pursuant to the act under sections 44 and 45 those descriptions of assessments are required.

And one of the things that the legislature did is they created an environment where the buyer of a condominium has an opportunity to read the documents to understand what they're exposing themselves to.

So what I'm saying here is that we've read the documents before we purchased the condominium unit.

And we understood that this was a non-expandable condominium which meant that our expenses what we were going to pay to support this condominium was limited to what existed in the condominium.

So a couple of your neighbors could buy this available land and operate it and allow everybody except those objecting to use it for additional parking.

Exactly right. That's one of the things that I explained the association. I told them how they could go about doing it.

So section 42 when it uses the word acquire, that does not include purchase?

Well, what the court said below as well, purchase could be a means of acquire.

And we agree that purchase could be a means of acquire. But the legislature didn't say that they could purchase. They said they could acquire.

So then the inquiry becomes under 42D is whether there's a limitation or restriction in the condominium instruments, the agreement between the parties about the use of the money.

And so that's what I'm arguing is that we pay assessments to maintain the existing condominium, not to spend money to buy out of the land outside of the condominium.

So acquire does mean purchase. So your argument is limited to the instruments, the contractual agreement which you say prohibits the use of assessments to purchase real property.

In this case, that's correct. But I think in general that where the legislature didn't use the word purchase, they used the word acquire.

They left the door open under the limitations and restrictions to look at whatever condominium instruments there are that might address that issue.

So in this particular case, the condominium agreement, the declaration says that assessment money is used for basically the ongoing operation of the existing condominium.

So in this case, that's how I'm applying that justice.

And then even if fees can't be used to acquire the land, would you have a problem with fees being used to maintain that land after it's acquired?

Because that's also not something that would have been apparent from the original documents.

Right. Our position is we're paying assessments to maintain the existing condominium, not to...

So even if the land were gifted, you'd still have your objection because there would be additional maintenance costs?

Potentially, yes. But I think if it were gifted and it was being... Well, the other thing to keep in mind is that as part of the condominium declaration,

if property is being used exclusively by certain members of... Then they pay for it.

It doesn't get... It's not a broad general assessment. It's a special assessment. It's a limited assessment.

So that's why really with respect to the gift, I anticipate the gift would be that only certain people are going to use it.

In fact, one of the objections we have about this whole scenario is that if they were to buy this land, we're not going to be allowed to use it.

We're going to pay for it. We're not going to be allowed to use it because it's going to be dedicated to guest parking.

What's the basis for that statement? What's the basis for your supposition there that you're not going to be able to use it?

We have six parking spaces right now for guests, and those are limited to the guests. They're not available for use by the owners.

But they're your guests, too. Your guests, too. Your guests can use them.

If I had guests, yes. But I wouldn't be able to use it.

But isn't that an accoutrement or a benefit of the property that you can have guests show up and park in those parking spaces?

Well, an argument can be made that, yeah, we've got more parking. But my problem with this scenario is that I've agreed to pay assessments for certain purposes.

I haven't agreed to pay assessments to buy land outside of the condominium and incur the expensive maintenance and so forth of that land.

I assume you made all these arguments about why this purchase shouldn't happen to your fellow members?

I did.

Before the vote?

Before the vote.

But what you need to know is that the attorney for the association told a membership, not this attorney, but another attorney, Mr. Salton's wrong.

He doesn't know what he's talking about. You can buy the land and you can add it to condominium. You can buy the land using assessment money.

And that's just not the way that, well, first of all, it's not an expendable condominium, so it doesn't become part of the common area.

And the other part is that we've agreed to pay assessment money to maintain the existing condominium, not anything else.

That's the essence of what I have to say here today and I anticipated it a lot.

So under that interpretation, if the association determined that they needed to replace the parking lot and they had to incur costs to pay the parking lot, you're not responsible for those assessments?

That's part of the existing condominium. What I'm saying is we can't be paying for things outside of the existing condominium.

And an interesting part of that question is that the parking lot is basically the condominium units.

So to some extent, the condominium units would be responsible for actually paying for that as a special assessment.

Well, I've really briefed this, I think, extensively as well as I could.

I think I probably should just point out that I did bring to the attention of the court below that the...

Addicts of agreement of the association also includes the limitations.

They say that it says that all funds and the titles to all property acquired by the association and the proceeds thereof shall be held only for the benefit of the members in accordance with the provisions of the condominium instruments.

And that brings...that goes back to what assessments are for.

Assessments are collected to the purpose of maintaining the existing condominium.

And the existing condominium specifically says the purpose of this condominium is for recreational purposes only.

And so by buying parking spaces outside of the existing condominium, I suggest to you is it goes beyond what the condominium was originally intended to be.

And then also there's some other considerations.

If they have money to spend on buying land outside the condominium, that may take them out of the tax protections of IRS Code 501

and then also it calls into question whether they continue to qualify as a voluntary corporation.

So those are other considerations we have on our mind.

Thank you.

Thank you, Attorney Sullivan.

Afternoon, Chief Justice.

May it please the court?

There's several arguments I'd like to unpack and I'm willing to take questions at any time.

But just briefly, Attorney Sullivan did reference the articles of agreement.

I don't believe they're actually presented to the trial court when this court reviews the trial court's order.

One of the things that the trial court noted was that the plaintiffs failed to identify in their petition which specific provisions of the declaration they contend

prohibit the association from purchasing land.

And then the trial court went on to reference the few provisions and the excerpts of certain documents that the plaintiffs did provide.

What I would say is that Attorney Sullivan's absolutely correct that the association is operated for the benefit of its members, right?

That's why we have associations.

And one thing Attorney Sullivan or the Sullivan's agreed to is to be members of that association.

And fundamentally that's what this case is about.

It's about a condo association in which the Sullivan's are but members by virtue of their unit ownership.

And the trial court considered the arguments made by the Sullivan's including the expandable condominium which I would submit is a red herring.

As we briefed in our papers that entire section of the statute governing expandable condominiums that relates to a declarant, right?

That relates to a declarant holding back power to expand the condominium to add units which necessarily modifies the rights and interests of the other unit owners.

It has no bearing on the unit owners once the association is formed to be self-determining and make that decision for themselves.

And it's our position that unit owners of a condominium could add land for an additional common area provided they vote as an association to do it.

And I also believe that under the existing statutes the unit owners could actually, if there's sufficient land, propose to add units to the condominium.

Because at that stage?

Although, assuming we agree with you that the expandable reference in the statute isn't the hurdle here, what about the any alteration to the interests of the owners needs the agreement of all of the owners, doesn't it?

If you want to alter the percent ownership or the rights that are conferred through the condominium documents, that's the whole purpose of the disclosure.

So you know what you're buying.

So if, for example, you want to alter the benefits procured through ownership, my understanding is you not only need all the owners, you need their mortgage holders.

You need everybody who has been, who has an interest in that property as it was first proposed.

So how do you get around that?

Well, because here the relative interests of the unit owners aren't being modified, right?

And so I think what you're speaking to is when a declarant adds units to a condominium or, from my perspective, if the condominium association decides to add units, at that stage you're creating more unit owners, right?

And you're reducing...

They're by diluting...

Exactly.

Exactly.

So you're expanding the property that is subject to the condominium, which has an impact, as we've heard, on the costs associated.

Correct.

And that's a decision that's made at the association level.

And there's nothing in the condominium statutes.

Are you already here by a unanimous decision of those affected?

By a majority in accordance with the bylaws and the governing documents.

And I do not believe that the condominium statutes require a unanimous decision in that context.

Another way to look at it is fundamentally this is no different than association choosing to upgrade a particular area of the condominium by a TV for the common area.

They're going to incur an expense.

That expense is going to be distributed or prorated among the unit owners.

So long as they follow the process that they've all agreed to for operating the condominium, I don't believe anyone would submit that the purchase of a TV requires a unanimous decision.

What about the language that Mr. Sullivan cites that the costs that are fairly allocated are limited to maintenance, repairing, and managing the property?

Sure.

So in our brief, we address that.

So that comes from Article 1-101, which is a definitional section.

So it does define assessment to mean the portion of the cost.

When you read the document as a whole, and especially when you look at what the trial court did, which is the fees and charges section, the definition of assessment is just trying to relay the information that the costs are apportioned.

The term assessment is not used in the manner that Attorney Sullivan suggests.

In fact, under the fees and charges section, it says the unit owners association will thereafter be responsible for maintaining and operating the condominium.

And each unit owner will be responsible for paying his pro-rate share of the maintenance and operating budget in the form of a common expense assessment.

And so it doesn't even use the word repair in that section.

So operating can be equated with acquisition?

Correct.

Because if you then turn to the definition of common expense, which the section I just read to you says each unit owner will share in their pro-rated portion of the common expense as an assessment,

it defines common expense to mean all expenditures lawfully made or incurred by or on behalf of the association.

And that gets to the heart of the case.

This is an association.

It has the ability to make decisions as an association.

Here there was no challenge to the decision-making process.

This is merely a challenge to the association's authority to take the act it wants to do in the future.

So would there be no limitation if the association voted to go out and buy Bitcoin, invest a couple hundred grand in Bitcoin?

Would there be no limitation in the documents on that?

I will say I haven't researched that far.

I would submit that from what I understand of reading the condominium statutes,

I would say that if it's not otherwise prohibited by the declaration and the association members as an association decide they want to do that,

it would be no different than if they decide to purchase other forms of tangible or intangible personal property for the benefit of the association.

Now it may not be a smart decision for the association to make and it may have other repercussions,

but I do think it's within their authority as an association because that's ultimately what we're talking about here.

We're talking about a group of individuals who have willingly chosen to associate with one another under certain terms and conditions,

including that when the members vote and they make a decision they all will be bound even if one disagrees with the rationale.

And the solution to someone disagreeing with that decision is to disassociate.

There's no mechanism for them to seek judicial relief to try to impose their will on the otherwise valid decision of the association.

The last thing...

So the association could choose to sell part of their property?

Of the common area?

Yeah.

I believe they could.

One of the things I highlighted in the brief is, and I don't think this is a direct issue in this case frankly because we're not at that stage,

but it's the mechanism that I believe an association would need to follow to add common area to a condominium

and I think it's essentially a two-step process.

They would need to purchase the land, so at that point they hold title as an association.

But just by holding title doesn't make it common area or common land with respect to the Condominium Act.

They would then need to amend the instruments to include that specific physical portion.

And is that amendment by majority or unanimous?

I believe that amendment's probably unanimous.

So you could have a little hurdle there.

As would retracting land or removing land, right?

And essentially another way to look at this case is that if you accept the plaintiff's position on the law,

then an association that was formed in the 1950s is stuck and is absolutely stuck with what they have for real property forever and ever.

They can't get rid of a portion of land they no longer have a need for.

They can't add land that they need.

The only solution would be, I guess, to completely disband the condominium, sell the fee simple under it,

and then I guess reconstitute itself for another bite at the apple.

There's no such restriction in the Condominium Act.

And I don't believe the Condominium Act contemplates imposing that kind of restriction on condominiums in New Hampshire.

If there's no further questions, thank you.

I think Justice Bassett really got to the root of things.

There has to be a limit.

There has to be a limit on what this money can be spent for.

If this money can be spent on anything that the majority of the owners choose to do,

that's going to devalue not only our condominium, but any condominium in the state.

There's going to be other practitioners in the state looking at this case.

And whether you dispose of this by opinion or otherwise, other practitioners are going to look at this case.

And if they see from this case that, well, if there's no specific prohibition that you can't buy land outside the condominium,

or there's no specific prohibition that you can't buy bitcoin, then that means that the association,

the majority of the owners, can then say, oh, we're going to buy this, we're going to buy that.

And they're going to pick the pocket of the minority of the people in the association.

And that's the problem.

And that's really what we're concerned about here.

In this particular case, if the association decided, well, gee, we like the marina next to it,

which happens to be an attractive piece of property, but it's worth quite a bit of money,

they could then decide, well, we're going to buy that and we're going to make you pay for it.

Well, wait a minute.

I didn't agree to do that.

Now, this particular expenditure is not particularly large.

I think it's 100, I don't know the exact amount.

It's around $100,000.

But the point is we did not agree that our assessment money could be used for anything other than the operation

and maintenance of the existing condominium.

And more importantly, we proved our case below that this is not an expandable condominium.

And I think that the state, excuse me, the Superior Court's dismissal for failure to state a claim

doesn't comport with the idea that the court also found that it's not an expandable condominium.

Well, what about Council's point that really this expandable condominium claim is a red herring?

That's really not what this case is about.

Oh, no, no, no, no, no.

If this condominium is not expandable, the state won't sell them the land.

So that part of this case is very important, maybe the most important part.

And that's because, and I submitted a request to the court, perhaps you've seen it,

to expand the record and include Appendix 6.

And Appendix 6 is a statement of the policy of the Department of Transportation about the sale of land locked or unbuildable land.

They'll only sell it to an abutter and only if the abutter can join it with their land

or what they call assemble with their land.

So in this case, if this condominium is not expandable, the state will not sell the land.

Thank you attorney.
