This is case 21-0531, State of New Hampshire v. Mark LeMay.

Good afternoon. Attorney Johnson, I understand you reserved two minutes.

Yes, Your Honor. Thank you. May it please the Court, Christopher Johnson, on behalf of Mark LeMay.

The issue in this appeal is whether counsel rendered ineffective assistance in making this motion to join unrelated charges.

My plan this afternoon is to organize my presentation under three points.

First, to talk about the high stakes of that decision.

Second, to address the deficient performance prong.

And third, to address the prejudice prong.

But I'm happy to take the questions at any time.

Beginning with the stakes of the jointer, the State's argument, I think its principal argument,

is that the stakes were low because essentially the same evidence would have come in at separate trials.

This is mistaken.

The stakes were high precisely because it's not the same evidence that would have come in.

It's useful in this regard to think I think about the evidence as three units.

One unit is the September Freemont evidence.

A second unit is the October Salem evidence.

And the third unit is the 404b Other Act evidence.

It is a procedural fact of this case that at separate trials only one of those three units would come in.

Because the prosecutor would not have sought to get the other two in.

So what about the question whether the 404b evidence would have come in on either one of the cases if they were separately tried?

So absent some other kind of ineffective assistance,

it's my position that the 404b evidence would not have come in at either separate trial.

How do we know that the prosecutor would not have sought to introduce this evidence?

First, because the prosecutor said so repeatedly at the time during the pre-trial proceedings.

And that's a pretty odd thing to say if it's not true.

Secondly, there is no evidence to the contrary.

The prosecutor did not testify of the Motion for Neutral.

And a couple of passing remarks that she made were not subject to cross-examination.

And third, there was no finding by the Motion for Neutral Court that the State would have sought to introduce the second and third units at these separate trials.

Now, unless something else had happened, like the introduction of the video from the Constitution.

That's right.

So unless the defense had done something else, and it is, you know, my assertion that if they had done that other thing

in these hypothetical separate trials, that other thing would have been ineffective.

And we don't have to address that particularly, because they did a different thing that was ineffective, which was to join the charges.

So there is, of course, and this idea...

So submitting the video would have been a different type of ineffectiveness.

Yes, yes.

And it would have been, the idea would have been, I think, a separate trial on the Fremont charge.

The defense would have, by putting the video, opened the door to the rest of the evidence, the other two units.

But two things.

That, as I've said, would have been ineffective as to the September Fremont trial, because it would have opened the door.

And it signifies nothing about the September Salem trial, the October Salem trial, that logic, even of that hypothetical opening of the door possibility, doesn't even touch the October trial.

There is some relevance to the video showing that these two interacting, despite the horrible allegations that occurred in September.

So there are some probative value to that.

So I think, and that gets us to deficient performance, I think so, the fundamental question is that was it a reasonable strategy to join these charges at such a high cost,

that is the second and third units coming in, to gain that advantage?

And that the advantage being that this video could be offered at the, you know, about something that happened in October to try to disprove the September allegations.

The problem with that is two problems.

First, the video hurts the defendant as to the October trial.

So in the sense that the defense would have been making a choice to sacrifice or harm the defenses to the October allegations to benefit the defense as to the September allegations.

But second, and even more fundamentally, that video, this sort of postulated, sculpatory value of the video vanishes completely in the face of the evidence that would be introduced in response,

namely the 404B.

And the idea, I think, was like if, but the defense was sort of trying to accomplish, was that if these people were just, had only ever had two dates,

and the first date was the September, she wouldn't have gone on the second date in October with them.

But that's just simply not the kind of relationship.

And so the state was able to introduce the whole context, Scott Hampton's testimony, to show this isn't about, like, agreeing to go on a second date after the horrible things happened at a first.

This is the dynamics of an abusive relationship.

So if the question on deficient performance is, was this joiner choice reasonable, given the price the defense was going to pay, which is the second and third units coming in at each of these trials?

The answer is no.

The video didn't help.

And the other asserted rationale.

Do you think you're getting through the mother's test?

Okay.

The other asserted rationale, I think, was that the defense hoped to sort of aggregate these two separate defense witnesses, you know, one relevant to September and one relevant to October,

and try to make more of them together than they would have been separately.

That also, when you examine it, is not a reasonable strategy because each of those defense witnesses offered trivial value, if any, even as to the separate charge on which each was relevant, and none at all on the other charge.

And so if you really thought that the trivial value was worth it, you could get it in the separate trial.

But it's not, it doesn't justify joining them given the price.

So how do we look at prejudice here?

Do we consider the fact that there's a lot of evidence, overwhelming evidence individually with respect to each episode?

And trial counsel is looking at the situation, perhaps, that there's, we have very little chance of winning either of these trials.

So let's throw a hail there.

So let me, yeah, get to that and answer it this way.

I think, you know, again, the harm is that these, the second and third units come in, and I guess I would disagree with the premise that the September trial and the October trial, each, the State had other overwhelming evidence.

And the first point I want to make about that is, I think, absolutely crucial, is that the State's evidence as to the September event was not the same as the State's evidence as to the October.

Each of them had their own sort of strengths and weaknesses.

So for example, with respect to October, the State had torn clothes.

They didn't have torn clothes as to September.

The State had the defendant's inconsistent statements as to the October event.

They didn't have inconsistent statements that the defendant had made as to September.

On the other hand, in October, the State confronted the problem that there were some incongruities in KM's testimony.

For example, that these assaults she described occupied eight hours of time, and they hadn't slept at all.

And to remember also, there were two acquittals that the jury returned with respect to October.

So there was at least some reason to think that if a well-presented defense, the target of KM's credibility was not beyond reach.

Whereas in September, you look at that, the holes there, again, no inconsistent statements by LeMay.

LeMay also injured and it was documented as to September.

So to make the event appear to be a fight rather than an assault.

So whether there was prejudice from this ineffective, efficient performance is a somewhat different analysis as to September and as to October.

Again, the harms were large.

There was this ongoing pattern of abuse that came in through the 404b evidence that invites a propensity influence.

There was, and I think this is crucial, in the 404b evidence.

There was evidence that Mr. LeMay had been convicted and indeed had pled guilty to some of the other Uncharged Act evidence.

And the State used that in closing as a kind of a confession, as a way to resolve the doubts about the he-said, she-said nature of what the case would have been otherwise.

They had him confessing to the enemy.

And the inflammatory nature, the Court I think had a point when it said that the other Act evidence was less inflammatory than the charged evidence.

But again, at separate trials, the charged evidence from the other incident wouldn't have come in.

And so the jury heard the combined jury, you know, putter, if you postulate a separate jury on Fremont, they wouldn't have heard about the charged events in October.

So if we agree with you, and Ruby man does the State bound by that proposition that cannot move to admit the 403b evidence in individual cases?

No, I don't think so.

I mean, I think at a retrial the State could make other choices.

The offense could make other choices.

You know, it's not hard to say how the litigation would develop differently.

But what we know is from this procedural fact of the way this trial was litigated is the State committed itself repeatedly to that proposition

that it wasn't going to seek to admit the other two units at a separate trial on each episode.

So with respect to the trial, the hearing on the new trial, what did the defense counsel say was the purpose for them to combine in this case?

I know they told the trial court judicial economy was the basis why they originally wanted to join the charges.

Did they move off of that position?

I think, you know, in their depositions and in their hearing testimony, I mean, they identified

the features, I think, that the trial court, the Motion for New Trial Court ultimately

relied on, which was the video, and we've talked about that.

And they, I think, some less extent that might also have mentioned, or maybe the Motion

for New Trial Court came up with it on its own, the idea of sort of aggregating

the value of these two separate defense witnesses.

That was largely it, Mr. Court has other questions.

It reversed the convictions.

Thank you.

Thank you, too, and John.

May you work?

Good afternoon.

I've got to frog in my voice.

Good afternoon, Your Honor.

The trial court made no error in finding that these lawyers were not ineffective.

And I want to kind of step back from what we see as the situation now and try to think

back on what it was in June before the trial when Mr. Sullivan filed the motion to join.

We know that his co-counsel, Pamela Rogers, had already represented the defendant.

And she represented him, as I understand it, in cases involving the victim.

So she knew something about the victim.

And either in his deposition or in the motion for a new trial, Mr. Sullivan said that he

thought that there was a good chance that the victim wouldn't show up.

That isn't contained in his motion to join, and I think it probably would have been ineffective

for trial lawyer or defense attorney to spell out exactly, this is why we think these cases

should be joined other than judicial autonomy, because it would be telegraphing or making

very clear to the State what your defense is.

But they had that.

But then can we even rely upon that as a strategy in determining whether this decision

was ineffective?

I think that you can rely on the representations that the lawyers made, both in their

depositions and in the hearing on the motion for a new trial.

The one thing that they were very clear on, and it's very consistent in the

depositions and in what Mr. Sullivan said in the hearing on the motion for a new trial,

is that they believed that by joining the two cases together that they could attack

the victim's credibility.

And given the fact that Mr. Sullivan at least believed that there was a chance that

she wouldn't even show up for the trial, that would certainly go towards what

their view of her credibility was.

But was it reasonable to not think that they could attack her credibility if the

cases weren't joined in the same way?

I think it becomes a much harder argument, because what their theory was was if the

victim had been so severely assaulted in September, why would she go and see the

defendant in October?

Why would she run from him?

Because she had been violently assaulted in September.

And if you read Ms. Rogers' closing argument, she makes a, it's really quite

compelling.

She talks about how at one point the victim who is saying, I have to get

away from this man, moves to a residence that is five houses away.

She pointed out in her closing that the defendant, they say the defendant is pursuing

this woman, but in fact, on both occasions, she's showing up.

But wouldn't she know, wouldn't Defense Counsel know that that's going to invite

exactly what it invited?

You know, I have to say that I don't agree with the position that the State

took on 404b evidence, because I think it would have come in.

Some of it anyway would have come in either way the case was tried.

And whether you characterized it as 404b evidence or simply relevant evidence

under rule 403, I don't think it really makes a difference, because I think it

would have come in.

And so you have this, it is a gamble, whether it's as high stakes as Mr.

Johnson is saying.

I don't really think I agree.

I think that the idea is that you're going to try to undermine the victim's credibility.

And you can do it in a couple of different ways in your, in the defendant's case.

The first is to highlight the fact that hours before this alleged terrible assault

took place in October, she is receptive in a video to the defendant's advances

towards her.

She's not looking like she's afraid of him.

She's looking like she is welcoming him.

But she's also looking like she doesn't have any injuries, which is inconsistent

with what the defendant told the police.

Right.

Well, there are inconsistencies in what the defendant told the police.

But I will point out that there were also inconsistencies in what the victim

had said.

And the defense attorneys made a lot of hay out of that.

At one point, the defense attorney pointed out that in her statement to the police,

she omitted the fact or the allegation that she'd been raped.

And she just sort of added it on to the bottom.

And in the closing argument, I think Ms. Rogers described that as a PS.

Oh, PS.

I was also sexually assaulted.

So what they were trying to do was they were trying to undercut what the State was arguing,

which was that this was a violent and difficult relationship.

They pointed out that the victim had come seeking money.

She'd been looking for money from the defendant on the second occasion.

She wanted $10 and then later on, according to the mother, it was $50.

They pointed out that the defendant had provided for her extensively over their long relationship

that he put her through what he paid for her LNA training.

Well, he paid for everything.

For everything.

That's right.

I mean, he employed her, leaked her job, and then controlled everything.

That would have been in either way.

It would have.

It might have come in both times, but when you look at what their theory is, which is if

this prior assault took place in September, it cannot explain why she shows up in October.

And so I think that the theory, their idea, the thought behind this was it's certainly

a gamble, but trying two cases is equally a gamble because the evidence in both cases

is going to be strong.

And the only way that you can attack it is to keep those two events tied together

and say it doesn't make any sense.

If you're assaulted in September, why do you go back in October?

So it didn't happen.

And the video and the mother's testimony with respect to the October assault was going

to be used to undercut the veracity of what the defendant was saying about September.

Even knowing that that, making that choice is going to bring in Dr. Hampton, and it's

going to bring in all that 4-4-B evidence about the prior assaults, the conviction,

the incarceration.

So that's why it is a high stakes decision, isn't it?

Well, it is, but I think that if you look at some of the other aspects of it, it is a

reasonable, perhaps not high stakes, but it's a significant decision.

There's no question about it.

But it makes it reasonable when you look at what the history of these two lawyers is.

I mean, the fact that Ms. Rogers had represented Mr. LeMay on prior occasions

and had some exposure to the victim, the fact that Mr. Sullivan thought that there

was a good chance that the victim wouldn't show up.

If you have two trials and the victim doesn't show up for trial number one, you

can get a material witness warrant for trial number two.

So there are a lot of different considerations.

It's not just judicial autonomy.

I think that it would be fair to say that Mr. Sullivan was just saying, well,

that's a reason to join them without exposing to the State the court.

This is our strategy.

This is what we're going to argue.

How do we assess prejudice here, assuming that we find that the decision was

deficient, constitutional deficient?

Do we assess the prejudice understanding and understanding that the States,

originally their position was, we're not going to join these cases and we're

not going to introduce 404b evidence unless the cases are joined.

Is that how we should look at it or should we look at it in terms of more

likely than not the 404b evidence that's coming in?

Well, I think that there are two different responses to that, Your Honor.

One is that you look first of all at what Justice Delta wrote in his order

and he made certain specific findings.

He made credibility to find findings with respect to the victim.

And apparently she did come across as being highly credible.

So there is that aspect of this.

The second thing is that I think that while the State took the position that this

404b evidence, they wouldn't seek to introduce it unless the cases were joined.

I do not think all of the evidence that came in was purely 404b evidence.

I think a lot of it goes towards the relevance of the defense that the defendant was raising.

And so in both cases, I think it would be fair to assume, in both cases the defense

is going to date the victim is lying.

In which case that is going to make a lot of that what is characterized as 404b evidence

relevant under Rule 403 and highly probative because of the assertion

that this is all a lie.

So I think that if you look at what Justice Scepter then went on to say,

which was that the 404b evidence was comparatively insignificant

when you look at the actual testimony about the two events

and that the 404b evidence didn't turn the tide.

It didn't change the outcome of the trial.

I think that if you look at that finding that he made, that has ample support in the record.

The things that he had done that were the 404b evidence were comparatively minor.

They weren't laudable, but they were comparatively minor when you look at these two very violent assaults.

You know, I look at this case and I try to think if I were a defense counsel

and in the first case the police officer standing there talking to the defendant

and getting his side of the story and the telephone rings

and the police officer hears the victim say, you raped me, you raped me.

That's a very tough case for a defense attorney to get around.

It's not easy.

The second one, even with the video and the victims seeking the defendant out,

that again is a tough case.

You have torn clothes.

You have two trips to the hospital.

People are going to testify about how the victim appeared,

even if she refused.

In the first case, she refused the same assessment.

Still, there was testimony about how she appeared.

These two lawyers had a tough case before them

and they made the best decision that they could make.

The decision was if we try to join them, we can attack the victim's credibility

and that's our only way out.

The jury has to say she's lying and that's our best chance.

I see my yellow light is on.

If the Court has no further questions for me, I will be able to answer.

Thank you.

One point on deficient performance and one on prejudice.

I don't recall any reliance by the trial court on the hypothesis.

The victim wouldn't show up.

But I think that, but I don't doubt that that's what Mr. Sullivan said

and it just shows that this jointer decision was a decision in search of a justification

for which there wasn't one.

With respect to prejudice, again, the idea that the State would have sought

to introduce this evidence anyway,

but there's no finding by the trial court that that's true.

It's contradicted by the record.

And one thing we know for certain is that it would not have come in

if the State hadn't tried to introduce it

and that's what the State of the Record shows.

Thank you.

Thank you, Council.

Case made.

It's adjourned.
