This is Case 20210460, State of New Hampshire v. Chasrick, Heredia.

And Mr. Barnard, my understanding is you reserve one minute for a battle, is that right?

That's correct. Thank you, Your Honor.

Please proceed.

Thank you. Please record.

My name is Thomas Barnard. I represent Chasrick, Heredia.

I plan to make four points this morning.

First, Heredia did not commit witness tampering by sending the letter.

Second, the indictment did not allege that Heredia committed witness tampering

in subsequent phone calls. Third, even if it did, Heredia did not commit witness tampering

in those calls. And finally, the evidence was insufficient to support the contribution

to delinquency charges.

By sending the letter, Heredia certainly committed solicitation to falsify physical evidence.

To prove witness tampering, however, the State had to prove that Heredia attempted

to cause Hugo to withhold the video. To withhold something one must possess.

Here it's clear that Heredia, when he sent the letter, did not believe that Hugo possessed

the video. Thus, as a matter of law, the letter could not constitute an attempt to cause

Hugo to withhold the video.

Now, the State argues on appeal that Heredia committed witness tampering not by

sending the letter, but in subsequent phone calls.

A defendant is entitled to be tried on the crime charge, not some other crime.

Here the indictment explicitly alleged that Heredia committed witness tampering on October 24th

by writing Hugo the letter requesting that he delete the video.

The indictment did not allege that Heredia committed witness tampering on some later

evidence by requesting that Hugo withhold information about the video or about the letter.

Even if the indictment had made that allegation, there was no evidence that Heredia

requested that Hugo withhold information about the video or about the letter.

Out of all of the recorded phone calls which this Court now has, the State does not cite

any specific call or any specific statement which it claims constitutes witness tampering.

What about the letter?

I'm sorry?

But the letter, the charge is that it was requested in the letter, right?

Right.

The indictment alleged that by sending the letter, Heredia committed witness tampering.

Right.

But as a matter of law, Heredia could not have committed witness tampering when he sent

the letter because witness tampering requires an attempt to cause someone else to withhold

something.

And it's clear here, it's undisputed that when Heredia sent the letter to Hugo,

Heredia did not believe that Hugo possessed the video.

And in fact Hugo did not possess the video.

So it can't apply if you're asking someone to cause someone else to withhold something.

It can apply.

Certainly, certainly witness tampering constantly applies if an individual asks someone else

who possesses an object to withhold that object.

But it doesn't apply here because when Heredia sent the letter to Hugo,

Hugo did not possess the video.

And Heredia knew that Hugo did not possess the video.

But Max allegedly possessed the video.

And so the idea was to have Hugo cause Max to withhold the video.

No, no, it was not.

The letter did not instruct Hugo to tell Max to delete the video.

The letter instructed Hugo to get the password and delete the video.

To get the password and delete the video.

Yes.

So it was not, it was not, and Max was not involved in this.

Right.

In the request.

And so Hugo intervening to cause Max's possession of the video to disappear isn't withholding.

That's the argument.

It's not withholding because Hugo, Hugo doesn't have the power to withhold the video

because Hugo doesn't possess the video.

He's destroying the video, essentially.

Yes, he's destroying the video.

That's for that reason that we concede that the evidence was certainly sufficient to show

false solicitation to falsify physical evidence.

I would argue it's not clear here that even Max possessed the video.

The video was on Google servers.

Essentially what Hugo, or what Heredia asked Hugo to do was to send a command to Google to delete the video.

So why is it plain error?

Well it's plain error because the evidence was legally insufficient to support the conviction.

And this court has routinely held that if the evidence is legally insufficient to support the conviction,

then that constitutes plain error.

I certainly agree if a trial court is making an evidentiary ruling or a ruling on joint or severance during instructions,

something like that, then it makes sense to apply the plain error standard stringent.

But the concept that a conviction should not be entered on the basis of insufficient evidence is fundamental.

So it's certainly reasonable to expect trial courts to refrain from entering convictions on the basis of insufficient evidence,

even if that specific insufficiency argument is not expressly addressed to the trial court.

Do you recall how the trial court instructed the jury on the witness campaign charge?

It basically read the indictment.

Yeah.

So they had approved that the witness campaign occurred by virtue of the letter as instructed to the jury?

I don't know if the instruction repeated all of the elements in the indictment, so it repeated with whole.

I don't know, I don't believe that the instruction also included the factual allegations of the indictment.

But if the States were relying on the phone calls, the defense was not given advance notice of that particular theory.

No, no, not at all.

You read the indictment, the indictment says already a committed witness tampering by sending the letter,

by requesting that he will delete the video on October 24th.

There's absolutely nothing in the indictment that would have given the defense notice that the state was relying on some subsequent court.

So if during one of those conversations the defendant had advised his friend to,

if you get the letter, destroy it as quickly as possible, that'd be a different claim?

Destroy upon reading?

Yeah, that sort of thing.

It would certainly constitute solicitation to falsify physical evidence.

I still don't think it would constitute witness tampering, because there's not a separate request to withhold the letter.

There's a single request to take a single action and not to destroy the letter.

So I still think in that circumstance the state would have a stronger argument, but it still would not constitute witness tampering.

To get a conviction for both solicitation to falsify physical evidence and witness tampering, the state would essentially have to show two requests,

a request to withhold and then perhaps later request to destroy, or a request to destroy that's refused and then a request,

well if you're not going to destroy it, at least don't give it to the police.

Turning to the contribution to delinquency charges, again I would make the point that a defendant is entitled to be charged to be tried on the crime charge.

Here each complaint alleged that Heredia contributed to one person's delinquency simply by providing alcohol to that person.

Because the receipt or possession of alcohol is not a felony or misdemeanor under the criminal code, the evidence was insufficient as a matter of law to prove the contribution to delinquency charges.

And to the extent the complaints can be read to a ledge that your client facilitated this particular crime with the individual victims here, the minors,

that's not how the charges were charged.

That's not how the charges were charged.

Now, each indictment, it's a little, or complaint, it's a little complicated because the complaints charge Heredia's acting as an accomplice to Hugo,

but the evidence was that Heredia provided the alcohol directly to each of the three individuals.

And each indictment named just one individual.

The indictments, there was no basis for Heredia to infer from the indictments that Heredia facilitated the sharing or the transfer between these three individuals of the alcohol.

That just wasn't, there was just no hint of that in the indictments.

And are you still pressing a double jeopardy claim?

I haven't planned to, but I'm happy to address the court's questions on that.

Essentially, my double jeopardy argument is an alternative argument.

If the court finds that the evidence was sufficient to prove witness tampering, then the court needs to conduct this double jeopardy analysis.

And if Heredia's request to Hugo to destroy the video sort of inherently or impliedly would also constitute a request to withhold the video,

then the two charges are the same for double jeopardy purposes.

Under that statutory construction, any request to destroy the video would necessarily also constitute a request to withhold the video.

And if the defendant can't commit one crime without also committing another crime by definition, those crimes are the same offense for double jeopardy.

Multiple convictions and multiple punishments are precluded.

If the court has no further questions.

Thank you.

You still have one minute.

Council.

Hey, may it please the court, Adriana McCool up for the State of New Hampshire.

I want to start by pointing out that the state did not charge the defendant with witness tampering for destroying the video or withholding the video.

Both the indictment and the instructions to the jury read that the state must prove that the defendant caused a person, specifically Matthew Hugo,

to withhold information when he wrote Hugo the letter about destroying the video.

And it's that information piece that the state charged the defendant with.

What is the information?

The information would be any information, so any facts or any knowledge about the video, including its existence, how it was created on the night of the charged acts,

and then any information relative to its deletion or destruction or alteration.

And the point of the witness tampering was to criminalize the defendant's behavior for telling Hugo not to tell anybody about that video.

Not to tell the police about the video, not to come to trial and testify about the video to withhold any information.

Were all those instructions contained in the letter?

No, they were not.

But that's why the jail calls helped the jury infer what the defendant's intent was behind withholding information.

Well, the indictment reads,

Why are we restricted to the contents of the letter as charged?

We are not restricted to just the contents of the letter because the jail calls speak to the defendant's intent.

And the state had to prove that the defendant's intent in this case was that he attempt to induce Hugo to withhold that information.

And the jail calls speak directly to that knowingly mens reo.

Well, the indictment reads that Hugo deleted information from any electronic device or any electronic communication services.

So that sort of limits what the state's alleging with respect to the witness tampering charge, does it not?

It does not because the first part of that sentence says to withhold any information when he wrote the letter and requested that Hugo delete information.

It's the withholding information up front that the state is charging the defendant with in this witness tampering charge.

It's the information which would include any information about video, its creation, and its destruction.

The state does point the jury to the letter because that's where the instructions are about deleting the video.

But if you also take into account the jail calls to determine the defendant's intent, the jail calls combined with the letter say to the jury,

the intention of the letter and the intention of these jail calls and the intention of the destruction of the video is to avoid Hugo from telling anybody about the video.

And the defendant needed to commit the witness tampering because it wasn't enough for Hugo to just destroy the video.

But Hugo wouldn't have known about the video until the defendant told him.

Hugo did know about the video.

So in his interview with police close in time to the charged acts, he told police he saw on the defendant's phone a light on indicating a recording was happening.

And in some of the jail calls prior to the letter being sent, Hugo does talk about there being a light on and tells the defendant that some of the girls noticed that there was a video being made.

So Hugo knew about the video.

But Hugo already told the police about the potential for the video.

Hugo did not tell the police about the video.

He said there was a light on.

Right, but he didn't know what was in the video because he didn't see it being recorded. He just saw the light on.

But he at least relayed that to the investigator.

Right. And at the time he was being interviewed by police, according to Hugo anyway, he didn't believe these children were children.

And so that video is only a crime because it's recording children engaging in the sexual act.

So at the time Hugo was putting forth this idea that these were adults, not children.

So he would have no reason to tell the police this was CSAI, a video of CSAI on his phone.

But he knows now that the people in that video are children.

And so when the defendant tells him, get rid of this video and then talks about in the jail calls the video being,

or the letter about the video being Skittles or a problem, as the defendant said,

all of that information signals to Hugo, don't tell the police about the video.

Don't tell the police what's in the video because they do talk about what's in the video.

And Hugo does eventually at some point know what sex act the defendant performed on GW in the video.

And so it's not enough for the defendant to just have Hugo destroy the video.

He also has to have Hugo not tell anybody about the video.

And it can expand beyond just the police investigation because an official investigation

based on the definition of official investigation in the statute can include a trial.

So it's also not enough that Hugo not just tell the police about the video.

He also needs Hugo not to come to trial and testify about the video to the jury.

So reading the jail calls, the State is not saying the witness tampering is just based on the jail calls or just based on the letter.

Well, Hugo's a co-defendant at this point, right?

He is, yes.

So why would the defendant be concerned about Mr. Hugo testifying?

Because the co-defendant in this case witnessed the defendant committing crimes, essentially.

Well, he was also committing a crime.

Right.

So there'd be a Fifth Amendment issue there, I assume.

Right.

And I don't believe that the jury received any of this information.

So I did not include it in my brief considering we were talking about sufficiency of the evidence.

But the co-defendant was given immunity and refused to testify, still even with the immunity.

So the State did not call Hugo to testify.

So to your concern, maybe if the State had called him, he may have still pled the Fifth,

or maybe he would have testified truthfully, or maybe he would have testified inconsistently.

Unfortunately, the jury did not receive any of that information.

What the jury knew, essentially, was that Hugo did not testify at all, and they did not know why.

Well, what's your response to Mr. Barnett's argument about tampering requires withholding

and withholding requires possession?

So in New Hampshire, we do have the concept of constructive possession to start with.

So you don't, in any possession, crime.

You don't need to already possess the item to commit that crime.

You can be charged with possession of a controlled drug, for example.

If you have the ability to control what happens with that item under the theory of constructive possession.

However, when the tampering itself is not a possession-based crime,

Hugo did not need to possess the video to withhold information about the video.

He knows about the video.

If anything, he possesses knowledge of the video,

and the defendant is asking him to withhold that knowledge of the video from police

and from any other investigative unit or any other...

The defendant's state of mind or state of knowledge as to the existence or location of the video is irrelevant?

It's not irrelevant.

The defendant knows the video exists.

The defendant knows that it's on Max Bambio's Gmail account.

For whatever reason, I guess that's the Gmail account he had on his phone when he made the video.

It's relevant to show that he is able to give Hugo the ability to go destroy the video.

Certainly for the falsifying, but in terms of the witness tampering,

the withholding information that he's asking Hugo to do

is also to withhold the information about how he's asked Hugo to go delete the video.

I guess it's relevant to show that the video does in fact exist,

or at least that the defendant believes it exists on this Gmail account,

but it's not relevant to whether Hugo possessed the video

because Hugo does not need to possess the video to withhold information about it.

Well, isn't it your theory that by virtue of writing the letter,

the defendant informs Hugo of the existence of the video and your theory is

the letter requests that he withhold any knowledge of the video, including the video itself.

So that's the basis to make it as simple as possible.

The defendant informs his codependent, there's a video out there, go destroy it.

And by the way, withhold any information about that.

That's where you read the letter.

I think reading the letter along with the jail calls,

that is the inference that can be drawn regarding the witness tampering charge.

Yes. I know that the indictment says withhold information

when he wrote Hugo the letter and requested that Hugo delete information,

but the jail calls are relevant to this charge because they inform the jury

about the mental state and the intention of the defendant

because the state also had to prove in the witness tampering

that the defendant attempted to induce or otherwise cause Hugo to withhold the information.

So, and again, I acknowledge it in the letter, there's not an explicit sentence that says

do not tell the police about the video. I understand that.

But that's why the jail calls are important to help the jury infer

that that is the purpose, that is the intention of the defendant.

And we know that from the jail calls because when they're talking about the letter,

the defendant keeps asking, did you get the letter?

Did you get the letter? And you pointed out just as Donovan,

one of the jail calls says when you get the letter, get rid of it.

All of that is threat information regarding his intention about

Hugo withholding information. There's also a back and forth at one point

in one of the jail calls where Hugo says,

I don't understand why you're so worried about the letter.

Like it's not a big deal. And the defendant says, the letter is Skittles.

The letter is Skittles. And Skittles to the defendant is a childhood phrase

they use to describe something that's a problem or something to be on the lookout.

And Hugo says to him, well, if you didn't admit to anything on the video,

it doesn't matter. You know, if you sold a million dollars and they don't have the money,

they can't prove you sold a million dollars. And the defendant again responds,

the letter is a million dollars. So in his mind, the letter,

which has information about the video and how to access the video to the police,

is Skittles, is a problem.

Isn't there double jeopardy Skittles?

There's no double jeopardy Skittles in this case because these are two separate crimes.

So witness tampering is about withholding testimonial evidence

or preventing somebody from going to court or going to the police

and telling information that they have. And falsifying physical evidence

in any form, solicitation attempt, whatever, what have you,

is about destroying physical, objective evidence.

So in this case...

But you're talking about withholding testimony.

In the witness tampering.

Also in the...

That's true.

In the other one, you're talking about the letter,

but also the jailhouse calls indicate that he wanted him to not talk about it.

So we're sort of overlapping here.

I will say there is some overlap,

but that's because these charges arise out of the same criminal episode.

So there will be some overlapping evidence,

but the solicitation of falsifying physical evidence

charges the defendant with soliciting the co-defendant, Matt Hugo.

Right, so we're back to just the letter,

not the jailhouse calls,

not the information overlay.

But the solicitation is specifically about destroying, altering, concealing the video,

which is physical evidence.

And this Court held in Ramsey that two cases for double jeopardy purposes

can be two separate crimes if they have different mens reyes and different consequences.

And this Court got to that conclusion in Ramsey by talking about its holding in Young,

which it called problematic.

And it called Young problematic because in Young,

this Court said that an attempted murder charge

subsumed a first-degree assault charge in Young.

And then in Ramsey, this Court held that was wrong

because those two charges, first-degree assault and attempted murder,

had different mens reyes and different consequences.

And in this case, we have different mens reyes and different consequences.

The witness tampering has a knowing mens reya

and the falsifying physical evidence has a purposeful mens reya.

And both of these have different consequences.

The witness tampering's consequence is preventing the,

or preventing Hugo from telling anybody any information about the video

and the falsifying physical evidence has a different consequence

of destruction of the video

or at least soliciting Hugo to destroy the video.

Those are two separate pieces of evidence that would be destroyed

and the legislature has separated those out as separate crimes

because we don't want people to destroy physical evidence

and we don't want people to prevent individuals from providing information

that they have about crimes.

Now, to respond to Mr. Barnard's argument regarding the crime of delinquency of a minor,

is it a crime for a minor to possess alcohol?

It is a crime for a minor to possess alcohol,

but what I'm alleging here is that the crime was actually the passing

of the alcohol amongst the children.

So it's not that the crime, the delinquent charge these girls have committed

is when they receive the alcohol from the defendant

in which the defendant said,

drink up, it's your last night out or something to that effect.

Each girl then sifts from the alcohol, that's not the crime,

but then passes it to the girl next to her to sip from that.

So RSA 1795, not 10.

Correct. So 1795 is about distributing or providing alcohol to a minor.

So each time those girls pass that can back and forth amongst themselves,

they're committing 1795.

That's a delinquent act.

And I know the defense argues in his reply brief that that charge is not in the criminal code,

but that would be an absurd result if this court were to hold

that 1795 is not in the criminal code.

1795 is a misdemeanor, and 6259 defines all felonies and misdemeanors as crimes.

And under that logic, any crime committed under 318b by a juvenile

would not be able to have a juvenile delinquency petition filed against them.

And I cannot imagine that the legislature intended for a child...

There's a difference between a delinquency petition and a crime as outlined here.

That's true, but 318 is also not part of the criminal code, technically.

But I cannot imagine that the legislature intended no juvenile petition

to be filed against a 16-year-old dealing with drugs.

No juvenile petitions get filed for delinquent behaviors.

That's true.

That aren't all...there's a whole different purpose to the juvenile delinquency statute.

I agree totally, which is why I think this charge under 1795 can be a delinquent act,

unlike the defendant argues in his reply brief.

But isn't a minor possession of alcohols in that a violation level offense?

If they're holding it themselves, correct.

But the second they distribute it to a minor, that's a misdemeanor under 1795.

But that's not the way the charges are read to me.

It means he's alleged to have aided and agreed or attempted to aid Hugo in planning

or committing it, specifically he provided alcohol to the girls.

But he's not agreeing or attempting to agree to aid the girls to commit this offense.

That's not the way the charges read, do they?

It is because he is an accomplice with Hugo in effectuating the goal of providing

alcohol to the minor so that they can then pass the alcohol amongst themselves

and get more and more drunk as they drink the beer.

It is part of the charge.

But there's no intent requirement that he intended to assist them in passing it around.

But the intention here is that he contributed to their choice to be a delinquent juvenile, essentially.

And he did complete that intention.

They did certainly pass that beer around for minutes of time, and all three girls did get very intoxicated.

And so that purpose of helping them contribute to their own delinquency was effectuated.

And he promoted that idea by saying to them as he provided them the alcohol,

drink up, it's your last night out.

Because they had already told them they were runaways from the rehab facility.

And so if there are no further questions, I'll rest on my brief.

Thank you, council.

Mr. Barnard, you wish to use your one minute.

I would waive my rebuttal unless the court has questions.

Thank you very much, council.

Case submitted, the court is adjourned.
