This is case 2021-0286, petition of CELCO partnership DBA Verizon wireless.

Good afternoon, attorney Delaney. I understand you've reserved one minute.

Yes, thank you.

Please proceed.

Good afternoon, and may it please the court. My name is Michael Delaney on behalf of the petitioner CELCO partnership DBA Verizon wireless.

I found the diagrams of Verizon's application difficult to discern.

So with the court's permission before entertaining questions, I'd like to briefly orient the court to a blow up of an illustration.

This is the photograph on page six of the reply brief.

This is the existing communication site at Cannon Mountain does not reflect Verizon's application.

At the top, there is a 95-foot guide tower, and you can see three guidelines extending in three directions down to the ground to support that tower.

Directly below it is a 2400 square foot equipment building.

That equipment building is full of communications equipment and additional antennas like the antennas on the towers.

Equipment is needed separate from the antennas to support the antennas.

On the top of the elevated equipment building is an observation deck that is open to the public for scenic viewing,

and the area below the elevated equipment desk deck is open area,

but you will see that it is obstructed by wood and steel girders that are in an X-like fashion that obstruct the footprint of the site along all sides.

Verizon proposed to affix six antennas to the facade of the elevated equipment building on three corners of the building for triangulation.

Two on each corner right at the corner.

So if I could orient you to the shingled area of the exterior wall on the far sides of the black boxes, there would be two antennas on each corner.

They are one foot wide, they are one foot depth, and they are six feet in height,

and they would rest towards the top of the equipment building but below the eyesight of the observation deck.

Those would be camouflaged by sheathing that would match the shingling and the color of the shingling.

That's consistent with legislative guidance in 12K13,

which asks carriers to consider using facade mounted antennas as a better option than high towers that have greater visual impacts.

So really, the tower capacity is a red herring because the technology has advanced to a place where we can use these buildings with less visual impact.

And in order to support those antennas, Verizon proposed to establish a 10 by 12 shed.

That shed was proposed because the department had told Verizon that the 2400 square foot equipment building was full.

The shed would be located within the existing footprint of the communication site directly below the elevated building inside the obstructed facade of the interior

where frankly no parent would want their kids going near for fear of safety issues.

Relative to the aesthetic impact of this proposal, Verizon proposed that first,

the visual impact of the camouflaged antennas would be minimal as compared to the tower with competitors' antennas on it.

Secondly, that the change in the surface of the natural environment,

the 10 by 12 square foot place where there would be a shed touching the ground is within the existing footprint and not in the way of hikers.

And finally, relative to public uses of this environment, you can see them in the illustration.

There are hikers that would not be impacted by this expansion proposal and there are scenic viewers who would not be impacted by this proposal

and really couldn't even lean over that fence to see these antennas on the side of the facade.

The state says we don't even have jurisdiction to be here, Mr. Delaney. How do you respond?

We assert there is jurisdiction, Your Honor, and I would look to your recent decision in September regarding jurisdiction to be here.

That was a case where you had a company that was soliciting funds from the GAP front fund under an executive order.

And this court opined that jurisdiction existed under certiorari review for two reasons.

One, no statutory mechanism appeal in any statute. That's the case here.

And two, the agency decision would otherwise be unreviewable.

Isn't there an adequate remedy at law for you here?

We submit there is not, Your Honor. And I would note in that regard, the state when it articulated that there's an adequate remedy of law said there may be remedies outside the four corners of the policy decision.

We're looking for a remedy regarding the misapplication of that policy.

Does that require some factual findings?

I didn't hear you, Mr. Your Honor.

Does that require some factual findings? And the Superior Court has certiorari review as well.

Shouldn't you be down there? Isn't that where you should start?

We submit, in this instance, with the state having articulated to us that there was no mechanism for appeal, that the certiorari review to this court was appropriate, and that there is no other way for us to get a substantive decision

on the federal...

Not that we are lazy, Mr. Delaney, but if we were to decide in your favor on that narrow issue, cannot we all go home?

Certainly, if you decided you do not have jurisdiction...

I meant the opposite.

Oh, I believe if you have jurisdiction, Your Honor, we would ask you to articulate the remedy that we're requesting in our brief.

The essence of your argument, legal argument, seems to be that the commissioner should have engaged in rulemaking, or perhaps the policy is a rule that was ultra-viries, either with respect to 227H or perhaps 541A.

And on the former, the first point, I just note that the Administrative Procedure Act itself has a provision where any interested person may petition an agency to adopt, amend, or repeal a rule.

That's Section 4 of 541A, and I'm wondering whether Selco or Verizon has petitioned the department to adopt a rule pursuant to RSA 227H, and why isn't that the procedure that should be adopted in this case?

That petition has not been adopted. We have not made that petition to the department, Your Honor. The rulemaking issue is one of the grounds that we've brought this on.

And in that regard, where we're at right now is we now have a decision that has been made articulating new standards that we can test, that we find in error.

So then the alternative is, or an alternative theory, is that the commissioner acted ultra-viries. And to me, a second adequate remedy for Selco in this situation is RSA 541A24, which permits a declaratory judgment against an agency where an agency may have exceeded its authority.

Why isn't Verizon pursuing that remedy, as opposed to the extraordinary remedy of tertiary?

Because we believe this is the appropriate place to address the errors with the policy. We're also aware that this court has articulated a holding, as we submit, requiring that rulemaking process to occur, and it has not occurred. Verizon proceeded forward.

So again, why not petition the agency to engage in rulemaking? Why isn't that the answer? I mean, that mechanism I will represent to you does exist.

And our position is that this court does have certiorari review other than the existence of that petition.

One final question. What is your opinion on the state's assertion that the language in Nevins is dicta?

We think it's central to the holding. It's central to the holding. Nevins very clearly said it was a challenge to whether rules needed to exist. The Nevins court said rules exist, but in this case nobody alleged prejudice.

That is a central component of the final holding of the court, and in that regard we believe it's dispositive.

Relative to the errors with the policy, we do believe that the department misapplied the standard in its own policy, and I would like to address that briefly if I could.

The standard for new users under section eight requires the department to weigh two open-ended competing values under that policy.

Aesthetic impacts is the first value. The second value is improvements to health safety and welfare. The third value isn't an issue in this case, electronic integrity.

Those values are at intention with one another, and in order to do a proper analysis of this type of a siting location, it is inherent that those two values be compared to one another.

They are codependent on one another to determine whether the relative aesthetic impact is too great. That did not happen here.

There is no mention in this four-page denial letter of any improvement caused by project benefits associated with Verizon improving coverage in the Franconia Notch State Park for in excess of 120 million people.

It is not even mentioned, and while the state and the brief certainly tries to undermine that position, the reality is the department didn't even consider it below.

So the findings, the positions in the application that there are substantial benefits by expanding 5G reliable coverage throughout remote terrain, those are uncontested.

There is coverage up there now, right? Just not 5G for Verizon.

There is coverage, and in the application there is an articulation that that coverage is unreliable. The application went so far as to say the improvements are needed in some cases relative to life or death situations.

Those assertions were not contested by the department. This was a singular tunnel vision focus on aesthetics, and in looking only at aesthetics, the department misapplied the criteria that exist for aesthetics.

And let me briefly talk about the placement of the shed. The finding is that the shed has the potential to result in unacceptable environmental impacts.

Now a potential is something that doesn't exist now that might exist in the future. That's an erroneous finding. That's an unreasonable finding.

And in that regard, the findings on the adverse impacts on the shed are future findings. Relative to the ice in the building, we do not believe those findings are supported by the record.

And in that regard, we believe that the criteria that exist under the policy to assess whether this shed was the least physical intrusion of the environment.

That standard wasn't mentioned or addressed by the department in this.

Mr. Delaney, is it your position that this is the only viable forum for review of this decision?

Of the underlying decision, it is, Your Honor. We believe that there could be mechanisms generally under the Declaratory Judgment Act, Ritz of Mandamus, to contest rulemaking.

But within the context of this case, within the four corners of this decision, this is the only avenue available for Verizon to obtain review.

Petition the agency to adopt rules and then reapply under the rules. Why isn't that the answer here? Because Sertiari would be an extraordinary thing to start reviewing what the commissioner did here, which is exercise her discretion.

And the alternative, Your Honor, is to remand the matter, vacate the decision that was wrongfully decided for that process to begin.

And for those reasons, we would request that you grant the petition that's been filed by Verizon.

Thank you.

Mayor, please, the court. My name is Michael Haley from the New Hampshire Department of Justice, appearing today on behalf of the respondent, the commissioner for the New Hampshire Department of Natural and Cultural Resources.

I'd like to focus on the issue today, which I believe is actually before the court, as Your Honors have pointed out, that this is not a decision that is appropriate for Sertiari review.

The state acted in this instance, not as a regulator, but as a landowner. And Verizon wants to enter into a lease with the state. They began contract negotiations with the state by submitting this proposal.

We have determined that the proposal is not something that we want to pursue any further. And there's-

So the state has unfettered discretion in this circumstance to do whatever it wants?

I believe that we have equal right to-

Is this a separation of powers claim you're making?

I believe that we have the same level of authority over the land as any regular landowner would, the ability to take into consideration any of the factors that any ordinary landowner would take into consideration.

Except there's state action here. It's not a regular landlord.

There is state action, except that it's not regulatory action. So there's not the same sort of due process concerns.

So that could be in the eye of the beholder?

Well, Your Honor, I believe that there ultimately is no right to enter into a contract with the state, nor is there any right to enter into preliminary contract negotiations with the state.

So I don't believe that it's the same type of state action.

So how do we combine that thought with a policy that the commissioner follows?

So this commissioner policy is an internal policy that the commissioner uses to make sure that her decisions are consistent from proposal to proposal.

It is not a rule in the traditional 541A rule sense because it's not something that is binding on the parties in the traditional way.

Shouldn't it have been adopted through rulemaking?

I can't speak to why rules weren't adopted following Nevins.

I do believe, however, that the type of rules that are discussed in Nevins are not the type of rules that are sought here.

It would not be possible to promulgate a rule that said, if you do the following things, you get a contract.

Any contract of this type would have to go through the regular RSA 440 process, which includes review by the council on resources and development.

What are the standards for someone in Verizon's position?

I mean, what are the benchmarks and how have those benchmarks been publicly vetted?

I mean, it's the purpose of rulemaking.

I believe that is correct.

I think, however, that ultimately the type of rules that were told to be adopted in Nevins are rules that would limit access to these type of sites.

The petitioners in Nevins were seeking not to put up a tower but to prevent a tower from being put up.

Again, any lease that we were to arrive at would require review by court.

Sorry, did you say tower?

I'm sorry, in Nevins they were seeking to put up a tower.

In this case, they're seeking to put antennas.

But any lease that we ultimately were able to negotiate would ultimately still need to be reviewed by the governor and council.

That decision surely is not reviewable on certiorari.

I believe that since we're talking about preliminary contract negotiations, it is improper for them to ask this court to jump in.

If we were to pursue those negotiations and they then came back and said, oh, we disagree on price.

Their decision on price is arbitrary and capricious.

Supreme Court, please review that.

That's really similar to the situation here.

We've determined that this use of state land, this building is full.

We don't want any more.

But this proposal doesn't exceed the fullness of the building.

It's on the side of the building.

First, I believe it's an admission by them that the building itself is full.

The building inside is full, but this doesn't expand.

I mean, it's attached to the outside of the building and it doesn't expand the height.

It doesn't add a new tower.

So the department has a lot of experience with antennas on various sites around the state.

They do have specific problems with facade mounted antennas in many instances.

It prevents them from performing maintenance on the buildings, repainting, reshingling, things like that.

Aren't those abstract facts that have to be connected somehow to this case?

You can't just throw them out.

I believe that we can because in this case we're acting as a landowner

and a landowner with experience of many tenants can take into consideration

the types of experiences they've had with tenants in the past

and ultimately decide they don't want to pursue a lease with a particular party.

Again, this is a decision as a landowner and not a decision as a regulatory body deciding the rights of the citizen.

So is this decision unreviewable in any forum?

I believe there are components of this decision that are certainly reviewable,

as your honors have already pointed out.

The decision, our interpretation of the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act,

our decision about the Telecommunications Act,

all of those things I believe as well as whether the policy is appropriate, which we believe it is.

Those are all reviewable by a superior court.

But not the actual decision by a state actor to allow two companies to locate and not a third?

Well, ultimately it would not be the department's decision to grant this lease.

We do not have authority on our own to grant the lease.

So the best that they could hope for is us to present a lease to court,

to long range, and to governor and council to seek approval.

As to the existence of tenants up there already, yes there are.

We did it on a first come, first serve basis.

Essentially the purpose of the towers in the first instance was to host state equipment,

Department of Safety, Fish and Games, key patrol.

When there was available space left, that went to some commercial tenants.

The space is now full.

I can't speak to whether first come, first serve is the fairest and best way to do that in all instances.

But I don't believe that if this court were to take this on-serture review,

your mission is not to decide whether we use the best method to allocate the space.

It's whether we actually arbitrarily and capriciously,

which I don't think first come, first serve is arbitrarily or capricious.

Would it be better for them to have brought cert at the superior court to develop that record?

I think I wouldn't oppose them.

I mean, I think they have the right to file that.

I'm sure that I haven't.

You're no longer claiming that the Commissioner's Act has to be viewed as a judicial or quasi-judicial act

to ground a petition insert.

Well, this court does not agree with that argument that the state made in the Whitman case.

So no, I'm not making that in case, that argument.

I believe this is distinguishable though because in Whitman,

the state held itself out as having an available program.

Come apply.

We'll use these standards and we'll give you money if you meet the standards.

That is very different from us saying, we're full.

Please don't apply.

We don't have space.

We don't plan on expanding the site.

I can apply without affecting your fullness.

I've found a workaround.

Your reason for being full doesn't matter anymore because I've found new technology that makes it doable.

I think it's helpful to think of this as an analogy to a sort of personnel decision.

Someone can come to the state with an excellent resume, wonderful credentials,

and if we don't have a position available,

we're not required to go out of our way to find a way to make that position fit.

If we're full and we're not interested in finding a way to make it fit,

I don't think we're obligated to do that.

Could you just go back to Justice Bassett's question?

I apologize, Justice Bassett.

I didn't hear the question.

It was the Lane and Water Conservation Fund aspect of this decision,

and the TCA aspect of this decision would be reviewable in Superior Court.

Is that your question?

I believe they could file a declaratory judgment in Superior Court

to request us rest an interpretation of those statutes.

But not the rest of her decision?

I mean, the rulemaking decision, I believe, as your Honor pointed out,

they could have a 541A24 action.

Those could all be joined together.

Again, I don't believe that the Superior Court would have the authority,

nor does this court have the authority to order that a lease be entered into.

That would ultimately be up to the governor or executive counsel.

But would the Superior Court have the ability to determine

whether the decision was arbitrary, unreasonable, or capricious?

I think that the problem with that is that, ultimately,

the remedy that's available is go back and negotiate more.

That's not really a remedy unless it requires the state to reach a contrary position.

And then I believe the judiciary is inserting itself into contract negotiations

on behalf of the executive branch,

and it does not appear to me to be an appropriate role for the judiciary to play here.

The executive branch agency is the landowner who is trying to use this space

with many competing interests at stake,

and they're in the best position to determine whether a lease proposal

is appropriate for the site.

You don't have to use all your time.

If there are no further questions, then I would ask that this court

not take this petition up on certiorary view and in the event that you do,

to find that the state did not act arbitrary and capriciously

and uphold the decision. Thank you.

It's not go back and negotiate.

It's go back and apply the policy with the criteria

as they're intended to be applied.

First come, first serve is unfairness and discrimination.

Under federal communications law,

you cannot deny coverage availability to one carrier

because it's already offered by another carrier.

And that's the claim that you can bring in federal court.

That is potentially a claim outside of this decision

that could be brought under the Federal Telecommunications Act.

Thank you.

Thank you very much, counsel.

The case is submitted.

The court will stand in brief recess.
