This is case 2021-0156 King Auto Body Inc. versus State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance

Company.

Good morning. I understand, Attorney Sackman, you have one minute reserved for a bottle.

Okay, and I think we're going to hear from Mr. Pespanen.

Yes.

Thank you.

Please proceed. You have five minutes.

Hopefully, we won't use it all.

Good morning. Thank you for hearing this case today. I'm a little bit nervous being here.

Not an attorney for anything.

So are we.

So we're here today to address the legality of post-lost assignments of insurance money

and proceeds in which my customers rely on expertise in collision repair to receive

payment from the responsible insurance company for the full necessary cost of their repairs.

Apart from hiring a lawyer to protect their interest, the assignment of this insurance

money and proceeds is one of the avenues that a consumer has at their disposal to ensure

that the insurance company is following their due diligence.

When my customer entered the contract with the insurance company, in this case State

Farm, they did it in good faith. The consumer agrees to pay their premiums with the understanding

that the insurance company will make payable on the loss the total cost that was necessary

to repair their damaged vehicle.

The cost to repair my customer's damaged vehicle is not the amount that was offered in the State

Farm insurance estimate. State Farm executed this estimate without physically inspecting

my customer's damaged vehicle. Based such estimate from a few photos supplied by others,

State Farm refused to consider the vehicle manufacturers, repair procedures and their

settlement offered to my customer. State Farm listed incorrect replacement parts in

the settlement offer an estimate. State Farm did not allow the provision for coverage

of hidden damage that is determined connected with the claim.

I think you've hit on the actual underlying dispute here, which is from what I understand

your perspective that insurance companies ought to be covering for OEM requirements or should

be doing more with respect to that.

My question to you is why isn't that a matter for the legislature to decide as opposed to

the court?

Because what is owed to my customers is bound in the insurance contract and the insurance

department that rules on the insurance law does not have the authority to rule on contract

law.

But there is a statute that governs what insurance, what may be recovered from

insurance companies for auto body work, isn't there?

There are laws about their settlement offers that have to be based upon an appraisal conducted

on by others. What is currently happening is the insurance industry is complying what

they call insurance estimates, which may be different from insurance company to insurance

company. They don't follow the vehicle manufacturers procedures to correctly to repair our family's

cars that are on the road right now. Our cars are rolling computers or rolling rockets and

the insurance industry wants to cut corners wherever we can to save them a few dollars.

The insurance estimates are not legal appraisals. There's no law in the insurance laws that

mention insurance estimates. They mention appraisals. Appraisals, I'm trying to figure

out where there's a definition for appraisals in the state of New Hampshire and the only

one I can find is the Department of Revenue. And the Department of Revenue says an appraisal

is governed by the uniform standards of professional appraisal practices which is authorized

by the U.S. Congress. These appraisals, they got to be done partially, independently

by disinterested party. That is not happening right now with these companies.

Sir, all of these arguments that you're making about OEM parts and all really go to the merits

whether this was reasonable or not or the repair was reasonable. But you agree that

the rights here can be determined by this single clause in the insured's contract

with the insurer? That single clause is the anti-assignment clause.

Yes. That's the legal issue in front of us, the threshold legal issue that we have to

decide. Right, yeah, you know. So I know the clause says benefits. That's not state

firm has to describe in the policy what a benefit is. And the benefit is not what

we're looking for here. What we're looking for is the proceeds that is owed after the loss.

The insurance company shouldn't have no new...

But that's up for the trial court to decide. If we remand and you get your trial, that's

not for us to decide.

To reword that again?

You're not asking us to acquire state firm to pay you. You need to be decided by

the trial court.

Correct. Yes.

And your position is you're not asserting any rights different than the insured would

have through the policy language?

Correct. I know the Keen District Court has dismissed numerous of my cases that the

insurance companies and state firm have not consented in the past to the

assignment. But in my folder here I have numerous copies of checks where

insurance company had consented and had reassigned funds to my company Keen

Autobody and they short paid on the loss.

Different insurance carriers again.

Different insurance carriers.

Different insurance carriers and state firm as well.

Sir, your five minutes are up.

Okay. Thank you for your time.

Good morning. May it please the court.

Ned Sackman here on behalf of the New Hampshire Auto Dealers Association.

Thank you for allowing me to argue on this case as Representative Theamicus.

Today we ask this court to adopt a majority rule that is based on sound

legal and public policy considerations.

We request that the court hold that anti-assignment clauses in insurance

policies are unenforceable when the assignment occurs post-loss.

This is a widely adopted rule including in neighboring Maine and Vermont.

For a long time. Is that correct?

That is true. I believe 1982 in Maine and maybe 10 or 15 years ago in Vermont.

Isn't there some reliance interest on the part of the wealth of parties to the

contract and setting the premium?

Wouldn't we be invading that reliance interest?

I guess you know maybe premiums would go up if your position prevails.

Right. So what my response would be that the insurance company

needs underwrite the risk of certain losses in their policies occurring.

They do not necessarily underwrite the risk of particular litigants.

They're not in the business of evaluating litigants.

That may be why they are restricting the assignment so that they have that

ability to give consent or control that loss.

I think where it's been widely understood and widely written about the

reason that they restrict the assignment and it's one that makes perfect sense is

they don't want the policy assigned to someone where the risk is going to change.

If they've written a policy for someone who has a safe driving record,

they don't want it assigned to someone who has an unsafe driving record.

Because they've underwritten that risk and they've set the premium to account

for that risk.

But in the instance where the losses already occurred and it's a loss that

the insurance company has promised, they'll cover.

They should not be relieved from providing the coverage they've promised

simply because it is going to be provided to a different party.

Again, it's once a loss has occurred.

So that loss, that loss that they promised to cover has already happened.

All we're asking to have happen is that once the loss has occurred,

someone else can collect the payment.

Doesn't that conflict with Margolis?

Margolis is different for a couple of reasons.

Number one, Margolis relied on statutory language that no longer exists.

So RSA 40723, which was a fire insurance statute,

said that policies that were assigned without permission, I should say,

are void and inoperative.

And that specific language was quoted in that opinion.

That statute's not on the books anymore.

So for that reason, it's different.

The other reason I would say it's different is in that case,

the entire policy was assigned.

Whereas here, all that's being assigned is the right to collect

on this particular claim under the policy, not the entire policy.

I appreciate your directness in your brief that this is a pure policy-based argument.

No textual basis in the provision, the anti-assignment provision that's before us.

In the rule you just articulated,

sounds like it would apply to all insurance policies,

regardless of the rest.

First party, third party, occurrence-based, claims-based.

And my question is, this is a highly regulated industry, highly legislated industry.

An entire volume of the RSAs is devoted to insurance.

Why isn't this matter of policy, if not the underlying dispute on OEM reimbursement,

why isn't this matter of policy properly considered by our legislature?

Fair question.

And if you don't mind, I'll break it up into two and answer both,

because I think the first part of the question

what I was understanding you say, Your Honor,

is the rule that I'm asking for would apply to lots of different kinds

of insurance policies.

And I think that's a fair summary, although I want to point out

that the court could choose to say,

we're going to only rule on post-assignment losses,

for example, in the kind of policy that's before the court.

So I don't think the court has to issue a ruling that would address policies.

Now, you also raised the question of public policy,

which, again, I think is a fair point.

And what I would say is, many times the court does properly defer

to the legislature on issues of public policy, but not all the time.

And so I'd like to give a couple of examples.

One is the non-delegable duty doctrine.

So in that instance, and in the Valenti case, this court said,

when landowners have independent contractors come,

regardless of how the contractual language is delegating the duty

to the contractor, they can't delegate the duty to provide

a safe place for the invitee onto the land.

And so that comes out of the Valenti case.

Another example I would give is non-competition agreements.

Again, this is an area where the court has made rulings that

touch on public policy.

And so the court's made a lot of rulings on non-compete cases.

You want to say something, Your Honor?

Well, I just want to get to the know of my concern.

When a court makes policy-based decisions,

there are policy-based consequences.

And one of the cases you cite is from Nebraska, the Miller-Gutter case.

And in that, the court noted that in some circumstances,

public policy may actually favor enforcement of the anti-assignment

provision post-loss.

And they point to a very important area of insurance,

and that's health insurance.

And the point there is that there

is an important policy consideration preventing

insured from going, for instance, out of network

to decide to pick their particular provider.

And I think that is an institutional concern

to understand exactly what we would be doing here.

Would you agree with that?

I think, certainly, the court would

is right to be careful about issuing a ruling that

has unintended consequences.

That's entirely true.

I think, however, in this case, you

can issue a ruling that's relatively narrow.

That says, when you're talking about property and casualty

policies, and you're looking at an assignment that

occurs post-loss, so that the only thing that you're really

changing is who the insurance company owes the money to,

and you're not changing the duty that, for example,

a health care provider might need to provide treatment

to another person or payment to another person.

I think, in that narrow instance,

you would be acting to avoid allowing insurance companies not

to have to pay for something they promised to pay for,

but you would be doing it in a way that didn't create

unintended consequences, because it wouldn't suddenly

apply to health insurance, for example,

or other forms of insurance.

I'm sorry.

Wouldn't it be rewriting the contract?

I mean, given that the insured,

if the insured is unhappy with the amount of money

to be paid, has remedies under the contract

to dispute the amount of money due to the loss.

So why wouldn't we be rewriting the contractual relationship

between these two parties?

You would not be rewriting the relationship.

You would just be choosing a very narrow part of the contract

superior towards the end of a rather lengthy contract.

Would the auto body shop then have

to go through whatever arbitration proceedings

or whatever remedies there are in the contract that

apply to the insured?

It would depend, of course, on the various policy.

But yes, I mean, basically, you would

have the body shop standing in the shoes of the insured.

You wouldn't be rewriting it, though.

You would only be taking this one narrow piece of the policy

and saying, we're not going to enforce that,

and we're not going to do it further.

Do we have to buy your public policy argument here,

or can we just construe the language of the statute

as have some courts analyzing chose of action

in that type of approach?

You certainly could do that.

I don't think you have to do anything I'm suggesting.

But I would say the language is pretty clear.

So I'm not going to sit here and suggest to you

that there is an ambiguity in the language.

I don't see one.

But I think this is not a rule of instruction.

This is simply a rule that's been adopted

to avoid a really bad result.

So that's how I would answer your question, Your Honor.

And the auto repair shop is in no better position

than the insured.

Whatever rights the insured has, whether they

have to go through arbitration or whether there's

any limits on the process for the recovery,

that would be something the auto repair shop was stuck with,

essentially.

It certainly wouldn't have improved rights.

No, this would simply be it's been

assigned the right to collect on the proceeds.

Although I would say, and I see my light sign just very quickly,

the body shop is in the better position

in this limited sense.

For a driver, this is a one-off.

Maybe they don't want to fight with their insurance

company.

For a body shop, this is an everyday occurrence.

And they're in a position to address it in a better way

than the driver.

Good turning second.

Thank you, Tony O'Brien.

Good morning.

Good morning, Your Honor.

May it please the court?

Brent O'Brien on behalf of State Farm.

Primary issue in this matter is I think there's no discussion

that the anti-assignment clause is ambiguous.

There's a significant discussion about what

the effect of that interpreting the clause

would have on the insurance industry in New Hampshire.

So I think it's important to start there.

At last count earlier this week,

Keen Autobody and its associated entities

have filed approximately 75 different cases

against insurance carriers.

And interpreting the anti-assignment clause

such that it applies to only pre-loss assignments

not only reads a limitation into the clause

that everyone seems to agree isn't there,

but it also will open the door for any automobile repair shop,

mechanic, windshield replacement company

to then create essentially a similar situation

to what Keen Autobody has done here.

If you look at some of the documents the Keen Autobody

filed with their brief, they have an authorization form

that's drafted, an assignment of rights form.

So this is in a situation where this is a problem

that's happened one or two times.

So what's the harm in that to the insurance company?

How has the risk changed, the risk being governed

at the time of policy issuance and the premium pay?

So I would say that the best explanation of that

is in the Mercedes-Benz case,

which is the Court of Appeals case from 2010 out of Ohio.

And the reason that the risk is different,

one is because an automobile repair shop

has different interests than an insured.

And that is, it's a profit maximization motive.

And insured's gonna pay a deductible

regardless of what the price is charged for the repairs.

So their interests are getting

the vehicle repaired efficiently?

Not necessarily, it depends upon the nature

of the accident, but go ahead.

You understand there are times when companies

just leave that deductible because there is a fault.

That is true.

That is true, Your Honor.

No, and what the Court of Appeals of Ohio explained is,

one, the Anti-Assignment Clause doesn't just prevent insurers

from covering a driver who's different

than the policy holder.

It also creates a situation where the insurance company

doesn't ultimately have to litigate against a third party.

And in a situation like this,

it would open the door for entities

that have an interest that's different than insured

to bring actions against insurance carriers

when insurance carriers, or most of them rather,

have an Anti-Assignment Clause in the provision

that has no distinction between pre-loss

and post-loss assignments.

Doesn't it take the consumer also out of the conversation

if in fact the insurance estimate is at one level

and the auto body shop says, no, you need this?

Would in that circumstance then the auto body shop

have to explain to the consumer, the insured,

what the difference is, why the additional work

needs to be done?

We read this out of this contract

and the consumer's removed from that analysis.

Absolutely, Your Honor.

And I think if you look at the assignment language

that's in, filed with Keen Auto Body's document,

that's essentially what happens,

is the consumer is essentially eliminated from the equation.

And the consumer, from the auto body shop,

the consumer is the insured from the insurance perspective

and that's the entity that has a relationship

with the insured and that's the entity

that the policy was issued to.

Well, there's another question here

that the insured could bring a claim

against your client, right?

There's one.

And could the insured say to the auto body shop,

hey, will you pay for my lawyer?

There'd be no problem with that, right?

I don't think that, I don't believe

there'd be a problem with that

because that would just be a litigation funding issue

on the other side.

But if it was the insured that was bringing the actual claim,

I don't think there would be an issue

with the auto body repair shop paying

for the lawyer for the insured.

And there's no issue.

I take it there's no arbitration clause here

that probably would have been invoked

but whatever rights the insured has,

certainly anybody who gets the assignment

isn't gonna have any greater rights.

That's my understanding, Your Honor.

I believe it's the same rights

that the auto body repair shop is trying to claim

under the policy that the insured would have.

And there's been a significant discussion

about public policy, but the question I have

is what public policy in New Hampshire

for applying the clause only to pre-loss assignments

is stronger than the public policy?

Why can't we characterize that

as the free alienability of shows and action?

So I think that probably would be the argument

the other public policy, but I would suggest

based on this court's decisions,

one, it's weaker than New Hampshire's support

for the party's freedom to contract.

Two, interpreting contracts

to into their plain language.

And three, this is a policy.

All automobile policies on RSA 412-5

are approved by the insurance commissioner.

And the insurance commissioner in this case,

there's no indication the insurance commissioner

ever disproved this language,

ever suggested that this language

should be limited to only pre-loss assignments

and the state farm anti...

Let me just stop you.

But shouldn't the insurance commissioner be presumed

to know this longstanding law

and the majority of jurisdictions?

So I don't know if it's necessarily

that the insurance commissioner

should know what the majority of jurisdictions do,

but what I would say is there's a suggestion

in the Amicus brief that we're on a march

essentially towards one position on this issue.

And I would suggest that that's incorrect.

If you look in our brief,

we've cited at least five cases

from five different states from the past 15 years

where courts have ruled that the anti-assignment clause

should be interpreted pursuant to its plain language.

And it's actually not a case that's favorable

to my position, but in the floor case,

which is the California case in footnote 46,

they explain that what motivated those courts

is the freedom of contract

and interpreting contracts pursuant to their plain language.

And the situations where those courts have ruled

that anti-assignment clauses apply

to pre-loss and post-loss assignments

have done it in a number of different situations.

The Mercedes-Benz case out of Ohio is the closest,

but in 2007, the Del Monte case out of Hawaii

involved environmental claims

and the court enforced an anti-assignment clause

after those claims.

In 2006, the Holloway case out of Oregon,

the Supreme Court there said that an assignment of rights

to and from an insured restaurant to an employee

was invalidated by an anti-assignment.

You concede that that's a minority view.

I have to concede it's a minority view, Your Honor.

If you count the number of cases,

there's certainly more cases that are against my position.

But what I'd suggest is that this court dealt

with a very similar issue to this,

in terms of interpretation and analysis

in RISA versus all state,

which was I believe about four years ago.

And a similar issue was involved in that case

where maybe 70% of the courts outside New Hampshire

had ruled that all states,

it's called, some people call it an escape pass clause.

It's a clause where if there's an uninsured

motorist arbitration that goes above $25,000,

either party can have a jury trial.

Most states had struck that down.

This court did not.

This court interpreted the language pursuant

to how the contract was written.

It didn't, this court does not engage

in just counting the number of other jurisdictions.

And I think that the fact that there's been,

in our index rather, we've cited I think 10 examples

of cases where the trial court has struck down

these types of cases where there's a key,

where there's a anti-assignment clause involved

is supportive of the position

that that is consistent with New Hampshire law.

And New Hampshire law, in addition to Margolis,

those cases I think are the clearest example

of what's happened with respect

to anti-assignment clauses in New Hampshire.

But Mr. Sackman distinguishes Margolis

on a number of grounds, different statute,

it's assignment of a whole policy.

Aren't those valid distinctions?

They are valid distinctions, Your Honor,

but what I would say is that Margolis

is supportive of the general position

that you don't need to demonstrate an increased risk

for the insurer in order to apply an anti-assignment clause.

And that's been an issue in some cases where,

well, there's no change in the risk

if the loss has already happened.

But in Margolis, this court specifically said

that there was no change in,

that you didn't need to prove an increase in the risk

in order for an anti-assignment clause to be applied.

And in the other authorities

that are cited in Amicus briefs,

one is Breyer, which is I think a 1902 case,

there's a distinction there that this court

draws between an anti-assignment clause

related to the whole policy

and an attempted assignment of a claim

or benefit under the policy.

Let me ask you, how here does the ability to assign,

if there is an ability to assign these claims,

how does that increase the exposure

of the insurance company?

I mean, they're either right or they're wrong,

either their estimate was right or it was wrong,

and that would be the same issue

regardless of the plaintiff, right?

That is true, Your Honor.

But the situation I think is best explained

in the Mercedes-Benz case.

One, it's the fact that it's an entity

that has an interest in having a much higher

or maximizing its profit as much as possible.

And two, it's an entity that has experience

with these types of situations

in the sense that they already have paperwork

drawn up for it, so they might know

if they've had cases in the past that...

So they're better prepared for the litigation,

just like your client would be better prepared

for the litigation than against an insured?

Well, I don't necessarily know if that's true

because an insured could bring the automobile repair shop

if it wanted to defend its position.

It would have to, I even imagine in a small claims case,

bring someone from the auto repair shop

to explain why the repairs are necessary.

So that entity is gonna be involved in the case

regardless.

The insured probably have to pay for their time,

wouldn't they?

Well, in a small claims case,

an insured would typically be representing themselves.

Now it's possible they could have an attorney,

but it's a situation...

Are they gonna hire an expert like the auto dealer?

They're gonna have to pay for that, that expert's time.

They may have to do that,

but it may be a situation where the automobile repair shop

has an interest in trying to recover as well

because they're the party that has charged the amount

that's higher than the insured's estimate.

So I can't be sure that they'd have to pay

for an expert's testimony.

That typically would happen,

but it may not necessarily happen in this case.

Especially since the automobile repair shop

may be characterized as a fact witness

since they were involved in the repairs itself.

But with respect to the Breier case,

the distinction between assigning an entire policy

and assigning the claim and benefits of this policy.

And the entire assignment clause that's involved here

is not stating that you're assigning the entire policy.

It specifically talks about the right benefits

under the policy.

Well, why are the cases wrong

that analyze this in terms of the transfer of rights

being a chosen action?

And that a normal policy reader would look at that

and well, these are just my,

I understand I can't insure my car

and then transfer the policy to a drunk 16-year-old,

but I don't, I wouldn't think that I couldn't do this.

Well, I don't necessarily think that the cases

from other states are wrong, Your Honor,

but I think they're interpreting,

they're drawing on public policy

that just may not be consistent

with the Hampshire public policy.

I think the most prominent public policy here

is the freedom of contract.

This court's repeatedly said

that it interprets insurance policies pursuant

to their plain term.

And I don't think that an insured

who was reading that policy provision

would think there was a distinction

between pre-loss and post-loss assignments

because there is no indication in the provision

that it applies only to pre-loss assignments.

It just says claims and rights and benefits

and rights and benefits of the policy

extend beyond the moment of a loss.

They include the right to bring a claim

to recover more money, various other rights,

depending on what the actual loss is.

So I don't believe that an insured would read that

and say that the language applies

only to pre-loss assignments.

I believe that's reading a limitation

into the provision that's...

Because again, the assignment,

the consequences of the assignment

or whatever happens to that chosen action

could affect the insured in a higher premium

going forward or who knows.

So I don't know that as a factor on her,

but what I would say is that

if the anti-assignment clause

were to apply only to pre-loss assignments,

it certainly would be a change

in the sense that insurance carriers

would then have to recognize

that they may face litigation

or a breach of the insurance policy

from parties that they've never anticipated.

And so I don't know what the ultimate effect would be,

but I think the possibility

that insurance premiums would go up

is certainly something that could happen,

but because I don't know how it would actually,

how great the increase in litigation would be,

I can't say for certain if that would happen.

And there'd be no restriction on the insurer

from assigning this to anyone.

That's correct.

I think if you limit the anti-assignment clause

to just pre-loss assignments,

it opens the door to any post-loss assignment of a claim.

So people could go around and collect insurance over it

or under payment claims

and bundle them together and bring them to court.

That's correct.

And they could do that,

even if they didn't have an interest in the question itself.

In recent cases,

he and Audubon always begun filing.

It has a separate LLC that now takes the assignment.

I imagine to take away the argument

that the same party that set the estimate

can then bring the claim.

So essentially that's already started to happen

in response to some of the cases that we've already seen.

Well, what about the fundamental issue here that we heard

that automobiles these days are highly complex.

They're computer-on-wheels.

This is beyond the can of the average insurer.

Where is their voice in the settlement of the claim

between the auto body shop and the insurance company?

Well, the insurer always has a choice

in where it wants to have its vehicle repaired.

And the insurer always has an opportunity

to negotiate with its insurance carrier

related to that amount.

And I believe even when State Farm

has their automobile repair shops

that they use or have as select repair shops,

it's set specifically on that website

that only the customer can decide

where these repairs happen.

So the fact that they're choosing

to go to Keen Autobody is their choice.

But what our concern is that they're agreeing

to a price that State Farm's never agreed to

and then attempting to force State Farm

to pay that price with State Farm having no say in it.

And I ask that you affirm the trial course decision,

but I see that my light is on.

Thank you.

20 seconds.

I have nothing farther for this question.

Case is submitted.

Thank you very much.

Congratulations.
