This is case 2021, 0356 Jeff Aker at all versus town of Hanover.

Good morning.

Good morning.

Good morning.

May it please the court.

My name is Nathan Stern.

I'm an attorney at Sheehy, Furlong, and Beam, and I'm representing Jeff and Lara Aker.

To understand this case, it's important to understand the physical context of this project.

The proposed facility here is a 21,000-square-foot church, the parking lot for over 100 cars

and occupancy by over 400 people, and this is proposed to be located in a single-family residential neighborhood,

a neighborhood that's both single-family in terms of the modest single-family homes that exist in the neighborhood today,

and as well as the single-family residential zoning district as defined by the Hanover zoning ordinance

that's reserved for single-family homes with very limited other uses.

A church is one of those uses. It's allowed as a special exception.

Some of the other non-residential uses that are allowed by special exception include, for example, a farm stand or a bed and breakfast.

If you consider for a minute the concept of a farm stand or a bed and breakfast that's 21,000-square-feet,

the parking lot for over 100 cars and occupancy by 400 or even 300 people,

you get a sense for putting a project that size in a neighborhood that's single-family residential.

I think that's a very good argument, but once you allow a church by special exception,

there, in theory, is no limitation like that, qualitative limitation like you described, correct?

Well, in the concept of the special exception, there are supposed to be conditions

opposed to safeguard the neighborhood from adverse impacts of the special exception.

Now here, the zoning board got it right the first time around.

They denied this application.

And then on the rehearing with no new evidence in the record, no new facts.

Okay, what authority do you have that says a zoning board requires new facts before it changes its mind?

Well, it doesn't have to have new facts. There could also be an error.

My contention is that there's new facts and no error here.

And there's nothing for them to correct the first time around.

And the evidence of that is that not once, not twice, not three times,

but five different places in the second decision, the zoning board defended its initial denial.

So it was legal error for the ZBA to change its mind?

It was arbitrary for the ZBA to change its mind on no new facts

and where it defended itself so many times, defended its prior decision.

I think that's what makes this different than just your many zoning cases that are out there.

Is the number of times the ZBA said, we did nothing wrong.

We thought it through. We analyzed it correctly.

We made no mistakes, but we're going to change our decision

and we're going to grant approval for the project with conditions.

Now, the primary...

Why weren't they just trying to get it right, as the Chief suggests?

I don't think that there was perceived error.

I know the town argued that there was perceived error and they had a chance to correct it,

but again, the difference here is they said so many different times,

we got it right the last time around.

We got it right and you don't see that when there's a hearing.

You don't see that very often unless they come out with the same decision.

Here, they said, we got it right, yet they changed their decision.

In our standard of review, the legal error is the ZBA's second decision

was arbitrary and capricious and therefore is incorrect.

That's correct.

It was arbitrary to defend its prior decision saying we got it right

and then changing their decision anyway.

What are the facts that support a complete denial?

The facts that support the complete denial are the impacts,

the adverse impacts of this project on the single-family residential neighborhood.

I want to just move ahead just a little bit to the condition that the ZBA used

to mitigate their primary condition they used was this occupancy limit of 300 people.

They looked at the traffic report that was submitted

and they reviewed the amount of traffic that this project was going to generate

and they found adverse impacts.

Although they said that it would be worse at 400 people,

this traffic report was based on an average attendance of 300 people

which is not that far out of the question even if there were 400 people there

because peak hour traffic is the 30th busiest hour of the year.

If you are thinking over the course of the year

if there's an average attendance of 300,

the traffic report could have accounted for more

but they said the traffic report was based on average attendance of 300 people.

Based on that traffic report, they found adverse impacts.

In particular they found that they thought that the traffic report was inadequate

in certain respects.

In some respects they said that it didn't even take into account the noise

that would come from the traffic that would impact the neighborhood.

That would not occur on a daily basis.

That applied particularly to the weekends when services were being held, right?

That's correct. Particularly the peak hour was anticipated to be Sunday mornings

for Sunday morning services.

A time when this residential neighborhood was one of the only days of the week

when they got rested from what the ZBA found was busy neighborhood the rest of the week.

These are qualitative factors.

Can you move to the legal factors?

For this, well, there was a finding of adverse impacts

and the ZBA is required to impose conditions to safeguard the neighborhood.

What they did was they said we can think of no better mechanism to do this

than to impose the occupancy limit that's in the traffic report itself.

The problem with that is it just simply is not logical to say

we find adverse impacts based on 300 people

so we're going to impose an occupancy limit of 300 people.

The only other data point that the ZBA cited in setting that 300 person limit

was two other churches in the town of Hanover.

One that had an occupancy of 120 people and another one of 150 people.

It's an order of more than double from the 300 people that they said.

That's a huge leap.

Do we know the size of those buildings?

I do not know off the top of my head,

but I do recall that they were less than 21,000 square feet.

And do we know if the occupancy limit in the traffic study of 300 people

was limited to the sanctuary as opposed to the rest of the building?

It was based on the entire building.

So it was based on a square footage analysis.

Although the 300 people was the average attendance at a service, correct?

That's correct.

The average attendance at a Sunday morning service.

Sunday morning was anticipated to be the most busy time.

That wouldn't include office space or classroom space

or Sunday school space?

I believe that the assumption was that during Sunday morning services

those other uses would not be driving the level of traffic

like the attendance at the service would be.

And there's no density issue with the 21,000 square feet on the size of the lot?

No, there's no lot coverage floor area ratio issue.

That condition was imposed with the intent of safeguarding the neighborhood

from the adverse impacts of the noise, lights, commotion, et cetera

that would come with the traffic as well as the traffic itself.

And it was just unreasonable for the board to impose a 300-person occupancy limit

thinking that it would mitigate the adverse impacts that were caused by 300 people.

Tell me, they had to call a line, had to draw a line somewhere.

What's wrong with 300?

What's wrong with 300 here is that 300 was the basis

for finding some of the adverse impacts that they found.

And the only other data point that they cited were those churches

that were significantly smaller than 300.

So I'm not saying that 200 would have been the absolute correct line,

but 300 was not.

It was unreasonable to expect that that would safeguard the neighborhood

from the adverse impacts.

I want to switch gears over to the wetlands special exception.

That's the other part of the Acres appeal.

Can you just address the character of the neighborhood argument beyond the traffic?

And how is this proposed church more out of character

than the multi-unit condo developments that are adjacent?

Sure. So the multi-unit condo developments that were referred to

in the certified record are in the rural residential area.

So Greensboro Road runs through the middle of this neighborhood.

There's a strip on either side that's single family residential.

And behind that is the rural residential district.

The condo unit.

So there's two different town home style developments.

And then one development that's a planned unit residential development

with 20 single family homes in it.

These are, even though there are a concentration of people there,

they are residential uses that are on the same schedule,

same traffic patterns, same types of noises, et cetera,

as the other single family residential uses in the neighborhood.

Now in addition, those planned unit residential developments

that were allowed when they were built

are no longer allowed uses in that rural residential district.

So you've got an area where in terms of what you observe on the ground,

along the street you've got these single family residential homes,

all of which are fairly modest in size.

And then sort of behind that you've got a mix of these developments

that were done as planned unit residential developments

which require a lot of preservation of open space.

So you've got a lot of open space in this neighborhood as well.

There's a commercial facility down the street.

There is one commercial facility that's grandfathered.

It's about a quarter of a mile down the street.

My recollection is it's around the magnitude of 10 or 11,000 square feet,

something like that.

And there is commercial development in the immediate area

over the city line, the town line.

There is commercial development down on Route 120.

There is the Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center.

But that's a really different neighborhood.

And that's well over a mile away.

The downtown of Hanover is not that far, but again,

it's over a mile away from this area.

So there is commercial development,

but it's not defining the character of this particular neighborhood.

And again, the church is proposed to be located in a zoning district

that's a single family residential zoning district

as an expression of what the neighborhood is.

It's not only single family residential when you look at it.

It's reserved for single family residential in the zoning ordinance

with just very limited other commercial uses

with an expression that those commercial uses

should have adequate safeguards to protect the neighborhood.

I would like to touch on the wetlands special exception.

I just want to say the wetlands issue is very important for the hackers.

They live across the street and downhill from this project.

So all of the water from this project, not all of it,

some of it's going off to the west.

There's a stream on the west,

but most of the water from this project will come to

what's referred to as wetland E or Design Point 2,

which flows through a culvert from there under Greensboro Road

and into a channel right into the Acre's backyard.

So very important issue for them.

There have been road washouts.

There have been a lot of flooding in this area,

so extremely important.

The way that the zoning special exception is set up for wetlands,

it requires that the applicants show

that there be no increase in peak flow rate

from the activity.

The town has maintained that the activity

is only the activity in the wetlands itself.

So only wetlands are wetland buffers.

So only that area needs to be considered.

But there's a difference in the zoning code,

in the zoning regulations.

Activity, as it's defined, does not depend on being located

in a wetland or a wetland buffer.

There are other places in the zoning ordinance

where it says activity in a wetland or a wetland buffer.

It doesn't say that for the wetlands special exception

that was at play here.

But even if it did, there is no evidence in the record.

Nobody looked at just the runoff from the section

of the project that's in the wetlands or the wetland buffer.

Nobody did that analysis.

The analysis was the entire project, correct?

That is correct.

And that was done by Otter Creek engineers.

And it's hard to separate the runoff from the project,

from the runoff.

From the wetland or buffer areas.

I believe it is.

However, it could have potentially been done by an engineer.

I am certainly not a wetland, a stormwater engineer.

But nobody did that here.

So even if the town is correct,

you only need to look at the portion that's in the wetlands

or the wetlands buffer.

That evidence wasn't on the record.

You're saying that the town had the burden to do that?

The applicant had the burden to do that?

Why didn't your client have a burden to do that?

Well, my client wasn't proposing the project.

I mean, there were some conclusory statements in the record early on

that said simply the project complies with these requirements.

But once you're over 7,500 square feet,

that calculation has to be done by an engineer.

There were more than 7,500 square feet of impacts

when the engineer did the calculation.

It showed that there was an increase in the peak runoff rate.

And it also showed that the discharge that was coming

from the driveway was going into what's called wetland e.

So you're saying without these calculations,

the judgment on drainage or runoff is somewhat ephemeral?

Is that accurate?

I'm sorry.

Could you restate?

Are you saying it's ephemeral?

The analysis is ephemeral?

Well, the statements were made that there was compliance,

just weren't backed up by any analysis.

Once the analysis was done,

you could see that that water is actually flowing into a wetland

and therefore is under the regulation.

There was the Superior Court when it was reviewing this issue

quote from the experts.

Oh, I apologize.

I'm out of time.

Go ahead.

Okay.

Thank you.

Said looking solely at surface water created by this activity,

which is a small portion of the surface water created by the project

in which, according to Mr. Keach's testimony,

will be diverted across the entire width of Lot 14

to the discharge point at its southeast corner.

That discharge point,

so he's talking about the water coming from the driveway,

that discharge point is wetland e,

also discharge point 2 on the map.

So that water is still going into the wetland

and they need to account for it.

And when they did account for it,

it showed an increase in the peak runoff rate.

Thank you, Tony Stearns.

Thank you very much.

Tony Specter Morgan.

Good morning, may it please the court.

My name is Laura Specter Morgan

from the Mitchell Municipal Group.

I'm here on behalf of the town of Hanover

and the Hanover Zoning Board of Adjustment.

Although I'm happy to take questions at any point,

just let me give you a brief roadmap as to what I'm going to speak

about this morning.

Attorney Tierney and I are splitting our time this morning,

so I have seven and a half minutes to speak to you.

And I am focusing on the issues in this appeal.

Attorney Dietel will focus on the Rilupa issues in the next argument.

I think it's important in this case,

although I know you all know the standard of review.

Point out what that standard of review is,

because here the hackers had the burden of demonstrating

before the Superior Court that the ZBA made a legal

or a factual error.

The Superior Court found that...

Their argument is that it's arbitrary.

That is their argument.

So in your brief, you say that the board perceived

an error in its prior decision.

Yes.

Regardless whether there were new facts or not.

Right.

And sought to correct the error.

What was the error?

The error was a lack of analysis of the Rilupa issues

in the original decision.

Of the what issues?

Rilupa issues.

The religious land use institutionalized persons' actions.

So the second decision discusses Rilupa?

It does not...

The decision itself does not discuss Rilupa.

In fact, the reference to Rilupa was removed from the first

to the second decision.

Yes.

So how...

I'm not following your argument.

So it's clear that the motion for rehearing was based

on the federal law.

It's clear that when the board granted the rehearing,

they did so under the understanding that maybe we need

to do a deeper dive into this federal law

because we didn't spend any time really analyzing it

in our original decision.

And then it consulted with counsel.

It held a rehearing.

And it's clear from the deliberations in this case

that the board really tried to work through a balance

between what does the special exception criteria require,

what does the special exception criteria allow,

and what does federal law require.

And the board concluded that although there were

no factual changes, and it believed that its factual

conclusions in the original decision were correct,

that its concerns about the adverse impact on the neighborhood

could be addressed through reasonable conditions of approval.

So the decision was not at all arbitrary.

In fact, if you look at the deliberations from the first decision,

there were actually two versions of the first decision.

Attorney Bernie Waugh sits on the board,

had written an original decision granting the special exception

without conditions.

There was no majority for that.

Attorney Arthur Gardner then wrote the second decision

denying the special exception.

But what's an attorney Waugh concerned with?

Attorney Waugh was concerned about the fact that it's a church

and he was very conscious of not treating a church

differently based on its viewpoint.

So again, how is the town saying,

well, we went back and looked a second time at an issue

that at least one member attorney Waugh

was very concerned about?

Because as attorney Eagleton,

who also sits on the board pointed out,

there was ample evidence in the record

to support a decision either way.

He said very clearly in the record,

I think we can make a decision approving the special exception.

We can make a decision denying the special exception.

And I think that is affirmable.

Is this all in the minutes?

That is at page 777 in the certified record.

It's part of the transcripts.

And that is because the certified record

is two volumes of this.

This is not a case where there wasn't evidence in the record.

There was a lot of evidence in the record.

And the zoning board spent a lot of time

considering that evidence,

weighing the special exception criteria

and doing exactly what they are supposed to do.

And that is to make a legal and reasonable decision

based on that evidence.

And while another board on another day

with the same evidence might reach a different decision,

that doesn't make this decision illegal or unreasonable.

Senator Lupa in the first decision,

did the board consider the First Amendment

or New Hampshire Constitution implications of its decision?

You're testing my memory.

I did read this this weekend.

There was a discussion about the fact that it was a church

and obviously you can't have viewpoint discrimination.

And there was a discussion about,

you know, we're looking not at the fact that it's a church,

we're looking at the objective impacts of the gathering space.

And particularly of the traffic.

The traffic was clearly the concern for the acres.

It was clearly the concern for the board members.

And how to balance the fact that the use would bring in

102 peak hour trips in, 110 peak hours,

102 trips per hour out with the needs of the neighborhood,

which is on the weekends,

granted a bit of respite from the traffic and normalcy.

Can you address the Attorney's Services argument that,

you know, two churches at the road have 125 and 145 capacity

where does 300 come from?

That seems arbitrary.

300 comes directly from the traffic study.

And it's a simple math calculation.

And I know the church disagrees with the town's math calculation,

but it's very simple.

The traffic report, which granted,

the generation was based on the square footage,

also cited an average attendance of 300 people.

So what the board did was it took 300 people,

divided it by 102 trips in,

and came up with 2.9 people in a car.

It then looked at the size of the parking lot.

The church had offered to be 104 spaces for parishioners,

nine spaces for employees,

and it multiplied 104 by 2.9,

and that's how it came up with 300.

And was the 300, again,

it was that based on the average attendance at a service

as opposed to other activities in the 21,000 square foot building,

for example, children in Sunday school

at the same time services going on?

It is based on average attendance at the service.

However, I do believe the 300-person capacity

does apply to the entire property.

And there is argument in the church's brief

that that's unreasonable given

that there may be 80 to 100 students

walking or biking there.

The ZBA looked at that and determined

that given this church's location now

about a mile outside of town,

that was much less likely to happen.

There's also argument in the church's brief

that people in the surrounding neighborhoods

might walk to church.

The record is devoid of any evidence

of that kind of attendance.

That's about 70 square feet per person in the building.

Is that regulated somehow?

Does that fit within some kind of user

square-foot-age building code density thing?

There is a building code density for residential.

I assume there's also one for commercial.

I don't know what it is,

and that is not what the condition was based on.

The occupancy limit was clearly not based

on the square foot of the building.

It was based on the proposed traffic.

Is 2.9 the number that would otherwise

apply to any establishment in Hanover?

Well, there is no number that applies

to any establishment in Hanover.

This is a number that was derived

from the evidence submitted to the board.

And on the wetlands special exception,

I just will briefly say...

The original request was for 120 spaces.

They lowered it to 113 after preliminary consultation

with the zoning board.

The request was for 415 to block it.

It was.

And again, the board's focus was

how do we balance what we need to balance here?

Are the impacts on the neighborhood

with the residents of Hanover?

I don't know.

I don't know.

I don't know.

I don't know.

I don't know.

I don't know.

I don't know.

I don't know.

Are the impacts on the neighborhood

with the rights of the church?

It was primarily focused...

Not the activities of the people in the building?

Correct.

Correct.

It was primarily focused on traffic.

So the traffic study was before the board.

Yes.

Around 1?

Yes.

And served as presumably a basis

for the denial?

Yes.

And in round 2 it became

a basis for a special condition

or a condition.

In round 2, in consideration of federal law,

the board decided that its concerns

about adverse impact could be adequately

adequately addressed with a reasonable condition of approval.

Thank you, Attorney Spector.

Thank you very much.

Attorney Tierney.

Good morning, Your Honor.

Michael Tierney for Christ's Redeemer Church.

I think it's important for the court to understand

this neighborhood because the whole cases

about whether a church fits the character of a neighborhood.

The character of a neighborhood is something

that was arbitrarily never actually decided

other than the fact that the church's proposal

didn't fit the character of the neighborhood.

We have the church right here.

This is the proposed church with their parking lot behind.

The reason why the parking lot is behind the church

is because that is the request of the Hanover Planning Board.

It was originally the other way around, but it was switched.

A budding are the Velvet Rocks condominiums

and then the Silent Brook condominiums.

And then you have a commercial building

certified record sizes of the same size

as the church building.

This pre-existing commercial building, 1,000 feet.

21,000 square feet.

It is, I think it was 20,000 and change.

Thank you.

1,000 feet, the other direction,

you have four lane Route 120,

which is the main road between Dartmouth College

and Dartmouth Medical Center.

And then right here, this woods right here

is a land that's owned by the Dartmouth Hitchcock Clinic.

And so if you go to the other side of that lot,

you have, well, the parking lots for the medical center.

You have discussion in the record about the fact

this neighborhood has changed over the past 25 years,

particularly when you had commercial development down here

and the hyper-therm factory that puts 250 cars

onto the road at the same time Monday through Friday.

Hyper-therm off Greensboro Road.

So there's three hyper-therm factories.

One of them is off of Great Hollow Road,

which is off this map, I apologize.

When you access it on Greensboro Road?

Yes.

Yes, that's the way the cars go to the hyper-therm factory.

There's also a career factory

right next to the hyper-therm factory.

But the record is clear

that you have commercial traffic commuters

going Monday through Friday in excess

of what the church is going to be putting

as far as traffic on a Sunday.

The traffic study, okay,

based on the square footage,

used the accepted traffic engineering

that's used all throughout the state

in order to determine the traffic impacts

based on the square footage of the building.

Now, after this was decided,

the traffic engineers went back and said,

well, if you were to do it using occupancy,

the 20,000 square foot building

is the equivalent of a 391 occupancy.

And so it was, as the hackers alleged,

completely arbitrary to say

that the traffic study supports a 300-person occupancy.

It's also important to remember

that in addition to all these condos right here.

How is it arbitrary?

It may be erroneous, but how is it arbitrary?

Because there was no basis in the traffic study

to say that over 300 people

would be an adverse impact on traffic.

The traffic study didn't say that.

All the traffic study said

was that average attendance was 300.

They projected traffic

from the equivalent of 391 people coming down the roads.

Exactly what do you think the ZBA and or the Superior Court

was supposed to do about this issue?

Yes, the problem is the discretionary,

arbitrary nature of the ordinance,

which says that they can impose on religious uses

whatever may be reasonably appropriate.

The ordinance or the actions of the board or both?

Both.

Both the ordinance as well as the actions of the board

led to arbitrary ad hoc decision-making.

And it's arbitrary ad hoc decision-making

to just say the scale of this is just too large.

Without any objective measure of the scale,

there are other towns and other states,

the Vision Church,

they have specifically in their ordinance

in this geographic area,

we don't want buildings bigger than 55,000 square feet.

That's not the Hanover Ordinance.

The Hanover Ordinance says that if you're a church

and you want to locate here,

you need to obtain a special exception

and the ZBA can impose conditions

that it determines are reasonably appropriate

to safeguard the neighborhood.

Whatever that means,

it's not defined what the neighborhood is.

The church wasn't proposing to build a building

bigger than 21,000 square feet, was it?

So it actually originally proposed a larger building.

The planning board had objected to the scale

and so they toned it down to 21,000 square feet.

Is that an issue on appeal?

That it is in the record that the church made it smaller.

But are you appealing that decision?

No, no, the church made it smaller, right.

Yes, the 21,000 square feet.

It's not scale, it's the occupancy limit that you're concerned about.

Correct, and it's important to remember

the church is allowed to build a 21,000 square foot building

designed for 415 people.

They're just not allowed to put 415 people

in there for religious services.

A condo, it's a small delta,

but what's the delta between the 415 planned occupancy

and the 391?

The traffic study used, it's a small...

So it is absolutely a small delta

and that delta is the people who are going to be getting church services

who are not coming in cars.

We have three residential buildings

that are actually owned by the church.

We have 50 condominiums.

The sidewalk does end there, but there are going to be people.

There's also in the record that you have area nursing homes

that give shuttle buses.

The church offered as a condition to have shuttle buses.

It has no intentions of having shuttle buses

for your people to be able to attend church services

and so it's not going to be having very much

to get from the 391 to the 415.

It is completely arbitrary to impose the hours

or the windows or the occupancy condition.

The windows aren't an issue, we know that, right?

The trial court has already ruled on that issue.

So the windows are evidence of the arbitrary nature

of the ordinance, which the trial court held was unreasonable

and a little bit due to its arbitrary nature.

The record supports that because we have a board member

who said basically made it up.

Correct, and the same board member admitted

that he made up this 2.9 ratio.

Okay, this 2.9 ratio doesn't appear in the ordinance.

The ordinance section 1002.1 says that

in this particular geographic area

you have to have one parking space for every five seats.

Can I ask you about the runoff issue?

Yes.

So my understanding is the science

of Pueblo was a little confused

as to whether the regulation dealt with runoff

from simply the wetland area or the whole project.

Is there an adverse impact to the acres

from the runoff of the entire project?

No.

Why not?

Both the Otter Creek engineers,

as well as the third party expert

who was hired by the town, Steve Keech,

had analyzed it and had determined

there was not going to be an increase in runoff.

Into that pipe that goes under the road

and into that drainage swale, if you will.

Correct, there is not going to be an increase in runoff.

The complaints work about the existing conditions,

but there's not going to be an increase in runoff

due to the church's project.

So if there had been washouts, that's a town issue.

And there may be more washouts.

Not more washouts due to the church

because both the church engineer,

as well as the town's engineer determined

that there would be no increase as a result of the church.

Thank you.
