Good morning. Our appeal this morning is case number

2021-0429, State of New Hampshire versus David Tufano.

Good morning, Chief Justice McDonald and Honorable Justices.

May it please the court. I am Ted Lothstein. I'm here on behalf of David Tufano, and

I've asked to reserve two minutes for rebuttal at the end if I need it, and I have

we'll take questions at any time. And hearing none, I'm going to start by talking about

harmless error. The state has, in a couple of pages, argued that the errors in this

case are harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.

And this argument has to be rejected. This is a very old school trial, the trial

we had here. This was a Mr. Robert is really one witness against one witness.

It was Mr. Robert in court to testify that he saw Mr. Tufano treat a cat in a

certain way. And then Mr. Tufano himself took the stand and tested. Can you isolate

the error for for us that you say was harmless?

Well, there's two errors that we're arguing on appeal. One is that the prior

acts never should have been admitted. And I can address that. And then the

second argument we're arguing appeal is that the woman who brought in the

prior acts, Miss Berry, we should have been able to impeach her on her prior

conviction for unsworn falsification. Was Miss Berry saying anything that was

disputed? Why is her credibility even an issue? Sure, I'll give you an example

of something that, first of all, there was a lot of things about that would

seem to indicate that she had a motive or bias that she did dispute. So

there was a that if you compare her testimony, Mr. Tufano's she

denied using certain colorful phrases. She denied refusing to leave as

property. She denied a series of questions on cross examination than

Mr. Tufano testified to differently. But as in a different example, and I

will admit this is not in my brief, but it's in the record. She testified

that her situation with Mr. Tufano was resolved when the police came and

she said Mr. Tufano promised to get rid of the trap. But when also the

faith, I'm with the justice donovan. I don't see why any of that matters at

all. Right, was her credibility? Was there any dispute that the prior act

occurred? There's there was not a dispute that she saw Mr. Tufano about

nine months before this incident, 10 months setting up or having a trap on

his property and that she angrily confronted him about it because she

does not that is not a crime. Setting up a trap on your property.

Well, so this is how the evidence came in. It came in that through Mr.

Robert's quote unquote, that missed that he he made a report the police

several days after the incident when he heard that Mr. Tufano has a

history of aggressive behavior towards cats and you can see that in

the state's brief and miss and I think that it may not be a crime to

trap cats, but prior the four rule four four B is not limited to just

prior bad acts. This court serves to make clear it's prior acts that have a

tendency to prejudice. The rule itself speaks to acts. Right. And

that's what we're dealing with. Prior acts that have a tendency to

prejudice the jury or prejudice the defendant's defense. So here Mr.

Tufano had told told a story almost immediately to Mr. Robert and

to a police officer when he was interviewed and then ultimately to

the jury, but he never had a chance of his story being accepted by the

jury because the the jury was informed that he is the cat

trapper of this trailer park. Okay. So in that moment, his

presumption of innocence is stripped away because you know the

reason we have rule four four B and my guess is that this

audience can really identify with this is that people should not be

judged forever based on one mistake they did in the past and we

shouldn't assume I'm still stuck on the humane society traps cats for

their benefits. So I'm curious as to how the whole act of trapping

somehow becomes a negative. Well, he wasn't trapping cats for the

cat's benefit. According to Ms. Barry, the argument that ensued was

that he was saying that they kill birds on his property.

Trapping them to remove them, right? So feral cats, humane society

traps them, removes them. So it's it's a humane way of doing

so. But so Justice Hans-Marconi, you may not be bothered by it,

but I believe that many jurors out there would be extremely

bothered by the idea of someone who lives in a densely populated

community and uses a trap to trap people's house cats. Even

if the trappers have a heart trap. Well, that is an irony

in the case, right? But but yes, even if the hat is the trap is

a have a heart trap. I think that that cats don't like being

confined and cat owners. My guess is that the cat owners in

this audience would not be too thrilled with the idea of having

a neighbor who traps cats. Was there any dispute as to whether

Mr. Tafano could operate a have a heart trap? So that's

one of the things that they make several arguments for

exceptions to rule four four B the state. And in doing so, they

really just round up the usual suspects, intent, plan, context

and what you just said, what you just said that that does he

know how to use a trap is the only argument they make that is

not synonymous with propensity. Okay, but that argument has so

little probative value, like he there's no dispute that he

owns the trap. He removed it from a shed. So the idea that

they would need the prior acts to prove to the jury that he

knows how to use it. I mean, this is not like a some kind of

flying machine he built in his garage. Doesn't that doesn't

that suggests that it's inconsequential and and therefore

harmless. What I'm saying is that it that it's probative

value is minimal on that point. But it's prejudicial effect

is severe. And again, I might not be able to convince

Justice Hans Marconi about that because you know, you

may think that it's no big deal to trap cats. But I

believe that you cat trapper on her own. I don't think

you could put together a jury of 12 people will all feel the

same way as Justice Hans Marconi. So how should it affect our

analysis here that this charge doesn't even require men's

rare? So for what you know, that what they had to prove is

criminal negligence. So when they are arguing that they

need these part, the prior acts to prove his intent, they're

not there to prove his intent. I mean, he it's still a

very high standard criminal negligence that to prove his

conduct as a growth deviation. But it's the opposite of

his intent. You know, the definition of criminal negligence

is that he failed to become aware of a substantial

unjustifiable risk. So the state did not allege that, you

know, they did a crime where they have to prove intent, but

then they argued that we need these prior acts in order to

prove his intent. And the problem is all those prior

acts are proving his propensity that he what does he do

with a trap? He traps cats with it. But that doesn't

mean that on this occasion, that's what he was doing

with the trap. But his ability to to have the jury

believe him and believe that he never intended to harm

any animal was stripped away when he bring out the

prior acts. And again, isn't the harm the fact that

he introduced water to this equation? Something that

didn't happen in the past? Well, it depends on who

story. So Mr. Tufano testified and had, I

believe it told the Oscar Lefebvre also that he

used the hose on the misting mode to try to drive the

cat backwards so it would move away from the door of

the trap. Is there testimony that contradicted that

it was on the misting mode? Yes. Mr. Robert said he

had the hose full on. And that was that was like a

central dispute in the case. Now, misting mode, I

think that a lot of I think that a lot of cat

owners use a spray bottle as a way to manage the

behavior of cats. So if the jury believes him

to have the hose on the misting mode, then the

case is a triable case. Once the jury hears a prior

bad acts and believe that he's just trying to trap

and essentially torture a cat, then the game is

over for him. His presumption of innocence is

stripped away and they're just going to decide,

hey, once a cat trapper, always a cat trapper.

And that's why we don't usually allow evidence

like this. Because it's nothing else but

propensity at that juncture. It's nothing

else but propensity. I see your argument.

And, you know, you have case law that you can't

bring out a person's subsequent possession of a

gun who's a felon to prove that they possessed

it at the time of the charge incident. And one

of the arguments you rejected in that case was

the argument that, well, it shows he knows how to

use a gun. And a gun is a much more complicated

device than a half a heart trap. So and then

we have Beltran, which was the use of a

stun gun or something like that on a witness

to prove what? Do you recall?

I don't recall, Your Honor. I'm sorry.

I thought you had cited it.

I was hoping you were going to continue and tell me

what Beltran said.

Well, I can, but it's a painful story.

What's the state of the record as to the

amount of water that was in the bucket or the

barrel? What is their conflicting testimony?

Yeah, there's three different versions.

One is that Mr. Robert, and I want to

say something about this in a minute, but one

is Mr. Robert said that the water was almost

to the top of the bin. So in other words,

the trap and the cabbie completely submerged,

which is horrifying if that was true.

But Mr. Tufano had told Mr. Tufano

testified that there was very little water

because he had it in the misting mode. So it's

little residual water in the bottom of the bin.

And what he told us and also the favor

testified that he uses hands to

show about a four inch four inches of water

in the bottom. So it was heavily contested.

Here's the thing. Okay. When I said before,

this is an old school case, you know, there's

nobody who got out of a cell phone and took

and took a cell phone video.

Nobody, there's nobody, nobody's surveillance

footage. Nobody cam.

Nobody cam. No home surveillance

footage. Nothing like

that. It's just an old fashioned credibility

contest. And apparently the jury didn't believe

your client. Well, well, here's what

they are not going to believe him when

they hear that he has a propensity to trap

cats. That's why we don't allow for four B.

There's, you know, he doesn't have any hope

of winning the credibility battle at that

point, your honor. But I wanted

to say is that you're saying the limited

instruction was ineffective somehow.

Yes, because the limited instruction

included intent and

context, which is just

synonymous with propensity, so it didn't

really limit the

at at all. You know, Mr.

Rebares testified he witnessed something horrifying.

As I said just now,

Mr. Rebares, nobody went to the police

that day. Nobody went

to the police. Days go by

and in this trailer park, people are talking,

rumors in Uendo are swirling

around and then people go to the police

and tell this story. And I think

this audience could appreciate the concept

that something happens that

from all external

viewpoints, it looks like nobody

thought it was a big deal. But then

people in a small community talk

rumors in Uendo and all of a sudden

Mr. Tufano is

reported, pilloried

and cancelled

by the community. I mean, that's a great

argument to make to a jury, but how should

that impact our legal analysis

here? Well, presumably that was

the argument made to the jury. That it's not

harmless error, that we can't just look and say

oh, well Mr. Rebares said it was true

so it's harmless error. The

state makes two different harmless errors

that are contradictory.

First the state says that

even by Mr. Tufano's

own story, as told to

LaFave and then to the jury, that even by his own

story, the evidence is overwhelming

for guilt. If that's true, then we can't

win on appeal. But we

disagree with that and again, many people use

a sprayer to manage the behavior of

their own beloved cat, okay?

But on the next

page of its argument, the state says

the jury found Mr. Tufano guilty

so they must have rejected his credibility.

So which one is it? Is it harmless

because by his own story he's

overwhelmingly guilty? Or is it harmless

because the jury rejected

his credibility?

What we're here to tell you is that he never

had a chance to convince the jury

on credibility because

of the prior acts. And then what was

particularly unfair is that

Miss Berry gets to come to court

and say that he has a prior history of

trapping cats and that got her very angry

on a prior occasion, not long

before this incident, but

he is not allowed to put in

positive evidence of his character.

The same judge who rules that her testimony

is admissible in order

to show intent.

All these supposed exceptions, rule 4

or 4b, also

does not allow Mr. Tufano to put

in evidence that he loves animals

and he's been a loving

companion to

animals and cats.

Is that decision on appeal?

No, it's not. But I'm

illustrating for you, number one

why this is not harmless

error and number two why he didn't

have a chance to have his credibility

fairly assessed by a fair

and impartial jury. Thank you.

Tony Gagnier.

Chief Justice, Associate Justices

and may it please the court, Sam Gagnier

on behalf of the State of New Hampshire.

Your Honours, we asked this court to affirm

the trial court's decision in this case for

two alternative reasons. First

the trial court sustainably exercises

discretion in each of its evidentiary

rulings, but alternatively

even if the trial court aired in one

or both of its evidentiary rulings

any such error was harmless beyond a reasonable

doubt. So tell me, why is this

prior act even relevant to this case?

Your Honour, this prior

act is relevant to intent

knowledge and context.

Intent is not part of the equation, is it?

Intent did not have to be proven

as a mens rea, however

the central dispute in the case

was whether the defendant acted

or whether his conduct

grossly deviated from that of

a reasonable. Is using a have a heart

trap a crime?

It is not, Your Honour.

So what difference does it make

what the prior witness observed?

Because that's all she observed.

The difference that it makes, Your Honour,

is the defendant's position

was that he placed this cat in the trap

so he could take it to the humane society

as Justice Hans Marconi pointed out

humane societies themselves do that.

That's a very reasonable thing to do

and a jury might view that conduct

as reasonable if the cat was placed

in the trap for that purpose.

The state's position was that the cat was perfectly

healthy. What the defendant

how did the state know the cat was healthy?

There was witness testimony

from the defendant that only

about 30 minutes after he

supposedly hit it with his car

it was awake, moving around and agitated

and then two different witnesses

testified that they saw it go running

off, sopping wet

immediately when the trap was opened.

I want to redirect you back to Justice Donovan's question

because

how is

the prior act at all relevant

here? If placing the cat

in the trap is not the crime that

allegedly occurred?

Yes, Your Honour. So again, the central dispute

is whether the defendant's conduct grossly

deviated from that of a reasonable person

in the circumstances. In a jury

might view placing the cat in the trap

20 to 30 minutes to take it to the humane society

as a reasonable thing to do

but they might view it differently

if they understood that his intent

in placing the cat in the trap and leaving it there

for 20 to 30 minutes was to just simply

remove it from his property.

What's the crime? Yeah, what's the crime with that?

It's not

a crime, Your Honour.

How could it be relevant?

This is what we're all getting at. How could it be

remotely relevant to an issue in this

case? It speaks to the

reasonableness of his conduct.

How is it unreasonable?

If a cat

is not injured, a jury

might view it as unreasonable to place it

in a have a heart trap and just leave it there

for 20 minutes. What if it's just a feral cat

or a roaming cat or a cat that's attacking

your birds at your bird feeder and you want to

remove it from your property?

That on its own

might also be reasonable but we

have more facts in this case.

The trap then goes into a plastic bucket

and then the cat gets sprayed with a hose.

That's the operative fact.

That has nothing to do

with the prior act, correct?

Right, Your Honour.

That does not have much to do with the prior act.

Why is the prior act relevant at all?

Going from intent

knowledge was another reason that

the trial court ruled

and the state offered

for the prior act. Knowledge of what?

Knowledge of how the trap operates

and his knowledge of the trap.

But there was no claim that the cat was

accidentally put into the trap

so what's the purpose

of establishing the defendant's knowledge

of how the trap worked?

So I think it would again go to rebutting

the defendant's point to defend

his case that he was acting out of compassion

he was just going to release this cat

safely. Is the trap particularly

complicated to operate?

I honestly

don't know, Your Honour, but I would say no.

Either do I.

It's on you though, if you had to operate.

Yeah, perhaps I shouldn't confess to this,

but I have a have a heart trap

and we've trapped cats that have come in

from our neighbors. Is that going to get me in trouble?

No, Your Honour, there's nothing inhumane

about it. Let's call it a have a heart trap.

We're not talking about a snare trap

or a foothold trap here.

Have a heart trap.

Exactly. Any dispute that he didn't know

how to, he had no knowledge

or did not know how to operate

a have a heart trap.

There was not a dispute,

Your Honour. So it's not

relevant for that.

So what are we left with?

What are we left with? If intense

out, knowledge is out.

Let me confess, I own a have a heart trap.

But you're going to say

context. That's the last thing

that we're going to go to. Context.

So it seemed that

to the extent that it could be relevant

for context in the state's

view and in the trial courts holding, it was

actually how the

how the case got brought to the

attention of the police.

Sharon Berry went to the police and told

them about the prior incident.

Officer Lefebvre confirmed that

incident and

Mr. Robert went to the police

partially because of

Ms. Berry's story.

But if this court is not persuaded

that it's relevant for any purpose

and therefore it was improper,

the state would then say that

and admitting this evidence was harmless

beyond a reasonable doubt. Let's focus on that.

He was

alleged to be a cat trapper.

How can that be harmless? I mean it's

highly prejudicial.

Your Honor, not when you have the facts

of this case.

Trapping a cat can be

for very humane purposes. Again

the humane society does it all the time.

There's nothing inherently emotionally inflammatory

about a have a heart trap.

The jury was going to hear,

the defendant

placed the cat and I have a heart trap.

Put that trap in a 50 gallon bucket

and then began filling the bucket with water

by spraying the trap cat with a hose.

So why didn't the state just limit itself

to that evidence? What difference does it make

what happened

in the prior incident?

Your Honor, that is exactly my point.

The state could have limited itself to that evidence.

But it didn't. And that's why

we're talking about whether the

error was harmless or not.

I mean the state put on evidence

that showed that he had done this before

under

disputed circumstances.

Your Honor, the state

I don't think put on evidence that he did

this before. There was evidence

that he had set a have a heart trap.

There wasn't even evidence that he had

actually caught a cat in that trap.

Just that he had set one.

The evidence here

on these facts as

they are undisputed is much

more inflammatory

to a jury than just the act of setting

a have a heart trap.

Nonetheless, how do you justify

the trial court's decision

to prohibit the defendant to point out

to the jury that the woman that's accusing

him of this prior act, that is prejudicial

committed a crime

by lying to a court of law

in the past?

This court typically looks to

four factors when determining

whether a conviction that's 10 years

old or older has a

probative value that outweighs its

prejudicial value. This court has

recognized that the 10-year limitation

in 609b is the result of a considered judgment

that these sorts of convictions

are in most cases

their prejudicial effect

outweighs their probative value.

Those four factors are the impeachment

value of the evidence, the date

of the conviction and the witness's subsequent

history, the degree

of similarity between the past crime

conduct and the centrality

of the credibility issue and the importance

of the witness. And all

of those factors weigh in favor

of not admitting the evidence.

The trial court recognized

as for the impeachment value

that this conviction was entered under

questionable circumstances and it was

22 years old. It was

the result of a domestic violence.

But the conviction

was on the record.

So why do, how does

the trial court get behind

the conviction to those facts?

Those four factors allow you

to look at the record subsequent to the conviction,

not the

details of the

conviction.

I don't think the trial court was

really parsing the facts of the

conviction, but the trial court recognized

that for the state to rebut the defendant's impeachment

effort, the state to some

degree was going to have to prove it.

The trial judge could have controlled that though.

I've just done just what Justice Hans

Marconi said and said

you're allowed to get the conviction in.

Move on, counsel.

Right, but for the state

the state, the states could

be limited and in time duration

the state wouldn't have to

try a case within a case. That's within

the trial judge's control. That's my point.

Sure, Your Honor, but if

I asked about this conviction at

trial and this Barry had maintained that

she was going to say the original allegation

was true then her recantation

was false. Right, so

one or the other.

That is correct, Your Honor, but

she was still going to maintain

the allegation was true and she was convicted

for the allegation being

false. Right, but wouldn't the

recantation then be false and be

a 608

statement?

It may be, Your Honor. Reflecting

dishonesty or deceit or

whatever the exact language is. But

if we were to reframe it that way

then it's not a conviction and then

I think the impeachment value comes down

even further and then we're still left with

the fact that it's 22 years old

and this woman has no subsequent history

of any convictions. Is that established

by the record? It seems to be a dispute?

I don't think it is a reasonable

dispute, Your Honor. The state

affirmatively represented in its objection

to the defendant's motion that it had

reviewed Ms. Barry's history

and there were no subsequent convictions.

Was it 22 or I thought it was 10?

It was

1999, Your Honor, and at the time of

trial I believe it was 2021

not a mathematician.

So do you agree that Ms.

Barry's credibility was an important issue

at trial? I do not, Your Honor.

Her testimony

was not substantially in dispute

and there was nothing that she

testified to that added to

the facts that went to proving

the elements of the state's case.

Why call her as a witness? Why call her

as a witness at all?

Your Honor,

to add some context

to the case is why I understand

she was called to kind of explain

give the jury a full picture of how this

case got to the police

and then to testify to that

prior act which as Justice McDonald

pointed out the state could have

secured a conviction without that.

Mr. Robers could have explained

the four-day delay in reporting

it to the police without

her testimony.

Mr. Robers probably

could have filled in that gap

Your Honor. There are some

jurists who would say the context

is the last bastion of scoundrels.

How do you react to that?

Your Honor,

I would cautiously disagree

with you on that

point.

Let me ask you, what sort of

deference do we owe the trial court

here on this impeachment issue?

It's a balancing between the probative

value and the prejudice.

Can we substitute

our judgment for the trial court?

No, Your Honor.

The trial court has

wide discretion

in controlling the

circumstances of cross-examination

including impeachment. So deference

should be given to the trial court

in this case because it is a discretionary

determination.

And looking back to the

factors of 609B

the degree of

similarity between the past crime and the current

conduct aren't similar at all.

The past crime involves

recanting an allegation

a conviction for lying

to the police. This involves

encouraging a neighbor to report a crime

that he witnessed and subsequently

becoming a testifying witness

in the trial that

followed. There is no evidence in the record

that Sharon Berry encouraged

the defendant, excuse me, Mr.

Roberge, to embellish anything

that he saw or report something

that he didn't saw.

And finally, as we have covered, the importance

of the witness testimony and the credibility

issue here was really minimal.

Ms. Berry didn't see anything that

day and did not have much to add.

And for all those reasons, the trial

court did not unsustainably exercise

its discretion, but even if it did

any such error was harmless beyond a reasonable

doubt. How did she not

encourage Mr. Roberge

to embellish?

How do we know that?

Given the, I guess,

the inference from her testimony

that this was a bad thing that happened

in the past and therefore

supports

more action on his part

to report this to the police.

How do we put those two things

not put those two things together?

So I guess

there's no way to know for sure exactly

what Ms. Berry told Mr. Roberge,

but there's no evidence in the record.

Mr. Roberge does not say, you know,

she told me this bad thing and then she told me

we really got to get this guy, so tell him

that the bucket was all the way through.

But this bad thing is what

this so-called viewed to be

bad thing is what prompted

his report to the police.

Mr. Roberge actually shut that line

of questioning down at trial.

He explained that it was not just her.

He also told

him that this really should be reported.

None of whom were recipient witnesses.

That is correct, Your Honor.

If the court has no further questions,

the state will rest on its brief.

Thank you, Your Honors.

I attended a recent seminar

and was told that just because

I reserve rebuttal, I don't have to use it.

I consider the case to be presented

unless there are any further questions.

The court has any.

Thank you very much, counsel.

The case is submitted.

That was good advice, by the way.

Court's adjourned.
