In this case, 2021-02-44, Daniel J. Barofaldi versus the city of Dover.

Good morning. For the record, Justice Donovan will view the oral argument by video and will be participating in our deliberations.

Okay. Thank you. Please proceed.

May it please the court, Benjamin King, Douglas London and Garvey representing the appellant, Daniel Barofaldi.

In the underlying declaratory judgment complaint, Mr. Barofaldi asked the trial court to declare that RSA 100A3, Roman I subparts A and D,

mandated the city of Dover to enroll him in the New Hampshire retirement system when the city of Dover appointed him to the newly created position of director of economic development of the city of Dover on July 27th, 2017.

The trial court dismissed Mr. Barofaldi's complaint for declaratory judgment on three grounds.

One, that Mr. Barofaldi did not exhaust administrative remedies.

Two, that Sir Shiori was Mr. Barofaldi's sole remedy.

And three, that the declaratory judgment was not an appropriate remedy because Mr. Barofaldi did not have a present legal right.

Would you please focus upon number two?

Sir Shiori?

Yes.

Yes, I will.

This court has only held that Sir Shiori is the sole remedy in circumstances where an appellant appealed a decision of the board of trustees.

So, for example, in petition of Malasos, the NHRS staff made a recommendation.

The hearings examiner approved that recommendation or agreed with that recommendation.

The hearings examiner made a recommendation to the board of trustees and the board of trustees adopted it.

The appeal was that...

The statute requires the approval of the board of trustees to receive credit.

I'm sorry?

The statute requires approval of the board to receive credit.

Okay.

Yes, but that is...

That's not the circumstance that's present here.

Here, Mr. Barofaldi wasn't even involved in presenting this issue to the New Hampshire retirement system.

He called.

He called the retirement system.

He called the retirement system.

Seeking the credit for the period between 2009 and 2020.

Yes, he did fill out a form.

But he did not submit that form to the New Hampshire retirement system.

Why does that matter?

That matters because he didn't choose the form.

He didn't have an opportunity to present any argument to the New Hampshire retirement system about why he was entitled to be enrolled in it,

why he was entitled to prior service credit.

Is it a practical matter?

What is the declaratory judgment against the city case issue at this point?

Get the plaintiff at this point.

I'm sorry, I couldn't hear you.

What, as a practical matter, receiving the relief of judicial declaration against the city, how does that advance the plaintiff's cause?

Certainly.

It advances the cause because the court would declare that RSA 100A31 subparts A and D mandate that the city of Dover rolled Mr. Barofaldi in the retirement system.

Effective July 27th, 2017.

And it would entitle Mr. Barofaldi to purchase prior service credit.

But it wouldn't coerce the retirement system to give him that credit.

But your honor, the question here is whether the statute creates mandatory entitlement and whether the city of Dover violated the statute by failing to enroll Mr. Barofaldi in the retirement system.

And I think we have to look at subparts A and D of RSA 100A31 because that's what the issue in this case is all about.

RSA 100A31 subpart A states that employees of an employer within the meaning of 100A shall become members of the New Hampshire retirement is a general rule.

But the provision states that memberships in the retirement system shall be optional for four types of employees.

Elected officials, officials appointed for fixed terms, employees appointed to unclassified positions with no fixed term before July 1, 2011, and court employees who were eligible for membership in NHRS.

Now, reading subpart A in isolation, Mr. Barofaldi was appointed for a fixed term to be the director of economic development for the city of Dover through March of 2020.

So he would fall within the option if you're only reading subpart A, but you have to read subpart D because subpart D says the option for an employer such as the city of Dover not to provide certain employees membership in the retirement system as a condition of employment

shall not be available in the case of newly appointed positions created by political subdivisions after July 1, 2011. That's Mr. Barofaldi under the undisputed facts.

What are the relevant facts here? The relevant facts are that Mr. Barofaldi was appointed to director of economic development for the city of Dover on July 27, 2017.

It was a new position. It did not exist beforehand. It was an appointed position. The city appointed him to it.

So under subpart D, the city did not have the option not to enroll Mr. Barofaldi in the retirement system. Enrollment in the retirement system was mandatory as a condition of his employment.

But the retirement system in its administrative determination determined that the plaintiff voluntarily waived that provision by terms of the contract.

That is true.

And why didn't your brief doesn't really does not discuss the fact that he was given a 45 day period to appeal? Why didn't he appeal that decision?

He chose to go to court instead. And he was under no law.

And your basis is that this is a pure question of law.

Precisely.

Excuse me, just one second. Is an voluntary waiver the ultimate actual question? That is a question of fact that was made by the administrative agency in this case.

I disagree, Your Honor. If you look at whether Mr. Barofaldi waived enrollment in the New Hampshire retirement system is, it implicates contract implication.

The waiver comes from employment agreement. And if you look at age 17 of the appendix, it says that Mr. Barofaldi acknowledges and waives participation in the

New Hampshire retirement system per the requirements and exemptions allowed by New Hampshire retirement system.

The member count technician ignored that language. And I don't even know if she had it before her because the city didn't address that issue either.

It's in the one page that it submitted.

You're reading a limitation into that language that I don't see. Where do you find the limiting words?

Per the requirements and exemptions of New Hampshire retirement system.

Not a very active verb, is it?

No, no, but it's a matter of contract interpretation, what it means.

And I would submit to you that it means per the requirements of 100A3 Roman 1A subject to the exemptions allowed in A and the requirements of sub-part D.

So read in that fashion, it would mean that Mr. Barofaldi could not waive participation in the New Hampshire retirement system because the city owed an obligation to enroll him in the retirement system.

If we disagree with you and your premise that this involves solely issues of law.

If we agree with the trial court that no, there are factual issues, do you lose?

What are the factual issues?

Waiver, fault.

On fault, fault does not go to the issue before the court.

Fault implicates RSA 100A3 Roman 6 D1.

And it says that if employer bears fault for failing to enroll an employee in the New Hampshire retirement system, the employer shall bear the cost of actuary statement to determine the cost

of the prior service credit that the employee is entitled to bear.

If the employee bears the fault, then the employee bears the cost of the actuary statement to determine the cost of that prior service credit.

But fault has nothing to do with whether the city owed a mandatory obligation that it breached to enroll Mr. Barofaldi in the New Hampshire retirement system.

And waiver, again, the language says waiver per the requirements and exemptions of the New Hampshire retirement system.

That is a question of contract interpretation.

And this court has repeatedly held that contract interpretation is a question of law.

The trial court did not address the meaning of that language, although we raised it.

So if there's any concern about the meaning of that language, I think the appropriate thing would be to remand the case to the trial court to conduct interpretation.

And all of these arguments could have been made on the administrative appeal, couldn't they?

There was a conscious choice made by your client not to pursue the administrative appeal where all of these arguments about why the administrator was wrong could have been made.

They could have been made, but Mr. Barofaldi is not required to exhaust administrative remedies because this court has repeatedly held that where a party raises questions of law,

the party need not exhaust administrative remedies.

Is there a time limit for choosing the alternate path of going by writ of cert?

I'm sorry, Your Honor.

Is there a time limit for filing your petition for cert assuming you have that alternative procedural option your client did?

Yes.

I don't think that, I mean this court has never held to appeal from a decision of NHR staff, a member account technician, that Sertiori is the sole remedy.

Sertiori would only apply, I submit, if Mr. Barofaldi had exhausted administrative remedies, if he'd appealed from the decision of the member account technician to a hearing examiner and then the board of trustees had issued a decision.

Under those circumstances, a writ of certiori would have been Mr. Barofaldi's appeal and the certiori would have been within 30 days of the decision of the board of trustees.

And the DJ action has no similar time limit.

That wasn't addressed by the trial court.

I would submit that the statute of limitations on the DJ action would be the general three-year statute of limitations.

And that would start to run when Mr. Barofaldi knew or reasonably should have known that the city had breached its mandatory obligation to enroll him in the retirement system.

And can you address this concept that because the retirement system determined there was no right to retroactive retirement, your client had no present right in order to ground a declaratory judgment action?

Absolutely, Your Honor.

In Giscolca on which the appellee relies, the court said declaratory judgment was not an appropriate remedy because the Hampshire retirement system had held that the employee didn't have the continuous years of service, sufficient continuous years of service to be enrolled.

And so the Giscolca had no present legal right.

This is materially different.

Mr. Barofaldi's legal right is sourced in the statute RSA 100A3 Roman 1 A&D read together.

That is the source of his present legal right.

And because the question is whether that statute entitles Mr. Barofaldi to mandatory enrollment in the retirement system, and Mr. Barofaldi is alleging that the statute does, and the city is claiming adversely to that right, we believe that declaratory judgment is the remedy uniquely tailored to the situation.

At any attempt to enforce through coercive action a favorable declaratory judgment be subject to raised judicata?

No.

And the reason for that is that this court has repeatedly held and has held in Cook v. Sullivan that raised judicata and collateral stop will only apply to administrative agency actions if the administrative agency actions had the essential elements of adjudication.

The essential elements of adjudication are not present here.

The city submitted its argument.

Mr. Barofaldi was not entitled to, was not given the opportunity to make any responsive argument in about five or six days after the city submitted its one page letter saying that Mr. Barofaldi had waived participation in the retirement system.

The member account technician kicks out a letter saying, you know, parroting the city's position.

But he chose not to appeal that.

He did, and now we come back to did he have an obligation to exhaust administrative remedies?

And our position is because this case involves statutory interpretation he did not.

I see my time is up.

Thank you very much, attorney.

Thank you.

Good morning.

Good morning, Your Honors.

Judge White for the city of Dover with me is our deputy city attorney Jim Perez.

Thank you for having us this morning.

Happy to take questions at any time and wave the three minute rule, if that's still called.

I did, it sounds like the justice are probably very familiar with the facts.

I did briefly want to cover the chronology here just so everyone's clear.

In 2009, Mr. Barofaldi came to work the Dover Business and Industrial Development Authority.

We call it EBITDA.

And he signed an employment agreement, had a waiver of participation in the retirement system.

In 2017, he came to work directly for the city and signed another employment agreement with the same waiver, essentially.

And at some point in 2020, he came to question why it was not enrolled in the retirement system.

And that led to the 2020 petition filed with the retirement system, with which the city disagreed,

resulting in an August 2020 determination from the retirement system that was adverse with a letter that advised me on 45 days.

Who filed the petition with the retirement system?

I believe that they are correct.

The city, we file a paperwork with the retirement system for the employees.

But it thoroughly contained all of the claims and issues in this case, correct?

Yes, Your Honor.

There's an administrative rule that specifically directs that petition to be filed.

It's a form created by the retirement system and it's created for situations where there's alleged employer oversight for failure to enroll.

So you would disagree with the characterization that it was just something spit out by the administration of the retirement system?

I would entirely disagree with that.

It is the first step in the process for handling these claims.

And I would like to emphasize, and I know it's in the briefs probably, but RSA 100A141 says right out of the gate,

quote, administration of this system is vested in a board of 13 trustees.

It's talking about the system.

That's a defined term in that statute.

That's the retirement system.

Two questions, though.

Is the petition copied to the employee at issue?

Or is the first notice the response from the retirement system staff?

Your Honor, I don't know that that's in the record and I don't know the answer and I don't want to tell you the wrong thing.

I do know the determination letter did go, Mr. Bairafari, with the notice of his appeal rights.

So it was not a situation where he was unaware of what had happened.

And if the waiver was statutorily prohibited, is it effective?

Well, so I think I will say to you, there's a two-part answer.

I'm sorry to be evasive, but the waiver in 2009 was effective.

It was waivable.

It was waived.

When he came to work with the city, I think the argument could be made that there was a continuation in some ways, possibly.

I think there were arguments to be made.

It could have been a waiver.

I think the city has accepted the retirement system's finding that he should have been enrolled in 2017 when the new employment contract was signed.

And so on that, on the string of that, the waiver was not effective.

There was a mistake made by both parties about the waivability and it was still in the contract.

So is he enrolled effective 2017 or effective 2020?

He was enrolled in 2020 when the retirement system directed the city to enroll him.

But does he get credit for 2017 through 2020?

That is also not on the record, essentially the rest of the story you're asking.

I believe the situation is that he could still get credit.

It's that there would be a split of cost purchasing that credit back to 17.

I believe when someone's enrolled after the fact, they have the right to go back and purchase that credit.

If they file a different form with the retirement system and there's some obligations of payment,

and the city has to make a payment of its portion, there has to be an actuarial determination of what to do.

But it's not self-executing.

So I believe the situation is, and Mr. King can correct me if I'm wrong,

situation is he was enrolled in 2020 and it is up to him to pursue the past credit

and the city will be asked to fund its obligation if and when he does that.

That's the side of the contributions, if you will.

Let me ask you an off-the-wall question.

Is it really our jurisprudence that exhaustion of administrative remedies is not required when questions of law are afoot?

That is true.

There are cases that say that there can be issues of law that relieve a party from exhausting.

One of those cases is cited in both of our briefs, the Foss case.

That case was a dispute over the subject matter jurisdiction of the banking department.

So it was entirely centered on a statute that defined their jurisdiction,

and this court held that that party did not need to go through the banking department

to determine its own jurisdiction before it came to court.

That is very unlike this situation where the statute is not self-executing.

The statute says for the potential right for employer-funded oversight costs,

but it leaves the agency the discretion of how to implement that right

and apply it to the facts of any given situation.

So it is not the case you can go to court, show the court the statute,

and the statute knows the answer, sorry, the court knows the answer.

You have to know the facts, you have to apply it to the facts,

and these statutes expect the retirement system to do that.

There are no disputed facts. Is that accurate?

I think there are no disputed historical facts.

I think there are disputed ultimate facts such as fault, the party's relative fault.

And is fault cabined in just determining who pays for the actuarial costs?

A finding of fault on the part of the employee doesn't prohibit retro-perspective enrollment.

Am I correct on that?

You can still get your best credit. That was not a bar.

But you might have to pay part of the actuarial costs.

That's right. It factors into the relative cost, bears the cost of going back in time, if you will.

And so that might be something that would have to be determined,

but is not determined by the letter from the retirement system so far.

Yes, Your Honor, because the retirement system was ruling on the issue put before,

it was a specific form for employer oversight.

That's all I'm aware of, but it's been asked to rule on, and it did.

And if this is an appropriate time, I would like to point out that

Attorney King mentions he's trying to draw a distinction between action of the retirement system's staff

and the Board of Trustees itself.

That distinction is a false distinction because there's an administrative role,

the retirement RIT 308.03B that says the Board of Trustees or its designee

can rule on these types of petitions.

So the staff member was acting as a designee of the Board of Trustees.

This is a ruling of a Board of Trustees.

Is there then an appeal to the Board if the staff member is the Board?

There is.

I believe the rule says that the designee can make it,

and if you're unhappy with that administrative determination,

you can have a full commence, a full formal adjudication before the Board.

And in doing that, you have a lot of the tools of discovery and things like that

if you avail yourselves of that appeal right.

That is the appeal right that was not pursued here and was foregone

for reasons I'm unaware of.

Do you disagree that the employee has a choice to appeal to the Board of Trustees

or go to court on issues of law?

I disagree with the procedure of this case up to the point

when it was filed with Trafford Superior

because if you were to allow this case to go forward,

there's no limiting principle for when anyone,

essentially there would be a roadmap for anyone who was applying

for this benefit or any benefit like it to go to the retirement system,

get a result you may or may not like, and then have a complete do-over in court.

And I do not agree that you have a choice after you've gone to the retirement system

and frankly even before.

I think these are all the statute expects these to steer off of the agency

and the court sees it the first time after the agency has ventilated the issue on Search for Art.

Mr. King says the limiting principle is that if it's purely an issue of law

and that's a mind that can be discerned,

then you don't have the problems that you're projecting here.

I would agree with you there could be situations where a pure issue of law

relieves a person from going through administrative agency.

I do agree with that.

But in this case, that's not a limiting principle

because this case is not pure issue of law.

You cannot look at the statute and know the answer.

You have to go through the rest of the fault analysis to figure out

it's not a conclusive presumption.

Attorney King's right that when there's a mandatory enrollment obligation,

the fault is presumed to be the employer's fault.

That is a rebuttable presumption of fault.

So you have to go through a process to answer the question

of what are the party's relative fault here?

And for that, there is just no pure issue of law driving this case.

Maybe I misunderstood what you said earlier.

I thought I heard you say that the city's position is that

he should have been enrolled as of July of 2017.

The city has accepted the retirement determination and did enroll him

in 2020 when it was directed to.

In the form that the plaintiff submitted,

asked in part for that relief.

It asked that that he get the form up.

Page 41 of the appendix.

There were some separate correspondence that I don't believe is in the record

about enrolling Mr. Bare Faulty, which the city did.

And in the city's letter to the retirement system,

if you look at the appendix, page 43,

the city acknowledged that it had enrolled Mr. Bare Faulty.

Prospectively.

Right.

But I'm concerned about the period when he took his present position

through July 11th, 2020.

And the city's position is yes, he should have been enrolled.

And in this form, he was clearly asking for that relief.

So why isn't that a question of laws as the plaintiff contends?

And I should clarify, if this case had not been dismissed,

the city would have considered disputing the period

from 17 to 20, at least, about who was at fault

and whether his waiver in 2009 and his position in 2017

was functionally the same.

But we've never really been asked to litigate those issues.

So we can no formal position in this litigation about that issue.

So it's not undisputed that he should have been enrolled

from 2017 to 2020.

The city would dispute that.

Oh, I don't want to hedge.

We've not gone proceeded into litigation.

And so I've not had to answer that question before this moment.

I would say, you know, we did enroll him in 2020

when the retirement system asked us to.

And that would indicate probably that we should have enrolled him in 2017.

And the retirement system said so.

You might have some other defenses to that

for that issue to proceed.

Correct.

And including this case, as I view it,

it's all about who pays for that mistake if it was a mistake.

And the determination was that there is fall on both sides

for signing a contract that purported to waive

retirement benefits that could not be waived.

Right.

But again, that mistake only deals with who pays

for the actuarial determination,

not whether he gets enrolled or not.

That's right, Your Honor.

Well, let me just clarify.

I might not understand when you say talk about,

when we're talking about the who pays for the actuarial

determination, is it just the process?

Like, okay, you pay the accountant $1,000,

so they can figure out who owns what,

an allocation of the expenses that had to be paid

into the system if he were enrolled.

Is it the latter?

It's the latter.

As I understand it, the actuarial determination

will spit out a number that's due,

and that is the number that will need to be paid

to true up or to make good on what the retirement system...

That gets allocated on the basis of fall.

It can be allocated on the basis of fall.

That's right. It can be allocated,

or it can fall entirely on the employer

if it is a situation where the employer is solely at fault.

And this does happen.

Sometimes employees for various reasons

are administratively overlooked,

or in other situations.

This is a situation where the employee signed a document

that waived it.

So this is not a situation where you hire,

you know, John or Jane Q Smith,

and they come to work there,

and someone forgets to file their retirement paperwork.

This is a far different situation in our view

on the fault analysis.

Let me just ask,

what are the factual issues in your view here

that make this something beyond just a pure legal issue

as Mr. King contends it is?

Do you have fault waiver?

Anything else?

I think those are the factual issues

that the statute needs to be resolved

to rule on the type of relief he's seeking.

Yes.

If I may, I did,

I don't know the court wants to entertain argument.

We did have some,

did not have an opportunity since reviewing

the reply memorandum to,

and wanted to make a few points,

and then I'm happy to wrap up.

Anyway, your red light's on.

Oh, thank you. Thank you, Chief. Thank you.

Thank you very much, Council.

The case is submitted.

Court is adjourned.
