This is case 2021-0274, Andrea Amadeo-Vickery versus the town of Salem.

Amadeo. Welcome. The record should reflect that Justice McDonald is disqualified from this case.

Having said that, Mr. Halier, do you have reserved two minutes?

So noted. Please proceed when you are ready.

Thank you very much and good morning and may it please the court.

My name is Russell Hilliard. I'm with the front of Upton and Hatfield,

and it's my privilege to represent the town of Salem in this matter.

The first thing I'll say is I'm glad I sat through the prior case.

So are we.

And I will particularly in contrast to that, to some extent, this case presents a narrow,

but I think important day-to-day issue in the administration that a right to no law.

You've dealt with lots of broader issues about what's a public document,

how do you apply exemptions, so on and so forth.

But this case does focus in on those words record reasonably described in section 4 of 91A.

And the reason for that requirement, at least from the municipalities point of view,

is that the requester needs to tell the town what she's after.

And in a more perfect world, some dialogue, if there was any dispute or uncertainty about it,

would ensue, in this case, litigation ensued instead.

Here the requester is a person known to the court, Attorney Amadeo Vickery.

She's the requester in the plaintiff, and she said she wanted correspondence.

There are requests that issue here.

She wanted correspondence with the Department of Justice

in which the town manager, the Salem Town Manager,

had described disability retirees quote as committing fraud.

What's important for context is about the same time she made a request

to the Department of Justice for correspondence with the Salem Town Manager

that described disability retirees as engaging in possibly fraudulent activities.

You're about to say that that is semantics that makes a difference, aren't you?

I'm sorry, Ron.

You're about to say that that is semantics that makes a difference, correct?

That does make a difference because I'm jumping ahead.

But in her opinion, Judge Messer said that the town was requiring people to use magic words.

We are requiring magic words.

That's what the request was as committing fraud to the town.

The request that goes to the Department of Justice, Attorney General,

as engaging in possibly fraudulent activities.

Just for one point or further context that Judge Messer thought,

I wouldn't say thought was irrelevant, but while this is all pending,

Attorney Amadeo Vickery is representing a plaintiff in a lawsuit against the town of Salem.

Is that relevant?

For defamation.

Not relevant to 91A, you're on.

I would say that.

But when the town manager is defending himself with civil litigation for defamation

and he gets from that same person, same person's attorney,

a right to no request as committing fraud,

it's certainly hard to ignore the context in which we're doing this.

But it really doesn't end up making a difference because what happened here

is that in the colloquies that I've quoted in the brief between myself and Judge Messer

really highlight what went on.

She viewed her task as determining should the town have interpreted the phrase

as committing fraud to mean the same thing or include the phrase

as engaging in possibly fraudulent activities.

And in considering that, she recognized that we had no definitive case law.

So she turned to a federal appellate court decision from the DC Circuit

interpreting and applying FOIA.

And that's the National Magazine case and it's a very interesting case.

And it wasn't cited by the parties, she cited it.

And of course that led to me looking into it and more.

But that case said that an agency under FOIA, it was the Custom Service,

has a duty to construe a FOIA request liberally.

And in that case, the requester asked for records indexed under the name of H. Ross Perot.

This came in right after the 92 election.

But in addition to seeking records indexed under Perot's name,

the request was for information, quote, pertaining to Perot

and information regarding offers by Perot to assist customs in drug interdiction efforts.

And what the federal appellate court ultimately said was because you have to read it liberally,

the words pertaining to coupled with the inclusion of other references to documents that didn't name Perot by name

were sufficient to alert the agency that they were seeking information about Perot

even if it was not indexed under his name.

The point of all that language all on page 890 of the National Magazine case

is to show how having started with we need to look at it liberally, the federal court,

what the request was and how it should have been read,

Judge Messer then took that and took it explicitly in her opinion,

which is at page 29 of my brief, the addendum to the brief,

and sites it.

An agency has a duty to construe a right to know request because she makes it right to know liberally.

So is that different than the way we construe 91A and we construe it broadly

to promote the purposes of the statute? Is that any different?

It is a little different because in a general way, yes, we look at the purpose

and I've cited it in my brief somewhere,

the purpose of it is obvious, open government, sunshine state and so forth,

but when we go to the phrase record reasonably described,

we need, there needs to be some direction

if the recipient looks at that request

and complies with it, complies with it as worded

and this is where my issues are going to just come together.

Maybe that's the right way for this court to interpret record reasonably described.

Maybe you want it to be read liberally,

but that's not been said so far

and the major point of my brief and my argument is that

if that's going to be the standard going forward, fine,

but the ton of Salem should not be penalized for responding to this.

My issue with that is more philosophical than we have time for today,

but why is ignorance an excuse?

Well, because it says, we were talking about it in the prior case.

Oh, we've been screaming about it in that.

I'm sorry.

We've been screaming about it, don't worry.

Because it's newer should have known it's a penalty.

So if someone is looking at this request and says,

okay, they want to have, I'm the town manager to say,

they want to have my letters to the AG where I've said someone is committing fraud.

And the town manager says, I've never accused anybody of that.

And in fact, the proof in the pudding is that what Judge Messer did,

which I wish if I were writing the script,

she simply said, okay, Hilliard, go back, do this differently,

and produce documents that are encompassed within a broader reading of this.

And in fact, she ordered us to do that within five days.

And we did it.

And we, this is in the appendix of page 84.

This is my letter to Trinidad-Bendazian explaining what we did,

our search terms, and the 32 pages of documents we found.

And what's telling about it is that having done that expanded search at her direction,

two things are important.

The documents we found were all within the 188 pages

that had been produced by the Department of Justice in response to the request of that agency.

And more importantly, none of those documents reflect the town manager

accusing someone of committing fraud.

So we performed the more liberal reading of the request.

It still didn't produce documents that, in our view,

were within the scope of the request as presented to us.

And that's why we're here today.

Because, and you can see from the record in this case,

the plaintiff put in evidence of other right-to-know requests

that the town was fielding from other former retired police officers at that time

and how we're trying to respond.

We need to know the rules of the road.

And if we receive this request and respond it with the documents

that are reasonably within this description,

then we shouldn't be penalized if, from this day forward,

the direction is from this court to read, reasonably describe,

read it more liberally.

So if we think that the trial court got it right on the substantive issue,

your position as we still shouldn't, and liberally as the way it should be construed,

we still shouldn't affirm the award of attorney's fees because how could you know?

How could the town know in advance? Is that right?

Precisely, Your Honor, you shouldn't affirm the finding of a violation

or the award of attorney's fees.

And, you know, it's telling, when you get to the end of her opinion,

the plaintiff requested that personal penalties be imposed on Mr. Gill and the town manager.

And I commend to you, I'm sure you've already read it,

the description of her analysis as to why she wasn't going to do that

really is the same analysis that should apply to the award of fees against the town.

So do we have to decide the underlying issue of whether the legal standard

requires that the requests be construed liberally,

or can we say and still find in your favor that we don't have to decide that

because even if that is what the law is, you didn't know,

your client didn't know that and therefore the award of fees was inappropriate.

Precisely correct.

But are you asking us to decide the underlying issue?

Well, I want to just, I have to appeal the underlying issue.

I want to highlight for the court that what has been adopted here

and applied against the town is a different or new standard.

And we couldn't, you know, have a philosophical discussion

as to whether that's how municipalities and state agencies, I guess,

are to construe these things.

Mr. Gill, I know you're answering my question, but you're about to run out of time.

Oh, I'm sure.

No, no, so let me just ask you about the venue issue.

If you're right on venue, what happens?

Do you want to, does the case disappear or does the case get refiled

and off we go again?

I was hoping you weren't going to ask me that question

because I'm candidly, I'm not really sure.

I was concerned about the venue issue and put it in there

because we're in a situation where, you know, I now live in Portsmouth.

Do you want to make a request to the town of Colbrook

for public records and have a dispute with them

and drag them down to Brentwood?

But this argument wasn't made to the trial court.

Yes, I made that precise point in my answer.

Well, you denied venue in your answer.

You didn't make the point that court didn't have jurisdiction.

Well, it's not a jurisdictional question, it's a venue question.

But you didn't ask to dismiss or transfer.

I did not, I did not, Your Honor.

I raised it in my answer.

It was addressed by plaintiff's counsel at the hearing

and the judge ruled on it in her order.

I think that's sufficient to raise the question.

However, the much more important thing to me and to my client

has to do with the finding of violating the statute

and an award of fees.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

You still have two minutes.

Thank you.

Bandazian.

Good morning.

May it please the court.

I'm Christopher Bandazian from the law firm of Barofsky,

a cove, and bandazians representing the plaintiff and

worm, victory in this action.

First of all it should be abundantly clear on reviewing

the trial courts decision that there was no new standard

adopted in this case.

There is a lengthy paragraph at page three of the trial

courts decision in which she runs through all the established

case law and this, the legal standard applied by the trial

court is the same as in Seaco's newspapers.

papers, and the most recent ACLU case versus City of Concord,

it's long established precedent by this court.

But isn't liberally construing the statute for the purposes

of the public knowing that the government different

than liberally construing the language of the request?

Aren't those two different concepts?

I don't believe so.

I believe that's a semantic difference.

But as I pointed out in my brief, the word liberal

was a quotation from opposing counsel's oral argument

before the trial court, where she was paraphrasing what

he had argued to her.

And it's a word used in a quotation from a different case.

But it is not a different standard that was applied.

The court announced the standard early on its decision

and devoted an entire paragraph to that subject.

So what is the standard in your view

for construing a right to know request?

Whether the request reasonably describes

the subject matter at hand.

And here, it's rather clear on the facts.

And the central issue below was not a legal issue.

It was a fact issue.

It was whether the right to know

request seeking documents, describing

New Hampshire retirement system disability retirees

as committing fraud statements by the town manager

or the Human Resources Director.

And individually and collectively,

there are a series of communications back and forth

with the Attorney General's Office

that make it quite clear that that's

the subject matter of those communications.

The first of those, which was an undisclosed email,

was an email from the town manager

to the Attorney General's Office,

stated February 24th of 2020, seeking to set up a meeting

to discuss possible fraud.

But doesn't that highlight the difference

between describing retirees as committing fraud

as opposed to engaging in possibly fraudulent activity?

Those seem like very different phrases

with very different meanings to me.

Why is that wrong?

Because the town is seeking an investigation

by the Attorney General's Office

of whether people are committing fraud,

whether it's possible or not.

Whether they are.

They're not making a determination

beyond a reasonable doubt.

They're seeking an investigation

by the Attorney General's Office.

And I would point out that the very next document

is the one document that was disclosed in response

to the right to no request.

And that very pointedly establishes

that the town knew very well what the subject matter was

and that the subject matter concerned.

But aren't we venturing into an arena where a,

I will describe the towns, the request of the town

as perhaps being able to be read more restrictively,

right, a definitive employees as committing fraud retirees

versus the AG's request, request to the AG,

which was engaging in possible fraudulent activity.

The next document, I'm sorry.

So I guess I'm wondering sort of at the other end,

if towns are expected to take a specific request

and blow it up into a really broad search,

wouldn't there be a complaint that now you're just

trying to bury me in paper and you aren't responding

to the request as made?

Seems to me the requester controls the request

in the first instance.

Very next document, which is the only document

in the chronology that was provided in response

to that right to no request, was a document either proceeding

or following the meeting in question

on the same day, March 6th of 2020,

in which the human resources director does not mention

fraud, she says questionable conduct.

So clearly, the town understood

the subject matter of that request.

And when the trial court made a factual finding,

you're talking about what was produced

after the trial court?

Prior to.

Prior to.

The march?

And after the petition was filed.

No.

Prior to.

Prior to, OK.

So the one document that the town produced

did not contain a specific accusation of fraud.

But it did reference specific conduct that had occurred?

This was a long 11 page or 10 page letter, begins at page 21.

Of the appendix continues to page 30 of the appendix,

much of it redacted.

But it talks about specifically questionable conduct.

It does not mention.

Of an individual.

Pardon me?

Of an individual.

Collectively, 20 retirees.

But questionable conduct that had already occurred,

I guess is my point.

Yes.

Got it.

But not specifically accusing anyone of fraud.

And so they understood that the right to no request

concerned the subject matter.

And as you look through the remaining sequence of emails

on the same subject that were not disclosed,

among other things, you'll find the human resources

director's follow up correspondence

with the AG's office dated August 6th of 2020.

References, RSA 281A56, which is the false representation

statute in workers compensation claims,

where someone can be found guilty

or is required to be prosecuted for perjury or false statements.

So misdemeanors or a class B felony.

So clearly, this is all the same subject matter.

Those emails were all reviewed by the trial court

before she arrived at her decision.

And it is a, I would say, eminently reasonable decision

based on the facts of this case

and her review of all of those emails.

We come then to what is the standard of review

of what is a reasonably described record.

And I believe it is something that this court shows

deference to historically and did, for example,

in good the office of the legislative budget assistant.

It is not a de novo review here because there

is no new pronouncement of law.

I think a reasonable reading of the court's decision

would so indicate.

And so based on that, we believe that the court very

sustainably exercised the discretion,

reviewed carefully what the evidence was, reviewed the emails,

and found that in totality or singly,

it was a reasonably described request.

So is it your position that, despite the differences

in the language between the request to the town

and the request to DOJ, that they are congruent?

They're asking for the same set of information?

Yes, one is perhaps more broadly phrased,

but they both concern the same subject matter, which

is an allegation of fraudulent conduct.

Concerning the same subject matter, fraud.

They both use the word fraud, so or fraudulent.

Correct.

But one says committing fraud, the other

says possible fraudulent activity,

and you don't think those are asking

for different types of information?

I do not, nor did the town, because they included

a document or voluntarily provided a document

concerning, quote, questionable conduct

that did not mention the word fraud specifically.

With respect to the attorney's fees component,

does the trial court need to determine

whether or not the lawsuit was necessary in order

for the requester to get the documents?

Yes.

And so why was this lawsuit necessary,

given the fact that you had the documents from DOJ?

At the time the lawsuit was filed,

we did not have the documents from DOJ.

Well, you could have gotten them from DOJ.

The request had been made.

It's unclear.

It is unclear.

I would be speculating if I said

we knew what we were going to get from either.

Can I ask you about venue?

If we conclude that venue is improper here

and that it was properly raised and preserved, what do we do?

There is no remedy that this court should order.

Venue is a workload-dividing mechanism.

And improper venue, I think the case that I cited

I probably will miscite it, it provides

that there is no remedy other than transfer venue.

Well, the other remedy is a nullification

of all the proceedings, nunk pro-tunk.

That's so there's no authority for doing that.

Venue is a load-sharing mechanism.

And that's all.

It doesn't mean the court's not competent to hear the case.

It doesn't mean the court doesn't have jurisdiction.

So that would be a new law.

What about the cases that are pretty old

but that are cited by Mr. Hillier that

talk about claims against towns and town officers are local

and therefore need to be brought in that venue?

Why aren't those applicable?

Your Honor, there are no cases that say that.

There is a case that says a Vermont Sheriff's deputy

cannot be sued for breach of the Vermont Sheriff's

duty and from that case, the next case that comes along

says a public for a public official venue is local.

But that's not the issue in that case.

So is there a venue?

Mr. Hillier gives the example of a request from Pittsburgh,

somebody living in Pittsburgh, New Hampshire, Colbrook.

OK, Colbrook for a request in Salem.

And then is there venue in Colbrook?

If the resident is in Colbrook, yes.

And if somebody is in San Francisco

and they file a 91A request for documents from Salem,

where's the venue there?

Well, I would say there's probably a personal jurisdiction

issue there.

But where the legislature has intended to restrict venue,

for example, this key area of cases,

it has done so specifically.

And the legislature is not spoken on venue

as relates to municipal actions.

It's common law and it's ancient common law at that.

And it really does not hold up in modern times.

And even in the treatise, the New Hampshire practice treatise,

they're pondering why this presumption has existed.

It's no different than any other defendant getting sued.

And it's a common law creation.

And it was not even created as an issue in controversy.

Mr. Hillier and his briefing points out

that your client is a lawyer and is involved in litigation

with the town.

Is that important?

Should that matter to us?

It should not matter to you.

And so I would say that concern is misplaced

because we represent workers' compensation

claimants, including police officers from the town of Salem.

And as part of that representation,

Attorney Amadea Vickery establishes

compensability under workers' compensation claims,

either by litigation or by agreement

with the town's workers' compensation council.

That is a prerequisite for the New Hampshire retirement system

to award benefits.

And so when her clients and former clients

are accused of misconduct, that is what gets our interest.

It is not a lawsuit for another client on a different account.

What about a separate but related point

that your client's a lawyer?

So she would choose words carefully,

and therefore the word difference between these two requests

were the product of thought.

And those different word choices

mean that they were different requests.

If that is a question, I'm not sure.

Should it matter to us that she's a lawyer

and that lawyers, their craft is picking words carefully?

That is not the standard under 91A.

The 91A standard is for the ordinary citizen.

And to hold any 91A request or to a different standard

based on their level of expertise would not

be consistent with our law.

So what import should we attach to the difference

in the language between these two requests?

Because they are different.

I would argue that they're, and I do argue

that there is no difference.

They both concern the subject of fraud

and the town has demonstrated in its providing

the March 6th correspondence as its only response

to the right to no request prior to litigation

that it understood what the request was.

Because that document merely mentions questionable activity.

There's no mention by the HR director of fraud.

Your red light is on.

Thank you very much.

Mr. Hilliard, you're too minute.

Thank you very much, Your Honor.

Two things.

The statute uses the adverb reasonably, not liberally.

And when you look at Judge Masters' opinion,

she very clearly says, and she paraphrases

the Nation Magazine case.

Although a requester must reasonably describe the records,

an agency has a duty to construe,

and she puts in brackets a right to no request liberally.

And the very next sentence says,

Construing petitioner's request, consistent with the statute's

interest of disclosure, the court

finds petitioner's request extended

to documents that discuss potential and suspected

fraud by disability retirees.

So I don't think we can argue about the standard that

was applied.

It's clear from the opinion.

The only other point I want to make in response

to Justice Donovan's question, the petition in paragraph 16

in the appendix at page 7 specifically

says that on November 23, 2020, the petitioner

received the records from the DOJ, 188 pages.

The lawsuit was not filed until December 16, 2020.

So they had the records before this suit was filed.

That's all I have.

Thank you very much.

Case submitted.

Court is adjourned.

Congratulations.
