This is case 2021-0222, appeal of Robert Newcomb at all.

Take your time, Mr. Cronin.

I overheard you whisper that you've reserved two minutes.

Yes, Your Honor.

Are you ready, Claire?

All right.

Whenever you're ready, Mr. Cronin.

I'll also waive my period of uninterrupted questioning if the court wishes.

May it please the court for the record, John Cronin, for Carolyn and Robert Newcomb who are here with us today.

This is another matter related to the DES and our great Lake Winapisaki that we bring to you today.

This particular case, and I think pursuing the adage of a picture is worth a thousand words.

You've probably seen the certified record.

Direct your attention to page 15.

You have a picture there of the completed repairs of this particular property.

It's a modest house built somewhere around 1972.

The Newcomb's purchased it in disrepair in 2011 and started to do work to it, repair and improvements to clean it up.

And by all accounts from their neighbors, I should say most of their neighbors, they did a great job,

proved the property and the look around it.

But a couple of years here of despair, a lot of sleepless nights, thousands of dollars over a transitory path.

It's about three foot wide.

Provides a second means of egress, which is a code requirement to get down to the ground.

The history itself, as we talked about, is in the papers.

I'll be brief and not repeat it.

But somewhere around 2019, the Newcomb's wanted to do some work to the back of the house.

The time in the following page in the record, you would see there were five sliding doors.

Some of them had those jealousy balconies on them.

And there's also a deck on another side of it in the walkway.

They wanted to provide that second means of egress.

Also remove the four sliders, put some windows in which you see in the finished product,

has the two bay windows up top and the other windows to the side.

Mr. Cronin, the state says that your client could have replaced all five sliders with windows

and resolve the perceived code violation.

Is that right?

I don't agree with that.

They wouldn't have provided a second means of egress.

I agree that they could have changed them with sliders, that they could have kept the sliders in place,

but it wouldn't provide a second means of egress.

And they did just that with four of them.

They could have done it with the fifth, but they'd have no other means to get out to the property.

The state also spins three or four pages of its brief,

saying that many, if not most of your claims,

the claims asserted by your client are not preserved.

You didn't file a reply brief, I think.

I didn't see it.

No.

What's your response to the preservation arguments?

I think all of the claims that we raise are squarely preserved.

There's four claims that are raised on our appeal.

One of them is jurisdictional, which is always relevant.

That's the question that relates to 482-3 subsection four.

The other ones go straight to the heart of the matter on the burden of proof,

as whether the decision of the hearing's officer was illegal or unreasonable.

I think the one that they say about preserve relates to the waiver.

We've cited some cases in there that the reason why a waiver wasn't formally applied for,

it's the department's policy that you could apply for all the waivers you want,

and they won't grant it because it's within 50 feet of the water.

So to require someone to do something that's futile and would not be granted

in an effort to exhaust their administrative remedies, we don't believe is required,

and we believe that issue is properly framed.

What about the point that's raised that you're arguing about subject matter jurisdiction,

but what's really at issue here is regulatory jurisdiction

in terms of geographic limitation in terms of the waters of the state?

I don't know if I really appreciate the distinction between it,

but I'll try and answer it the best way that I can.

I think when you look at the initial complaint that was issued by the DES,

they cite the violation for building the structure over the public water.

Over the public water, not adjacent to it.

There's no proof anywhere in the record, any place,

that establishes that this deck is built over the public water.

And if you look at the building as it's...

Page 15 kind of looks like it is.

Well, if you look at the...

Just correct me.

Your Honor, if you look at the shoulders of that,

you can see the rock buttresses on both sides,

and if you had an opportunity to do a view,

you would go out there and you'd look at the deed,

and you would see that someone in 72, prior to existing regulations,

and when they did things differently, built a channel,

cut out the land to access that area under the garage

so they could bring their boat in and out.

I don't think the state suggests that the water underneath the building

in the garage is public water.

We would also submit that any water that's within the fee-simple bounds

of the deed is not public water.

And that was never established.

We believe for jurisdictional purposes there's an exemption for it,

but it's a primary piece with the illegal and unreasonable.

We think the hearings officer would have had to have required

to showing that this particular deck is over the public water.

There's nothing there but an allegation, no proof at all.

Well, didn't your clients admit when they responded to the complaint

initially that it was a house over water?

It is a house over water, and I think you take it in the context

and there was some criticisms of the client.

The DES regulations, I think, for lawyers are even difficult

to navigate.

I know I go to the smartest guy in my office, Dan Muller,

to help me understand them, but for lay people to take a look

at them and respond, Carolyn Newcomb is super diligent.

I think she did a great job in her response.

The house itself, the complete structure, is a house over water.

And certainly I wouldn't expect the Newcoms to understand

survey issues or literal property rights,

and that's something in fairness.

When we got the case after they had stumbled

and looked like they weren't going any place,

but getting in order to get their building teared down,

take a look at it.

And my first inquiry was to look at the complaint,

ask for the deed, go out to the site and look at it.

And I'm not a surveyor either, but there's no proof here

that this deck, it's only three feet out,

is in the public water.

I think it's within your fee simple bounds.

Now that's a fact question, right?

It may be or it may not be, but we never had the opportunity

to do that if the state came in and proved their case.

And the burden of proof is a little bit funky here, right?

So initially, whether the state brings a complaint

and they brought it, they would have a burden to prove

by a preponderance of the evidence that the allegations

are true.

Now, we cited, goes to the hearings officer who,

you know, it's a captive guy.

He was criticized by DES and the court case

that you had before on the other side of Lake Winnipesaki

for not granting a motion to dismiss.

So he takes a look at this case.

And, you know, anytime there's a fact,

the question either says it's irrelevant

or finds exactly the way the state looked at it.

But I think you would definitely have to have had

some type of record evidence that this was a building

over public water and it wasn't.

Secondarily, with respect to the exemption,

if you look at the statute, there's a carve out,

several carve outs, one of them talks about

repair or replacement of an existing structure.

And, you know, we can debate, I guess,

if the intent is the entire structure or sections of it.

But I think a common understanding of a repair

of what the Newcombs did throughout the whole house

is to repair this property, to take care of the things

that were dilapidated, clean it up and repair it.

And if that would be the case, we believe

that it would be exempt under that statute

and there'd be no jurisdiction whatsoever.

So I would tend to agree with you if all the work was inside.

But this is clearly this deck and the stairway

is new and extending the perimeter of the structure, isn't it?

That's correct.

But if you look at the title of the statute

and you go a little bit further,

it's clear that the intent is to prevent

digging, dredging and filling and impacts to the public water.

This does none of that.

You can see in the picture initially

the application was for three foot by six foot deck.

The contractor got out there to do it.

He looked at it and said,

how can I support this with three by six?

I'd have to put the supports into the public water.

He went back to the building offered and said,

do you mind if I extend it out a little bit on both sides

and put that angle post in and tie it back into the house.

And that was done.

So there's no work in any of those dredging fill issues

which we think are a primary step to get to the point

that it's a repair reconstruction.

You can build over the water and not have dredging fill, right?

And you're not contesting the theoretical notion

that a building extending over the public waters

comes within the jurisdiction of DES.

Are you?

I think in some respects we are.

If it's a repair or a replacement of a building

and it extends over,

I think that would be exempt from the jurisdiction.

If it's a new extension, additional extension.

Excuse me?

This structure sticks out more in the direction of the water

than it did before the work was done, right?

Right.

That's correct.

And I agree with you.

If this was a new building, say,

and you were going to jut it out over,

can't deliver it, say,

and you got it out over the public water,

I would say that would be a jurisdictional issue.

But then again, the way the statute is worded,

I think you could make an argument that there's no trenching,

no digging, no impact to the public waters.

And you can only build so much to do that, right?

You can't deliver, especially in the building around the lake,

only a few feet based on engineering standards.

But you could do it.

The argument about the meaning of repair or reconstruction,

when was that first made in this process?

I couldn't say that.

I think in the response by Carolyn Newcomb,

certainly it wasn't legally drafted.

It's in the record.

I recall something of that nature,

but somewhere in the proceedings.

I can't say the particular time and place where that was first raised.

With respect to the other elements,

when you look at it,

and keep in mind as far as that definition, too,

the nitty area they talk about don't enlarge the footprint.

It isn't enlarging the footprint of the building, per se.

And if you look at the things that were removed,

including the jealousy balconies and the other balcony on the other side of the building

and steps that were moved prior to the Newcomb's ownership

and are reported by some of the neighbors.

In fact, some of the neighbors that are in the record recall

seeing that there was a balcony or a walkway in this same place

because what was found there was a doorbell.

Now, the Newcombs don't have personal knowledge of that,

that's the feedback that they got at one time and place

that there was something there which would make some sense.

Well, when we look at the other particular complaints

that are in the record as far as the Estoppel claim,

we believe that's something that at least the Newcombs should have had

their day in court or hearing.

Their contractor, who submitted an affidavit,

stated that he did what he typically does,

and he gets experience around the lake,

went to the town official,

showed him what he planned on doing.

At that particular time, a three-by-six walkway with some steers

said that you need a building permit for it.

You probably need to check in with DES.

You may need something from them.

He says that he did that.

He called, explained what he was doing,

and said, well, we don't regulate egress staircases like that.

You've got to get your building permit.

But he didn't show the DES the plans.

There was no personal meeting.

He did not.

There was no meeting whatsoever.

But I think if you had an opportunity to question some people

and cross-examine them at the department,

they usually take pretty good records of calls and inquiries.

Was there a call there?

What do they typically do when they get such a call?

Do they generally tell people that have egress issues,

that it's something that's for the matter

of local building department?

We didn't get that.

By the same token, if you had the hearing,

the state would be free to question the contractor, right?

How diligent was he?

He certainly has to exercise reasonable effort in doing that.

But it's pretty clear that the Newcombe's exercised no bad faith.

They're trying to do this and do it right.

They're paying all the money to get it done.

They're not looking to skirt anything.

So I think if you had an opportunity to be heard on that,

who knows what the evidence would show.

Plus, we have a whole Whitney of Wittances that were disclosed,

which have some personal knowledge of the history

of that particular property.

With respect to the waiver,

I think this case presents an opportunity

where what, you know, say maybe a rigid application

of these rules and regulations by DES

certainly understand the need for the DES.

I certainly value our Great Lakes and our waterfront.

They deserve protection and they need to be protected.

I think the DES does a really good job at it.

Certainly most of the people up there are subject matter experts

and they dedicate their life to that work.

But I think this policy of an administrative agency

not to entertain waivers is problematic.

You have cases like this, you know,

that work their way to the Supreme Court

because people have so much invested in it.

There should be some mechanism,

and I know in the olden days you'd have something like this.

There'd be a fine or there'd be some remedy,

but at least an effort to get to a resolution

rather than tearing things down.

So what is the requested relief in terms of a waiver from us?

Well, the policy decision not to grant waivers

is inappropriate because it's in the statutes.

So we should say that it's unlawful and inappropriate?

Yeah, you could say that the decision of the hearings officer

with respect to the waiver was unlawful

because the statute contemplated a waiver

as all land use to either a waiver of variance

or needs to be a relief valve as Justice Horton wrote,

I think, in Simplex,

that they shouldn't just disregard it as a matter of policy,

they should entertain the arguments of the waiver

and see if it makes sense.

The argument is that there was no argument for waiver.

Right? That's what the state's telling us.

There was no argument for a waiver?

That's correct.

The reason there was no argument for a waiver

is because the state said

we don't entertain waivers as a matter of policy.

That's the 50-feet of the reference line,

which this building is.

Don't bother with the waiver. It's going to get denied.

Why would you go to the effort to pursue it if that were the case?

Your red light is on. You still have a few minutes.

Thank you.

Mr. Harrison.

Good morning. May it please the court.

My name is Joshua Harrison of the Attorney General's office,

and I represent the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services.

As detailed in our brief,

we believe many of the appellants' arguments

have not been properly preserved.

This case of opponents failed to state a claim

in their most appeal to the wetlands council

that their deck and stairs complied with.

Can I ask, is there a process for an applicant to call,

have this consultation with the division,

and get a written response?

The department did.

Or is it no man's land?

Can they issue a written response that,

yeah, we've looked at this and it's not within our jurisdiction?

I'm not sure how that would come into play in the circumstances

we have here where the structure was built.

Well, apparently the contractor made a call and was told,

no, that's a building official issue.

So can that person say,

gee, would you send that to me in writing?

I could put it in my pile.

Or do we just wait till after the thing's already constructed

and somebody stumbles upon it,

and now we've got to tear it down?

I think the department absolutely offers those opportunities

to anybody willing to, you know,

either discuss permitting issues,

they have pre-application meetings,

or if it's something that they're considering,

whether it would or would not run afoul of the statutes,

they certainly have those meetings

and have those discussions, look at plans.

I think the department does do that outreach.

So where does someone like this go?

I'm looking at the photograph,

which I know you don't dispute.

And I know I can't sit as a hearings officer

in my current life.

Where does someone go when they have a project like this

that requires another way out,

and at least on the surface,

it looks entirely reasonable?

Where do they go?

Well, I think you go straight to the statute.

RSA 482A26 is very clear on its face.

In the first instance, it prohibits these structures outright.

It then prohibits structures from being modified

that are existing dwellings over water

to become dwellings over water.

And finally, it allows these structures,

if they are already existing as dwellings over water,

to be repaired and reconstructed

for maintenance purposes only,

for functioning equivalent use,

as long as the footprint and expansion isn't...

The statute does contemplate waivers, does it not?

The section does contemplate waivers,

but it must meet those first few requirements.

That's section 3B of that statute.

So there are waivers contemplated within that statute,

but if you don't meet 3A,

then you don't get a 3B contemplation.

And that is a discretionary statute.

It's mentioned today.

Does the department have a policy that they don't?

Issue waivers on Lakeland and Pataki?

I'm not aware of that policy.

I know Councillor for the Appellants has mentioned it,

but I've not seen that in their Notice of Appeal

or anywhere since this idea of this policy against that.

I think the statute mentions it,

further RSA 482A27 directs the department

that when there is a violation like this,

removal is the route that needs to be taken.

How do we know based on the record

that this structure is a dwelling

that extends over the water?

Well, I'm glad for that question

because I think in the first instance,

Councillor for the Appellants mentioned

that there's an initial complaint.

I think that's inaccurate.

The department acts as an executive branch

in the first instance.

RSA 21014IA directs that an appellant

must appeal that decision,

raise every single ground

for why that decision is unlawful or unreasonable,

set those grounds forth fully,

and they have the burden of proof

by preponderance of the evidence

to overcome that initial determination.

So I think in the first instance,

the department doesn't have that burden to demonstrate that.

We also cited to decisions in our cases

in our brief that somebody claiming a bulge

or a sudden change to the land

also bears the presumption that

of overcoming the presumption

that it's accretion or erosion.

So all those circumstances together,

the department had no burden

to demonstrate that in the first instance.

Certainly they have some obligation to look at the D,

maybe the Mets and Bounds,

maybe the boundaries.

Attorney Cronin has represented that this balcony

is well within the description

of the fee-simple title to this property.

Again, I don't believe that argument

was preserved below.

I just made it.

Could you repeat that, then, please?

Well, my question is, isn't there some obligation

to take a look at, on the part of the state,

to take a look at the Mets and Bounds

and the boundaries of the fee-simple

absolute title to determine

whether it's

an offending property?

Well, as counsel for the appellant state,

a picture is worth a thousand words.

I think they visited the property, looked at it,

there was water that went under the structure

and made the determination in the first instance.

So you're saying, after that administrative

determination was made, that it was a dwelling

over the public waters,

there was no pushback

on that issue

and that there was

an obligation on the part of the landowner

to raise that issue

at that point, or therefore

close from raising it later.

Is that your position?

Yes, it is.

That

argument is not preserved, it needs to be raised

at multiple points on appeal.

And I wasn't under hearing officer,

I almost didn't have that obligation

in front of them, no supporting allegations.

It's fairly in the case because

it's an assertion in the

administrative order.

It is.

So I'm not seeing

if it's in the administrative order,

but I think

the landowner then has

to

separately preserve an issue

that's already in the case.

I think they need to preserve it because

if they don't appeal it on that basis under

RSA 21014IA,

that aspect of the administrative order would be deemed

not

appealed. So they need to appeal

each and every grounds and set those forth fully.

That's the process that occurs

and that reaches to the jurisdiction

that's a regulatory jurisdiction question,

not a subject manager jurisdiction question.

This is a regulatory issue,

it was not raised.

It is then brought to a separate tribunal

to hear those issues.

So that's why all these claims are regulatory

jurisdiction, not subject manager jurisdiction.

With respect to

ASTAPL, those were also

claims that

what brought initially, they do not survive a

motion to dismiss and the hearing officer was correct to

dismiss it.

Those claims evolved

from stating that the department does not

deal in egress issues to

that the department does not have jurisdiction to

a later

submitted affidavit that

seemed to address that they called and the department

actually said we don't have jurisdiction.

But looking at the notice of appeal in the first instance,

they just said

that they called and the department does not deal in egress

issues.

Would you address the opportunity to be heard

issue that Attorney Cronin has articulated

here? Why can't

the petitioners here

be given an opportunity to be heard

beyond dismissal?

Well, because the

RSA 21M3

9E is the hearing officer's role

and the hearing officer decides all issues

of fact in these appeals while the

wetlands council hears all

issues of law in the appeals, while

the council hears all issues of

fact.

If you can't

sufficiently provide enough allegations

of fact to overcome emotion

to dismiss, then it's right for dismissal

and emotion to dismiss. That's the hearing

officer's role to hear. Does he apply the same

standard of trial, Judge Wood?

Yes, I believe so.

With respect to waiver

and alternative remedy, again

that was not an issue that was raised

and we addressed that previously.

What about Mr. Cronin's point

while

they didn't raise a waiver

argument because

the department says there's

not going to be any waivers?

So how can they be faulted?

I think there's still something that needs to be raised

in the notice of appeal.

It wasn't here.

And then I just

refer back to our brief and what I say

previously. You've referenced

the notice of appeal a couple of times.

This is the appeal to the wetlands council.

The appeal that is

specifically set out in statute in RSA

21014.

That statute requires specificity

at an early stage so

the hearing officer and the council know what's being

alleged. Should we take into account that they were

prosa at that point in time?

I don't believe so. Again

that statute is clear just like the RSA

482A26 is clear

which also relates to the estoppel claim where

the statute is clear on its face. The estoppel

typically does not lie. There's due diligence

and reasonable reliance that are involved

and there's reasonable reasons

for not

for why an estoppel wouldn't

issue here.

If the court has no further questions

I'll rest on the briefs. Thank you.

Thank you. Mr. Harrison

and Mr. Cronin, do you have two minutes?

Yeah. Just

want to clarify one thing. I think

the court had mentioned that

Attorney Cronin said that the

steers and deck were well within the meets and bounds

of the parcel. Perhaps I was being too generous.

I appreciate the generosity

but I just wanted to

correct. If I said that I was mistaken.

I meant to say that it's a question

of fact and I believe from my observation

not being an engineer and looking

at the deed that it was clear that

someone cut the channel and took that

natural line. But it was a question

of fact that I think the state has

an obligation to establish

Premophacia who claim that it's over the public

water. By the council.

By a hearing.

And I heard the response of the state to that

issue and never mind

a prosa person. I don't think

a lawyer could respond to that and appeal

it and get a surveyor. In this day and age

you wouldn't get it done for six months

to come up and have it done.

So I think that's standard for the hearing

officer. It's only questions of law.

So the facts

would go to the council.

True, but I think

the interpretation of the deed and the fact of whether it's

that's a mixed question of fact and law

and I think at a minimum he would have to have

some evidence before

to make that conclusion. Thank you.

Thank you. Case submitted.

Courts adjourned for the morning.
