This is case 2021-0441, David Pelletier at all versus town of Rye.

Good morning.

Attorney Dowd, I understand you've read zero minutes.

Yes, thank you. Attorney Kelly Dowd, may it please the court.

I'm here to represent David and Karen Pelletier as well as the rest of the appellants in this case.

In preparing for today, I was thinking about what is sort of the essence here and it's not all the issues,

but I think a lot of the issues could be distilled into looking at the tourist accommodation uses provisions,

specifically the findings that the planning board was supposed to make.

And looking at what they say, for example, this is section H2 on page 12 of our brief,

the granting of the special use permit will not be detrimental to adjacent property or neighborhood.

Next one will not be detrimental to public safety or health or welfare.

Next one will not be contrary to public interest.

We look at the minutes of the planning board and you look at what they looked at.

What they looked at is not, is this detrimental, but there's a grandfathered use that is detrimental.

And what we're proposing to do here is less detrimental, which is not what the ordinance says.

It could be a different ordinance.

It could say less detrimental and it didn't.

And so I think a lot of the argument here is an argument about, oh, it's less detrimental.

We're saying, no, that's not what the ordinance calls for.

That's not what the rule is.

It's not a legal decision.

So what result, what use of the property would ever be acceptable to your clients?

Demolition.

No, no, no, no, no, no.

I think there's clear, I guess I'm going to go to the next point, which is the drainage issue.

There's a stormwater maintenance plan.

The stormwater maintenance plan, they're in a flood zone.

It is going to dump water on the neighbors.

That is something that doesn't have to happen.

They could go and design a stormwater management plan that is neutral.

That is not going to shed water, particularly in a flood zone.

And that would not be negative to the neighbors.

And there's no exploration of that in the record, but if we're talking.

Is the baseline absolutely no water shedding?

Or is it what the water shedding would exist if there were nothing there?

What's the baseline?

Generally speaking, if you're doing a big commercial project, their requirement is a neutral stormwater management plan.

So that you're not, you know, putting neutral compared to what though, I guess?

To the existing condition in terms of like a natural, natural existing condition.

Yeah, you know, now you have a development and there's impermeable surface,

but you can set it up so that you're not putting water onto the neighbors.

It certainly is done in a number of cases.

The planning board had no interest in doing that here.

They had no interest in maybe a reduced scale of this would accomplish that.

And it is both a public safety thing and as well as an issue for the neighbors,

because they're all there in a flood plain.

And the last thing you want in a hurricane or in a flood is your neighbor's property putting water on your property.

And so there's no reason why that wasn't explored.

And as I said, the requirement here is not less detrimental.

To get to the point, the other point that has been complained of is the question of the impact on the viewshad.

There's an existing one commercial building.

They intend to put in three buildings.

All three will be wider and larger and higher blocking the neighbor's site.

So there could be a scaled down version of this that was at the same.

I mean, typically when we're not talking about a footprint necessarily,

but if we talk about a height footprint,

they had done something that was within the same height as the existing.

Proposal to the existing development, it would be fine.

So our position is not that this property can't be developed shouldn't be developed that some new development wouldn't be a positive thing.

But the new development should be neutral in terms of the stormwater.

There's a number of things that can be done that weren't done.

The planning board wasn't interested in looking at and it's contrary to the ordinance.

It isn't.

My understanding was that the stormwater runoff was reduced as compared to the current situation, the status quo.

That is the claim that was made.

And I'm saying to this court, if we, that doesn't matter because the requirement under their ordinance is not less detrimental than the existing use.

It's whether it's detrimental or not.

So I think.

Well, but detrimental is a relative concept, isn't it?

Just the concept of you're worse off to your detriment.

It's a comparative concept and so it's as compared to something, the baseline.

Why isn't that the way to think about this?

That it's, well, you know, the stormwater runoff is going to be less under this.

How is that to the detriment of your client?

Okay, so step back.

The existing use is grandfather.

And the only reason existing use can do the stormwater, what it's doing with the stormwater is because of grandfather, right?

You can't go in and shut it down.

If you're going to start afresh and start anew and take that out, now you're putting up new development.

There's no reason why the new development shouldn't be fair to the neighbors.

And in fact, it appears from the way that this was literally put together that they said detriment.

They didn't say less detrimental.

They could have said considering the existing use and balancing this, then this is less detrimental.

That'll be a go.

That's not what they chose to do.

Now, I understand that you say what is a detriment and that is a word which has a certain amount of vagueness in...

Well, it's a comparative term, it would seem.

But it's comparative to what, I guess, is the question.

And you're saying it's inherently comparative to detrimental compared to the existing use, which is grandfather,

but which would never be approved under any circumstances.

Now, that's not what it says.

I would think that could make that more clear.

I think a detriment would be, for example, stormwater being dumped on your property from your neighbors.

I think it's detrimental to the neighbors in terms of where they are with this

and doing it right.

So that's what I think in terms of a lot of the arguments that are presented.

It's really this issue of the board saying, hey, it's less detrimental

versus the balance view is it shouldn't be detrimental at all

and there's no exploration at all by the planning board.

There was no question to the, hey, is there a way that you can come back with the design

that's going to be stormwater neutral?

Hey, is there a design that's not going to be higher than the existing?

That just wasn't done.

There's an issue with the collateral estoppel and that also connects to the detrimental,

although this is a little bit different in terms of the new construction would be higher.

There's one commercial building.

The new construction will be higher than that commercial building.

There'll be three at this point.

And there was a finding on an appeal to ZBA on the question of standing

that Karen Palatier possessed a cognizable injury to her view of the ocean

that decreased the use and enjoyment of her property.

And so for that reason, because she had an immediate injury, she had standing.

Isn't it potential injury or isn't it impact?

It wasn't a finding there with an actual injury.

The standing analysis.

I will, hey, I understand what you're saying.

And then those who are potentially impacted by the thing can show they have standing,

but that doesn't answer the question of whether there's an actual impact.

I do want to, yes, can I, I want to respond to that.

I think what the court is saying is true in an abstract sense

about what a court could find in determining standing,

what the trial court actually found in its actual determination on the ZBA appeal

was that constant visual impact that the new building will have on Karen Palatier's property

is a cognizable injury to her ability to use and enjoy her property.

The court in this case didn't say this might be an injury or it might affect you.

The court specifically said this is a cognizable injury to your ability to use.

But they didn't have data.

They didn't have any of the expert reports or any of that.

The issue wasn't really joined.

You can have an interest in traffic,

but then the studies might show that there's no increase.

I guess I'm just not drawing that connection.

The court actually found was an injury.

Now we can say, well, maybe the court was wrong,

or maybe certainly I would agree with this court that the trial court could have said

these parties have standing and had framed that basis for that standing

in a much more provisional way.

But that's not what happened here.

So our issue is the court and the ZBA clearly found that there was an injury

because of this development, because of the visual impact of this development.

And we're talking about nice properties in Rhine, New Hampshire on the sea coast

with an ocean view.

And the last thing anyone wants to do is have a big building in front of their view.

So this is not, I don't think it's a trivial issue at all

given where this is located and where this is happening.

I joined Justice Hans Marconi's concern on this.

I mean, a cognizable injury is something that's required for standing,

which is subject matter jurisdiction.

And that just because there's subject matter jurisdiction doesn't mean that

you prevail on the merits.

I agree with that.

But what I would say to this court is that the finding that was made

as far as the finding on the cognate, the specific finding that was actually made

found that there was this detrimental impact.

So that's a final decision on the merits.

That was the part of, this is the other thing I would address with the court.

There's been a distinction made by the Pellies, the interveners,

in their brief about finding a standing is not a determination on the merits.

And that's true.

You have a determination of standing that doesn't settle a case to resolve a case.

However, the case in the ZBA got resolved on the merits.

And part of the findings of the court, part of that entire decision,

includes the findings it had on the issue of standing.

That is part of the case.

That is part of the facts that were litigated.

I said in the Degle case where it says,

re-litigating any issue or fact actually litigated and determined in a prior action.

That was part of the facts that were determined in the prior action.

And we think that reason on a stop-all grounds,

it's obviously clearly in the record that this is a bigger structure

and will clearly impact the visual impact of the neighbors.

And it's actually more detrimental than the existing structure.

But in addition, the trial court already found in the ZBA that that was there.

So that satisfies your inquiry on that issue.

But I agree in a theoretical sense with the court.

I just think the actual record, when you look at what the judge actually found,

it does have these implications.

And I don't think just because a judge makes a factual finding on a question of standing,

that somehow that isn't going to be subject now to any kind of race judicata

or collateral, a stop-all, if there's substance.

I was curious also about the height issue.

Yes.

If townhouses are permitted, which I believe they are,

then how does that jive with your argument that the higher one-level building

should be the limit of the development?

That's not our position.

These are three stories.

And they're going to put the garage below.

But it's 28 feet is what the zoning says in this district.

It's supposed to be 28 feet.

The existing commercial building is non-conforming.

This new proposal is even more non-conforming.

Now, they did get a variance.

And we're not here to litigate the variance before this court.

But the issue is towns adopt zoning restrictions, like height restrictions,

based on the character of the neighborhood.

So by the fact that they had to get a variance for this,

it suggests that it's not within character of the neighborhood.

That will stop.

Tony Phoenix.

Good morning, Justices.

I'm Tim Phoenix from Holt Phoenix, Cormley and Roberts in Portsmouth

on behalf of John Simonus and his family,

who are the property owners and the interveners.

I'd like, with me is Monica Kaiser of my office,

who pulled the laboring oar on the brief.

And of course, Mike Donovan, who was town council at the time,

and appeared with us in the brief

and was at all of the planning meetings

before the decision was made.

Before I go into the merits,

I would like to renew a motion to strike that we filed.

Early on, we filed a motion to strike

because the appellants had included as part of their appendix

records relating to the certified record,

relating to the related but different zoning matter

that has been discussed in part.

The reason we don't want that included,

and by the way, the order said it was without prejudice.

The reason that we don't want that included

is because that record was not before the planning board

and was not before the superior court.

Parts of it were, and those parts are already

in the certified record,

but the whole of it was not in the record.

More importantly, their record of the zoning appeal,

certified record at the superior court, Judge Wagling,

did not include the two most important documents.

And that is the order on the merits,

which denied the Mrs. Pelleteer's claim

that she had a colorable problem

with respect to the effect on her property,

given the height and the denial of a motion

for reconsideration on that issue.

So that case was settled.

It was not appealed to this court.

The variances are granted, including a height variance,

which is essentially the same that we're here

before you today on.

Turning to the merits of this case,

I'd like to go through some of the background

that got us here.

First, referring to the certified record at page 266,

there is a document entitled,

Driftwood Down Homes Fact Sheet,

prepared by our engineer, Altus Engineering.

And that is a two-page document that has 25 lines on it,

which identifies a number of aspects

of the current situation at that site,

including wetlands,

subseptic systems in or very near the wetland,

old buildings, pavement, traffic problems,

all kinds of other runoff problems,

flooding problems, all kinds of problems on this site,

and then how it compares to the proposal

for these three townhouses and six units.

In all 29 cases, the proposed plan is better than,

and in most cases, significantly better than,

the existing conditions out there.

Again, that's at CR 266.

Next, for the procedural history,

please think about this.

There were five substantive planning board hearings

and dozens of pages of minutes from these meetings,

and the Appellants Council, Scott Hogan at the time,

appeared, I believe, at all of them.

They had an engineer that appeared

and made one written comment,

which was about lot loading for septic purposes,

and we made a change in part because of that.

There were six plan set changes by Altus Engineering.

They were in response to the common concerns

of the planning board, their peer reviewers,

the public, and DES.

Can I just go back to a point that you made a moment ago,

which is that this is an improvement, it's better.

There are these 29 categories of information,

and this is less detrimental, I guess,

to use the words that were used before,

but is that enough?

Why is that enough?

Well, you have to think about this at the lens

that the planning board is looking at it.

There's a problem in this Parsons Creek,

mainly caused by septic system.

This property is a problem with respect to septic systems.

Some are failing.

One is in the actual wetland.

So the prism that they're looking through

is what do we have now,

and how does that affect things

traffic-wise, building-wise, coverage-wise, environmentally?

And what our project does is take away most of that

and improves it greatly.

And the reason we needed variances is because

the entire property is in the wetland setback,

so you can't do anything on that property

without getting certain variances.

Is that the lens that the ordinance is talking about?

I'm sorry.

Is that the proper lens under the ordinance?

Because the ordinance, the standard,

the test is whether the granting of the SUP

will be detrimental to adjacent property

or the neighborhood.

Well, I'm getting to that.

The board found that it was not detrimental.

I'll get to that in a moment, if I may, Chief Justice.

But I think you can't take this out of reality,

which is what do we have now?

And the board is looking at,

somebody who wants to do something reasonable there

that fixing all these problems

and under our analysis under the special use permit

meets the requirements.

Going forward, we had 12,

at least 12 peer review submissions.

There were six by Sabago Technics,

which analyzed and commented upon

Altus Engineering's work

and ended up supporting drainage, stormwater, et cetera.

Another company, Comprehensive Environmental,

wrote six different submissions

that supports the septic

and the stormwater and drainage.

We had another company

that looked at long-term effects of climate change.

We also had DES.

DES issued four permits on this.

So they've looked at all of this same information

environmentally and came to the conclusion

that it was entitled to permits.

We got alteration of terrain.

We got wetland permit.

We got shoreland permit.

And we got a septic permit.

So everything that was done

was looked at by our people

and vetted by independent experts

hired by the town at my client's expense.

Additionally, town attorney Donovan

wrote numerous memos advising the board

on the meaning of and how to apply

the requirements of the special use permit

and the land development regulations.

He and I actually sparred quite a bit on that.

And the project was changed partly

because of that from our original proposal

for eight units in four buildings

to six units in three buildings.

The other thing I'd just like to mention

is that the height of the building,

they're complaining because it's 36 feet

and blocks their view.

What's the evidence of all of that in the record?

What's the precision of evidence on that claim?

Does it block someone's view?

Was there a surveillance?

The appellees, the pelleteers

live about 900 feet behind us

across the marsh and up.

And they claim to have discrete views of the ocean.

We have the certified record.

At certified record 264 and 160,

our expert, Altus Engineering,

provides documentation showing

the new buildings superimposed

over the existing conditions.

There may be tiny effect,

but the important point is Altus Engineering

demonstrated that at 28 feet,

which as my brother at the bar said

would be permissible,

there was no change in the effect of our view,

whether it's 28 or our 36 feet.

And the 36 feet, the reason we are at 36 feet,

as you know, it's garage under two stories above,

but we also had to comply with the requirements.

Our elevation is between 7 and 8

at the front, call it 8.

We had to be a little over elevation 11.

The bottom of the first floor has to be

over elevation 11.2, I think it was.

So you have to raise it up already 3 plus feet.

That was under then existing FEMA regulations.

Under current regulations,

that number goes up to about 14 feet.

So we now have to lift the first floor up 6 feet.

So when you get it up 6 feet

and you add two stories, 10 each and a roof,

you're over the 28 feet.

So why not add another foot or two

to get enough room to put a garage under,

which gets cars off the road,

out of the elements,

and also stops you from having

to have more impervious coverage by building a garage next to it?

Can you clarify, is it right that that

28 feet needed a variance

and that variance was secured?

Is that what a variance was needed for?

28 feet would not have needed a height variance.

Okay. But did you get a height variance?

We got a height variance,

which was appealed,

but their position was overturned by Judge Waggling

and they made the same claim here

which gets to the collateral stopper issue.

One more factual thing.

Did you say that the pelleteers are 900 feet from your...

Roughly, it's like 700, 900 feet.

It's across the Martian Parsons Creek

and then it goes up and they're on a street that's up

and looks over.

The other thing is most of their view

is already blocked because on the beach there's dunes

and there's houses on top of the dunes

and those houses are taller than our building is

which is also down below the road level.

So most of their area already is blocked

and particularly in the summer when leaves are out,

I don't think they can see anything.

In the winter, they may have had little views

but as I've said, we've got documentation

that their views are not negatively affected,

at least not in a way that would lead to a colorable claim.

So let's see.

What about collateral stopper?

That's where I'm going.

I think the justices asked the right questions.

The bottom line is that a decision

to giving someone standing to bring a claim

is not saying that the claim is legitimate

or has merit and that's what happened here.

We filed a motion to dismiss claiming

that no appellate had standing

and they objected to that.

Judge Wachling considered it.

They made their arguments that my views are impacted

therefore I have claims and she said,

I'm going to let you in.

She decided against them.

The final order said, we reject your claim.

All of the variances including the height

were eventually upheld.

Plus, Mike Donovan, thank you, Mike,

gave me while we were sitting here,

in a black spot dictionary with the definition

of a cognizable claim and one of the definitions

is capable of being judicially tried

or examined before a designated tribunal

within the court's jurisdiction.

That's very clear.

It just means you have the right to bring a claim.

It doesn't mean you have the right to say your claim

is good and it was eventually determined that it's not.

So we don't have an identity of issues,

a final decision and a final decision.

That one's easily dealt with.

Turning to the SUP,

they talked about detrimental to adjacent properties

in neighborhood and architectural issues primarily.

So they complained about drainage,

they complained about storm water,

they complained about flood plain,

they complained about the height,

they complained about...

How does the drainage go 900 feet?

No, I'm not saying the drainage goes 900 feet.

I'm saying they're complaining about it.

I know.

My question is how does the drainage impact

reverberate that distance?

Well, we claim that it does not.

It alters his plans,

showed that we were dealing with storm water, drainage,

flooding, all of those things properly on site.

And my point is on every issue they've raised,

we have independent peer review experts

that support our position.

And that's what the court, the board,

and thus the court made his decision on.

In comparison, we have zero expert reports

from the appellates,

except for one report by their expert

that, as I mentioned before,

talked about septic lot loading.

And partly in response to that,

we made a change to it.

They made a big complaint about the architecture

is not compatible with the area.

But we brought in an architect,

Carla Goodnight,

who gave a long presentation and a PowerPoint

that is in the record at 171,

thank you, Monica,

where she showed how her design was informed

by the eclectic nature of the area

and how the three-story design of the garage under

was in keeping with many other homes in the area.

The last issue that they raised was the issue of density.

They claimed that the board and thus the court

improperly analyzed density

because the ordinance allows density to be reduced

from what it otherwise could be

in consideration of lot configuration,

wetland, nesting, septic,

abutting properties, et cetera.

But again, this issue was very well vetted by me.

I briefed it.

Mike Donovan briefed it.

As I said, we argued about it quite a bit

and we took the position that originally

we could put up to 10 units on there.

We went in with eight to be conservative

and through all of this

and because of these reasons,

we went down to six

and the planning board and the Superior Court,

which are, this is a deferential issue

and it's basically what do they know?

They live in the area.

They know how things work.

They know the effect on all the surrounding properties

and they found that our proposal was reasonable.

And yet, there was no response,

at least not by experts from the opposition.

There were claims made,

but nothing to support those claims.

In summary, justices,

this project received extensive

and detailed review and scrutiny over a year

and five hearings and many, many plan changes,

many, many reviews by outside experts and DES.

And all of them support this claim,

support our position and support the height

and all the other relief granted by extension,

by the zoning board earlier on

and under the special use permit requirements

and the site view requirements.

There's no basis for substituting the judgment

based upon the discretionary finding by the planning board

and then held up by the Superior Court.

The appellants simply disagree with the decision

with no evidence to back them up

and support their position.

Thank you.

Thank you, Tony.

Tony Dub.

Yes, a few things.

I would point out to the court that in this case

there was a challenge to standing made,

but then for whatever reason,

I think the parties, the interveners in the town

decided to withdraw that challenge in this case.

I'm not sure, but there's never been

a standing issues raised in this case.

I do want to point out one thing that I didn't highlight,

but there were two tranches of,

there were a number of variances granted

to make this project go.

There were two tranches basically of variances.

On the second tranche, which was in 2019,

there was a design that was going to be septic system

within two feet of the high tide to the high water mark

and they have to be sealed

because this area floods periodically and whatnot.

But one of the conditions that the zoning board put on that

is that the planning board approval of project

without plan modifications affecting these variances

was a condition.

Now subsequent to the second tranche of variances

from the ZBA, they radically changed the design.

I think they reduced the number of buildings to three.

They changed the location of the driveway.

They moved septic and as they pointed out

this whole area is in the wetlands,

basically most of the area in this lot

is in the wetlands buffer,

which completely changes the layout,

which means, as we argue in the brief,

these variances that they obtained,

they've changed the layout.

This affects the layout.

Now they're arguing, like they argue in the brief,

I mean they, we're talking about,

claims about facts, but it's clear

you can look at their stormwater plant,

their stormwater planet is not neutral on stormwater.

It's going to shed stormwater.

On this issue of the variances,

they are clear that, hey, yes,

we're going to be putting all these things

in different places within this wetlands buffer area,

but we claim that it's less of an impact.

Well that is a good argument, a fine argument,

but that should be an argument made to the ZBA

to modify those variances or to receive new variances

and that's another reason why the planning board

aired because this is not a permitted use.

Thank you very much, councilor.

One minute to respond to that.

Case is submitted.
