We had a party for some neighborhood friends. It was great.

Nice.

This is case 2021-0547, state of New Hampshire versus Christopher Harrington.

Good afternoon.

Good afternoon.

You've reserved two minutes.

Yes, thank you. Good afternoon.

Ted Blotstein here on behalf of Christopher Harrington. May it please the court?

I will take questions at any time. I'm going to tell you what I hope to reach during my argument.

First of all, to the extent that the questions allow, I intend my argument to focus on the first issue, which is whether the pre-trial ruling was reversible error.

And second of all, and I'm actually going to start with the second thing, second of all that I believe that the state made some doctrinal errors in how they analyzed the two issues.

So starting with the second thing, the issue of whether the trial court's decision to grant the motion in limine and allow testimony about Mr. Harrington allegedly sexually assaulting the AP, the child complainant at a funeral.

The issue with the trial court aired in granting that motion as opposed to either denying it or just holding off until we see what the evidence is at trial and what the defense is at trial.

For that issue, this court can only consider what was presented to the lower court at the time in the motion of limine.

But for the issue of harmless error, which is tied into the trial, then everything that happens in the trial is relevant.

And what happened at trial was very different than what was presented to the lower court when it heard.

So was there evidence before the trial court at the motion in limine that the victim had disclosed to two other individuals prior to the disclosure at the camp?

So of course that's exactly what I was about to talk about.

That issue was completely ignored to the extent that you would think that the prosecutor and the defense lawyer had no idea at the time of the motion in limine hearing that another, that AP had disclosed to a different child under really very similar circumstances as the disclosure at nature's classroom on October 12th of 2018.

Because in each time AP just disclosed to a peer, AP never told, went out of her way to tell a police officer, school counselor, priest or anything like that.

Alayla testified, the other child, that in the summer of 2018, which was before the funeral, and also before that sometime during the preceding or a preceding school year, that AP had told her that Mr. Harrington sexually abused me.

So again, that information was not in front of the trial court at the motion stage?

At all. At all. Instead the premise presented to the trial court at the motion in limine hearing was that we, the state, need to explain her one year delay in reporting the abuse one year after the pattern of alleged abuse ended.

And that premise was proven a trial to be completely wrong, illusory, that in fact she had disclosed twice to a different peer.

The nature's classroom disclosure is really not different in kind. She didn't disclose to a teacher in nature's classroom, she told Kaley, another kid, and then the testimony trial is that Kaley made her disclose to Mrs. Page, the teacher.

So in both instances are the same. But the difference of course is that the second one, the state presented their argument at the motion in limine hearing.

I don't know if they didn't know about Alayla. Let's just say that's possible, right? Because the motion in limine hearing is a long time before the trial.

So it's possible that the state didn't know that yet, given the benefit of the doubt. But what was presented to the trial court was frankly wrong.

And I guess one thing that is troubling is that when you read the trial.

So what do we do with that? I mean, you had said before, well what actually happens at the trial shouldn't affect our analysis of whether the court aired on the trial ruling.

It can't.

Which I understand. But isn't this additional information only information that the trial court had after the trial began?

So I agree with you. But it is relevant to harmless error. To show harmless error the state needs to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the testimony about sexual assault at a funeral

had no, you know, did not affect the outcome of the trial. And there you can take into account that Alayla's testimony completely eviscerated any probative value of the sexual assault at the funeral.

The whole premise that the prosecutor had presented at the motion in limine hearing is that this explains her delayed exposure.

But the trial court was entitled to make an assessment of probative value based on the information that it had before at the time of the hearing.

Right. What I'm saying is that when you analyze harmless error that you have to say that if it was error, I understand that you're saying it can't be taken into account to determine if it was error.

That's why I raise the ineffective claim as a second issue. Because it can't be or it's one of the reasons. It can't be taken into account.

But if you determine that the decision was error, and I'll get to that, then you should be looking at the fact that any probative value of it was eviscerated.

One of the things the state says is that, look, the state didn't even argue this in closing argument.

So this shows you that it wasn't that important in the trial. What could the state have argued in closing argument?

By that time, the sexual assault at the funeral only tended to prove his propensity to commit sexual assault.

Well, is it really prejudicial? I mean, the victim, AP, doesn't even describe a crime at trial.

Yes. She says that he grazed her butt during a hug, and she's not sure if it was accidental or not.

Forcing the defense lawyer into cross-examining about prior inconsistent statements, because it just sounds so awful.

Like what? He would hug this child at a funeral in front of all these people. I mean, the defense lawyer had no choice but to attack this.

Well, I think given the trial court's ruling, the defense counsel had no decision but to do that.

Exactly.

Because it was coming in.

That's the point. So the defense counsel had to attack it with the prior inconsistent statements where it was squeezed her butt, squeezed her breast,

but the defense counsel never should have been put in that situation. And this is why.

Let's circle, let me just finish the thought that I was trying to say, which is by the time of closing argument,

the prosecutor had nothing to say except propensity.

And so it's no surprise that the prosecutor didn't raise it again after Oleyla's testimony.

But if we go back to the merits of the motion-limiting hearing, first of all, I agree that the state can anticipatorily try to alleviate,

try to address the issue of delayed disclosure.

The case law is clear that the defense, that the state is not required to wait and see what the defense lawyer does at trial,

because maybe the defense lawyer will wait till closing argument, and then the state has to come back with, you know,

and sort of do a rebuttal case, and that's awkward at times.

Well, even if it's not argued, isn't it available for the state to put in the evidence just to counter any possibility

that the jury might draw an inference from a certain time period, even if it's not argued?

They can put in evidence explaining a delay in disclosure.

Right.

Here's a problem. This did not explain the alleged delay in disclosure, which turned out later to not be a delay in disclosure.

But it did not explain it because what the state didn't do with the motion-limiting hearing,

either through its witness or through its own argument, they didn't say that this child is going to come to court

and tell the jury that the reason I disclose in nature's classroom is that he sexually assaulted me again at the funeral.

They did not promise that. All they did is say we're going to make a circumstantial case that, look, the funeral is on the 12th,

and then her demeanor changes drastically in school, and then she discloses to a friend at nature's classroom.

Therefore, there must be a connection between the two things.

But the state did not promise that the child herself would come to court and say this is the reason.

And without that promise that the child herself isn't going to come to court and say this is the reason,

then the trial court's ruling misbalanced, grossly misbalanced, prejudicial effect versus probative value.

Because the prosecutor was just saying that we can argue a circumstantial case.

Her demeanor changed. She disclosed this must be why she disclosed one year after the abuse ended.

But if it's only a circumstantial case, how about just the funeral itself?

This is the man that she saw as her papa.

She conceived of this man who had died by suicide as her grandfather.

The man is identified as a stepfather, but in fact the record from the motion limiting hearing shows that

that's the man who raised Christopher Harrington.

Well, the state could have just argued that just being in the defendant's presence was a triggering event

without getting into the alleged assaults.

Of course.

That would have removed any prejudice.

The idea that the change in demeanor at school shows that this is the triggering event for her disclosure.

The funeral, yes.

I mean, of course it's going to...

I mean, not that it's a triggering event for disclosure.

It's a triggering event for her change in demeanor.

Her grandfather, she has no living grandparents.

The man that she sees as her papa has died.

If we assume that nobody told this child that it was a suicide, just assume...

The record doesn't tell us that.

Then it's still a horrible death because then it'll be a sudden death out of nowhere unexplained.

So the change in demeanor at the school has very little, if any, like inferential...

a circumstantial value to prove that this is why she did school of sexual abuse

because just having losing your grandfather is going to change her demeanor at the school.

And yes, the court could have said, well, we'll let you put on a funeral.

The fact that she saw him again at the funeral, like you said,

and that her demeanor changed at school after the funeral because she had lost her papa

and then she disclosed.

And then the state can, at that point, see how the defense handles itself.

And I think what the trial court should have said is that, you know,

I'm also going to rule that if the defense opens the door to the testimony,

which they obviously wouldn't have because by the time you get to trial,

she already disclosed to another kid.

But she didn't disclose to a counselor.

She didn't disclose to a teacher.

She'd been in therapy for a period of time.

The defense counsel would have gone there.

So, well, I understand what you're saying.

But the court's balancing in the motion-eliminating hearing

was an unsustainable exercise of discretion

because while the funeral had a lot of probability of value

to show why her demeanor may have changed

and why she may have been emotionally upset in that time period

and why she may have shared a troubling thing with another kid,

she did not intentionally go to a teacher or a counselor, as you say.

She was kind of compelled to.

But the sexual assaults, in the motion-eliminating context,

the sexual assaults are at minimum a, while hugging her,

moving her hand down her butt and squeezing it.

That is so overwhelmingly prejudicial.

And here's why.

The state is wrong to say that, well,

it's not as bad of a sexual assault as a digital penetration

or things like that.

So, you know, it's innocuous.

It's the setting that makes it so prejudicial in two ways.

One, wow, that's just such an awful thing to contemplate

that a man at his own stepfather's funeral,

really his father, could do this.

But more importantly, it establishes like a super-propensity.

And this is what I argue in the reply brief

that the hardest thing for jurors to understand

is like, how could anyone do this?

But at least one thing that makes a little sense is,

well, it's done behind closed doors.

It's, you know, the testimony trial was a sexual abuse

was in a bedroom, in his downstairs workshop,

in a hot tub, you know, with the jets on.

Let me ask you this in terms of probative value.

Based on the information that the trial court had

at the time of the hearing and its ruling,

why isn't it probative on the issue of delay?

I mean, there appeared to be a delay at that time.

So, isn't there, don't you acknowledge that there was

probative value given that factual construct at the time?

I will acknowledge there's very little

because the funeral itself would supply

almost equal probative value.

She sees him again.

But I'll acknowledge that there is a little.

Something big that happens in our life

and involves him right before.

So, I understand what you're saying.

But the trial court should have been troubled by the fact

of how much the child's story was changing.

It was so premature to make this ruling.

Originally, in the CAC interview,

she said he hugged me and then moved his hand down

and squeezed my butt, put his hand on my shoulder

and then moved it down and squeezed my breast.

But then there was a so-called Zwicker memo

where the prosecutor meets with, of course, complainant

and then discloses new and inconsistent information

at the motion limiting hearing presented by the defense layer

that by that time, she was saying something different,

that it was just a squeeze of her butt.

It was not a squeeze of her breast.

So, when did it turn into a graze of her butt

as opposed to a squeeze?

Is that something that was disclosed prior to trial

or was that something yet learned at trial?

The record doesn't show when it turned into only,

whether that was disclosed or not,

but it changed at trial.

I want the court to understand, when she got to trial,

she never said in all of the prosecutor's direct

that the story I'm about to tell you about this funeral

is the reason I disclosed.

I'm out of time, so thank you.

All right.

Attorney Woodcock.

Good afternoon, Your Honors.

May it please the court.

Elizabeth Woodcock for the State of New Hampshire.

I'd just like to point out one thing

before I take questions from the court,

and that is that while the trial court

made a preliminary ruling,

when the court issued its order on August 2nd, 2021,

it wrote that the 404B motion was granted

and then it went on.

It was either directed to submit

either a joint proposed instruction

or competing proposed instructions to the court

for its review at least 30 days prior

to the start of jury selection.

That never happened.

I'm sorry, what kind of instruction?

A limiting instruction?

That's right, a proposed limiting instruction.

I think that it's a little unfair to say to the court,

well, you tried to trouble spot this particular issue

and give the parties an idea

as to what you anticipate before trial will be admissible.

And then the court says,

so I've made this ruling,

please submit jury instructions,

and that also in the course of that order

suggested that the court,

if the evidence didn't come in as the court had anticipated,

the court would revisit the ruling.

It's not very fair to then turn around

and say to the court,

well, you made an error,

but we never objected to it.

Well, wait, is that the same thing

asking them to submit your instructions?

I think it is.

And inviting further objection?

I think that it is because the ruling,

Justice Hans Marconi, is a preliminary ruling.

When you're sitting there as a trial judge,

you can't anticipate how that evidence is going to come in.

And neither can the lawyers for that matter,

you don't know.

So the court is giving them a kind of a roadmap

or a little guideline to say,

this is how we're going to proceed.

If the defense was really so dissatisfied with this ruling,

it had alternatives.

It could have filed a motion to reconsider.

It could have filed the jury instruction

and then pointed out to the court

this particular testimony,

particularly as it has developed

and the new revision we have of the victim's account,

it won't fit this particular jury instruction.

So it sounds like you're supporting

Attorney Lawstein's ineffective assistance

of counsel claim.

I think that that claim is premature.

And I will explain to the court why.

We don't know why the lawyer did the things

that he did in the course of this trial.

And it's always hard to read very much

into the cold transcript as the court

is far more aware than I am.

But when I read that victim's testimony

on the question of the funeral,

I thought to myself, well, if I were the prosecutor,

I would have been completely deflated.

And I think that the defense counsel,

if he had ever been asked,

why didn't you do this or why didn't you do that

or move for a mistrial or do all these other things,

that defense attorney sitting there

may have said to himself,

well, this works right in to my analysis of the case.

And his analysis of the case was essentially,

it wasn't simply a delayed disclosure.

You never told your counselor.

You never told these other people.

It was also that the victim was motivated

by a desire to be kind of the center of attention,

the popular kid.

And if you came up with this,

this would somehow get in gender sympathy

from your fellow students and perhaps the faculty

and whoever else it would put you

as being kind of an important person

in everybody's viewpoint.

So I think that defense counsel

looked at that really lackluster explanation

as to what happened at the funeral

and decided then, well, wait a second.

When you were at the Child Advocacy Center,

you gave this account.

Now you're giving a second account.

And now here you are under oath.

And look at this, your story is just falling apart.

What should we do with the parent fact

that these two earlier disclosures

weren't part of the discussion at the hearing

and weren't included in any of the arguments

or the trial court's analysis?

I don't have a good explanation

for why the state did not make the court aware of it.

It may have been that the case had transitioned

between prosecutors or something of that sort.

That could happen.

And the motion may not have been fully informed

when they filed it.

So it's a sort of mutual mistake.

I mean, it seems like everybody was operating

on an incorrect factual premise.

Well, I'm not certain that the record

actually supports that, Your Honor.

But I would be hesitant to say

that either the state or the defense

deliberately omitted information.

I'm not saying anybody deliberately omitted anything.

No, I'm not casting aspersions at anyone.

It just appears that those very important facts

weren't part of the conversation then.

And that has ramifications here.

Well, I think it does have ramifications

for the pre-trial ruling.

The court made its ruling.

And that's what we have to evaluate, right?

The pre-trial ruling made on the basis

of the information that the court had at the time?

Right. I think that that's part of it.

But then secondly, if you look to the state's argument

that the evidence coming in constituted

if there was error, harmless error,

then you look at the other evidence.

And the problem for this particular case

is that without any objection from the defense,

what was the court supposed to do?

The evidence came in.

The court listened to the evidence.

Nobody seemed to be saying,

hey, wait a second.

The state didn't deliver.

And if you don't say that to the trial court,

what is the trial court supposed to do?

No limiting instruction offered.

No motion to reconsider.

No nothing.

And it suggests to me that defense counsel,

when he was asked, you know,

sort of not to put it too bluntly,

but are you going to raise a delayed disclosure defense?

Defense counsel, if you read the transcript,

was very coy.

He didn't come out and answer it.

He just said it's premature for the court to consider that.

Well, isn't the fundamental problem here

that the trial court having made the observation

during the hearing that, well, you know,

it's really too early to assess the probative value

and it's really too early to assess the prejudice,

then the court goes on and does exactly that.

And it's a premature ruling

and that's what is putting everybody

in the situation we're in now.

Well, I think that that, again,

is not quite presenting it fairly to the trial court.

The trial court has given a motion in lemonade.

Trial courts routinely rule on motions in lemonade

with the expectation that that motion can be revisited.

And the way that that motion gets revisited

is when the victim takes the witness stand

and begins to testify,

defense counsel gets up and says, may we approach?

Your Honor, I think that this...

Right, but the trial court was informed

and I think she did state that she was aware

that the victim had changed her testimony

about what happened at the funeral,

at least on one occasion, right?

So it went from squeezing to a graze

or with respect to the breast anyway.

So given that, I mean,

the trial court seemed to think

that there was less than clear proof of this prior bad act.

I think that the trial court was looking at it

in the entire picture,

which is not simply that

whether he grazed her or grabbed her

but that her exposure towards him,

going to the funeral, doing all this thing,

the entire package of things

was part of what prompted her to make the disclosure.

You might not just put the evidence in

that she attended the funeral,

the defendant hugged her,

and that interaction triggered something.

That would have been within the trial court's discretion.

But again, I think that if the defense

had filed a motion to reconsider, number one,

if the defense or the state had filed a jury instruction,

if the defense had objected

at the time the testimony was being given,

if the defense had been asked for a limiting instruction,

none of those things happened.

And I think that when you're looking at a trial court

trying to set out the ground rules for a trial

and trying to give the parties,

okay, this is what my preliminary ruling is.

Nothing said that this absolutely would have to come in

if the defense raised a different argument

or renewed its argument at trial.

It does seem to me there's sort of a fundamental difference

between a pretrial ruling, a motion to eliminate,

saying, well, I'm going to exclude that evidence,

but then let's see how the trial goes.

And then you're in a position as the proponent of the evidence

to stand up and say, well, things are different here.

I'm going to try again, Judge.

But here, where the motion to eliminate

is to let in some very significant evidence

on which everybody frames their strategy

and their construction of the case,

it seems like a very different situation to me.

Well, I think that if the evidence were that devastating,

Your Honor, then the defense would have taken affirmative steps

to have the court revisit it or to raise it again

before we actually start having the court take testimony

or any of those things.

But I think that if you go back and look at that hearing,

when the defense is kind of dancing around the whole issue

related to late disclosure,

and I don't mean to sound flip by saying dancing around,

but he's avoiding really committing to what his defense is going to be

and appropriately so.

But if in his mind he knows this is what I'm going to do,

then he may have made a conscious decision to say,

well, let's see how this comes out

and see if it comes out to our advantage.

What do we do with the fact that, I mean, the trial court says,

the court concludes that the evidence of the Winchester incident

has a high probative value

because it dispels the inference that the Epping incidents did not occur

based on the year-long delay in reporting.

So that's the basis of the high probative value,

and then we get to trial and even before trial, apparently,

people understand then that there wasn't a year-long delay in reporting.

Well, I think that that raises a somewhat different question

than what was actually presented to the court.

I don't think that anybody ever said,

wait a second, Your Honor,

now we've heard from this other witness

and there was an earlier disclosure,

and therefore the following things should happen.

But I think that if you look at the way that the victim testified,

to the extent we can try to fill in what Defense Counsel is thinking,

which I think we cannot do.

Well, does the state have an obligation to apprise a trial court

of new information?

For example, that there was an earlier disclosure

that resulted in just maybe a six-month delay.

That's something the state learns after the motion

to terminate hearing.

Isn't that something?

I can't answer that, Justice Donovan,

and I wish that the record were clearer.

And I am very sure that the state apprised

the defense of this information

because there was no objection to the other child's testimony

at the trial, that there was no objection.

Oh, this is coming as a surprise to me,

or something of that sort.

And again, if that was information that the defense got

after that original motion to eliminate,

that would have been a perfect reason to file a motion to reconsider.

But to Justice Donovan's question, what about the state?

I mean, our dilemma here is that the trial court

in the motion to eliminate ruling acted on imperfect information.

I think that it did have imperfect information, Your Honor,

but I think trial courts frequently have imperfect information.

But I just want to know what the response is

to Justice Donovan's question about what should the state have done

in that situation?

I am not certain because the record is devoid of any explanation

as to how these things developed,

which returns us, of course, to the question

of ineffective assistance of counsel,

because we don't have the information

that led the trial counsel to make the decisions that he made.

So we don't know how this developed,

but apparently it was not a concern to a trial lawyer

who was, I would say, very experienced.

Well, we do know that the state gained this information

after it had submitted an argument to the court

based on contrary information.

I think that's what we're getting at is,

I file a motion based on X.

I find out later it's not X.

Don't I have an obligation to correct that record?

The state did correct the impression

that the victim had been consistent

in her representations as to what had happened at the funeral home.

I'm talking about the prior disclosure.

The representations made to the court

that there was no prior disclosure,

this therefore would explain the delay,

and then the state finds out there was a prior disclosure.

I don't know the order of these things,

Justice Sands-Marconi.

I can't answer that.

I can't tell you when the state realized

that there had been an additional disclosure.

I don't know the answer to that.

I do know, however, that nobody, again, raised it,

and it was clear that the defense knew it

when the defense went to trial.

The defense was not unprepared for that witness,

and so I think that if the state may have born some burden

based on a record that we do not have,

and I think that that's the problem,

but we do know that at the time the case went to trial,

the defense attorney knew about this information.

I see my red light is on.

I would ask to yield the floor to my colleague, Mr. Losty.

Thank you, Attorney Wood.

All right.

Very quickly, I'm going to use my two minutes if I can.

One, to whatever extent it matters.

It's the same prosecutor throughout.

Number two, this is not a preliminary hearing.

This is the state's opening statement.

But what happens that led to her making a disclosure

is that she saw the defendant, which wasn't unusual.

She saw him at a funeral,

and the defendant came over to her and gave her a hug.

And while he was hugging her,

he briefly touched her buttocks and her breasts,

and that rattled her

because even though it wasn't like the other assaults,

even though it wasn't like being asleep in bed

and having him touch her vagina,

it was just enough for her to wonder

if they were going to start again.

So this was not a preliminary ruling.

The state stood up instead this stuff in opening.

What are you reading from?

The transfer of the opening statement.

The statement of the trial.

The trial.

None of that actually came to fruition at the trial.

The child did not say that the assault at the funeral

led her to making the disclosure.

The child did not say that he touched her breast,

but she didn't say that he didn't either.

She said, I don't remember if he touched my breast or not.

Is this remedy here a mistrial?

Isn't that what should have happened?

Well, that's the second issue

is that the defense counsel is ineffective

to not just stand up when the testimony

from the child was so different

and move for a mistrial.

The last thing I want to say is it's not fair

to hang the failure to ask for a limiting instruction.

It is not fair to hang that only on defense counsel.

I've hung some things on defense counsel,

but the record shows in its inner brief

or the states in the states brief,

this court ordered both parties to prepare jury instructions

and neither party supplied a limiting instruction

and when you're considering the issue of harmless error,

the lack of a limiting instruction is very important.

This jury was allowed to use this testimony

for any purpose, including propensity,

and I don't agree that because the child comes to court

and says that I don't remember

if he touched my breast at the funeral or not,

that that means that it's inconsequential.

Just think about the fact that the child's

leaving out the possibility that he touched her breast

at the funeral, leaving out the possibility

that he intentionally sexually assaulted her

is extremely prejudicial.

The jury was allowed to use her propensity.

This court should grant a new trial.

Thank you.

Thank you very much, counsel.

Case is submitted.

Court's adjourned.
