Thank you, sir. When you're ready. This is case 2021, 0325, Daniel Richard, versus

Speaker of the House of Representatives at all. Thank you, Mr. Richard. Good morning.

If it please the Honorable Court, my name is Daniel Richard. Likely preserve two minutes

for rebuttal the defense's arguments. This is a first impression case on the right of

redress agreements by remonstrance. I respectfully submit the following three points. First,

the Bill of Rights, Part 1, Articles 30, 31, and 32 are still some of the laws of the land.

These are private rights of the people and not the rights of the state. Second, conflicting

arguments by the defense. Third, the trial court and the defense arguments in this case

are repugnant and contrary to the precedent of this court in Burt versus Speaker in 2020.

First, someone here is not telling the truth. Either the legislature's own legal scholar,

Attorney Chuck Douglas, a former member of this court, was telling the truth in 2015 when

he wrote a redress analysis for the legislature, or the defense is telling the truth when they

say that I have no rights to be heard or considered by the legislature anymore. Both cannot

be true. It's an undisputed fact that for 34 years the general court did act as

a tribunal for public matters. In private disputes under Part 1, Articles 30 and 31

and 32, and from the time of the adaptation of the Constitution in 1784 until Merrill versus

Sherburn in 1818, Merrill versus Sherburn clarified the separation of powers in Article

1, excuse me, Part 1, Article 37, but it did not repeal Articles 30, 31, and 32. It did,

however, stop the common practice for litigants in civil causes to petition the legislature

for new trials, or stays, appeals, or reversals of decisions of the courts until the practice

was ruled unconstitutional. The Merrill court reaffirmed the legislature's jurisdiction

to hold tribunals to decide matters of public concern. The trial court and the defense

did cite Part 1, Articles 30, 31, and 32 of the Bill of Rights out of context, and

they ignored this plain meaning, its historical usage and custom, which are preserved in

the House and Senate journals and in the state archives. This is an error of law. The

primary tactic for the defense relies on trying to convince you that Part 1, Article 31 does

not say what it says. Article 31 states very clearly, quote, the legislature shall assemble

for redress of public grievances, and for making such laws as the common good may

require. This is important. Article 1, Article 31 is one sentence it has two parts,

beginning with the legislature's first duty to assemble for redress of grievance. This

is a right that is really important. This right is distinct and separate from the legislature's

duties detailed in Part 2, the form of government. Part 1, Article 31 and Article 32 emanate

from the Bill of Rights, and not from Part 2, the form of government. The second

part of the sentence in Article 31 is mandatory also, for making such laws as the public

good may require. This compels the legislature to establish all laws and rules necessary

to perform all their constitutional duties detailed by the first clause in the sentence.

This is a private right of the people, not the right of the state, therefore an obligation

upon the legislature to assemble when called upon by the people for correcting, strengthening,

confirming the laws. This must be complied with. The powers delegated to the legislature

to enact laws and to judge for the benefit and welfare of the state are distinct and separate

from the Bill of Rights, which they cannot touch. Item 2, conflicting arguments by the

defense. Which of these is true?

Can I just add on your first argument, is it influenced at all by the historical

function of the general court when it sat as a court?

It did, Your Honor. From the very beginning, or from prior to the adaptation of the Constitution

into the early constitutional period, the process was in regular practice.

Mill versus Sherburne changed all that. Only from the perspective that it clarified

private matters submitted to the courts would be heard by the courts and not relitigated

by the legislature, which was what they were doing.

Conflicting arguments by the defense. On July 23rd, Attorney Sianzi stated that

I was told in the Speaker's Office there was no process under House rules by which the House

of Representatives would consider the remonstrance and to the extent that I wished the House

to consider the subject matter of the remonstrance, the only proper avenue was through legislation.

What a convenient answer. My constitutional rights have now been subject to the convenience

and the discretion of the legislature's procedural rulemaking power.

On March 13, Attorney Sianzi changed his story when he submitted as his evidence the following

summary of law and Exhibit F on behalf of Speaker Shurtliffe in the Legislative Ethics Committee.

Attorney Sianzi quote, This is a confession. The scope of these rights and the mechanism

by which they are implemented by the legislature has evolved over time. In New Hampshire, petitions

for redress and remonstrance, while once common in the early part of the state's

history, fell out of favor. What has fell out of favor? When did the Constitution fall out

of favor? Falling out of favor is not a constitutional amendment. Attorney Douglas' redress analysis

did not say these rights simply fell out of favor as claimed by Attorney Sianzi, but

rather the redress analysis stated the all-important point on page three quote, and the constitutional

articles of course still remain, which is true today. Now comes Attorney Lehman on

page six of the transcript of the Superior Court hearing. Judge Kessinger asked Attorney

Lehman quote, Let me ask you about one thing you said. What is the process from your perspective

by which the legislature complies with its obligations under Article 32? With regards

to a remonstrance, and he repeats the question, how does the legislature meet its obligations

under the Constitution? Attorney Lehman replied by not retaliating against somebody

who files a remonstrance. Let that sink in. That's the government's response. If Attorney

Lehman's statement is to be believed, a constitutional right has been reduced to a lack of retaliation.

What's even more insulting is the fact that the trial court believed him. The fact of

the matter is they did retaliate by suppressing my right of freedom of speech to deliberate

and debate before either of the House or the Senate under Part 1 Article 3031 and

Article 32. Mr. Richard, could you clarify, you said that you took issue with the trial

court's ruling in regard to Burt and Hughes. Yes. But the trial court found that under

those cases, the issue was justiciable. So what are you taking issue with? Well, Judge

Kessinger also said that this case was justiciable in his opinion. Yes. And so

he did review it, but unfortunately he ignored the press into this court and the usage

in custom because there is no case law on this. The closest we get is Merrill versus

Sherburn and your opinion in 2020 in the Burt case on similar but not quite the same

point. And you've referenced several times Attorney Douglas's peace on this issue, but

that's not binding on either this court or the House or the Senate. Absolutely.

Absolutely. And the reason I cite that is for two reasons. One, it was their evidence.

They submitted this evidence because they believed it to be true. When Attorney

Sianzi presented this evidence to the Ethics Committee, he submitted it and

then tried to convince them that my rights simply fell out of favor. And so

I've had a problem with that. Judge Kessinger acknowledges his obligation to

the legislature twice within his line of questioning of Attorney Lehman. What's

very concerning is Judge Kessinger would accept such a ridiculous answer from

Attorney Lehman as a response to his question. What good are my rights? What

good is the Constitution if it's true? Item three, the precedent of this court.

Judge Kessinger and Attorney Sianzi were both personally involved in Burt versus

Speaker as the trial judge and the attorney of record for the House. Therefore,

they have full knowledge of the opinion of this court in that case. As if a

losing argument, excuse me, losing on this bogus argument the first time wasn't

enough, they've now resurrected it a second time in this case. Such a legal

argument was rejected for the same reason by this court which subsequently

reversed and remanded this flawed reasoning in Burt versus Speaker. No

part of government make fringe on the Bill of Rights. Attorney Sianzi cited

in his brief to continue on this point about, excuse me, about your opinion.

Attorney Sianzi cited in his brief on page 12 that the trial court found

that I have no right to be heard or considered by the legislature in

light of the legislature's authority to make its own rules or procedure

under Part 2, Articles 22 and 36. They believe this allows the legislature

or the defendants the discretion to decide whether or not Part 1, Articles 30,

31 and 32 apply. This is an error of law. Attorney Lehman states on page

3 of his brief that somehow he believes in the same losing argument

when he states, quote, that the newly added provisions granting express

authority to the Senate and the House to settle their own rules or

procedure reflected a break from the past practice. It's not true. There's

no such amendment. Article 22, Part 2, Articles 22 and 36 still say the

same thing today. Here's the rub. This is a substantive rights issue,

not a procedural issue as the opposing counsel will tell you. There's

no newly added provisions or constitutional articles granting any expressed

authority to the Senate or the House to exercise such discretion as to

decide whether they will follow the Constitution. Nor does the defense cite

any such authority, and even if they did make such a rule, it'd be ruled

unconstitutional as they cannot amend the Constitution by a legislative act.

Finally, Speaker Packard and President Morris as the elected leaders of the

general court did retaliate. The defendants make, excuse me, the defendants

made intentional choices as they're the only elected officers of the

legislature with the authority to cause the legislative body to assemble

for public redress agreements. This is why the petition for writ of

mandamus lies upon them, as these decisions were made by these two

individuals and not by the general court. Thank you. Do you have any questions?

Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Richard. Mr. Sienzi, I understand you have

reserved eight minutes and that Mr. Layman has seven. Is that accurate?

Yes, it is, Your Honor. Thank you.

Thank you, Your Honor. May it please the court, James Sienzi, on behalf of

the Speaker of the House of Representatives. In the interest of time, I'll be willing to take the court's question at any time.

Part one, Article 32 of the New Hampshire Constitution

means exactly what it says. The people have a right to request

of the legislature. I think that's the important word

in this case. I think that I know

that is what Judge Kissinger found in dismissing

this case, that there is a substantive right in Part 1,

Article 32, and it is the right to request. There is no

legislatively prescribed procedure in the Constitution

for petitions, redress, or mandamus. Wouldn't a fair reading be that

the legislative body is required to do something?

Well, none of the cases that have decided, certainly there's no

New Hampshire precedent on this case, but all of the federal cases

in the state cases which have looked at this issue have not come to that conclusion.

In fact, they have said that the nature of the right is a right to petition

to request, that there is no right to be heard.

There is no right for a person who presents a petition

to be heard or for the legislative body to act on

a petition. So beyond that, it's ephemeral?

It's really within...

So requirement that the legislative body act, is there a requirement

that at least it be informed of the contents of

the petition? I don't think that's...

I don't think any of the cases have even gone that far. However,

in this particular case, the legislature has been informed.

The receipt of the remonstrance was published in the

House Calendar. It was made available to the body on, I believe, three separate

occasions. So to the extent that the court believes

that the right requires the legislature at least to receive it

and be made aware of it, the legislature has complied with that.

And you're not taking issue with this court's ruling in the Burt

case, are you? No. And in fact, I don't think there's

anything inconsistent with this court's holding in Burt

with how the trial court decided this case. In fact,

they followed Burt in, as you noted, Justice,

that this case was justiciable and therefore I

don't see any inconsistency. And justiciability was the issue in Burt. Correct, Your Honor.

And Judge Kissinger followed it. Correct.

Right before Part 1 Article 32 is

Part 1 Article 31, which says the legislature

shall assemble for the redress of public

grievances. So doesn't that inform

Justice Hick's question as to what happens next with the grievance?

It certainly opens the question, but I don't think it provides

an answer. It's unlike other legislative

legislatively prescribed procedures in the Constitution,

for example, veto overrides or presentment of bills.

It's not specified. And so therefore I think it

devolves on the legislature's own rulemaking authority in Part 2

Articles 22 and 37 to determine whether

there is going to be a process. There may have been a process at some point.

There isn't now. That's incumbent on the legislature

to determine the process for handling petitions, whether it is simply

a matter of receiving and being made aware, or if the

legislature chooses to take some further process, as suggested by the plaintiffs in this case.

So the legislature could ignore

the second half the legislature shall assemble

for making such laws as the public good may require.

They could just not do that? Well, I don't think that there's

anything in the Constitution that requires the legislature

assembles to make laws, but I don't think they're required to pass laws.

I don't think there's any constitutional requirement that the legislature

needs to meet to pass laws. We certainly do

and there are rules in the House and the Senate for that purpose.

There's a whole gap in the three branches of government if the legislature didn't

pass the law. A gap you don't want us to fill.

No, but I guess my point is that

it provides sort of the framework

for the duties of the legislature.

The Constitution doesn't spell out then what the legislature needs to do

to effectuate that. And I think in terms of making laws

or receiving petitions for redress or grievance, that is incumbent on the

legislature to flesh out through its rules, through its internal processes, how

it's going to meet its constitutional requirements. How it's going to redress the grievances.

Correct. Correct.

You would agree that there is a constitutional limitation at some point

in the powers of the House or the Senate and their rulemaking.

And I think that was the issue President Burt

correct. And certainly this Court

is the final arbiter of the Constitution.

There are sort of limits to legislative rulemaking.

I don't, again, I don't think there's anything inconsistent with this matter

in the Burt case. I think the legislature could

stop rules to deal with redress of grievances

and remodesses, but I don't think it's required to. And I don't think anything

in Burt. And certainly this Court doesn't get involved with the rules that the

legislature prescribes for its own procedures.

Correct. And I think only to, I think this

Court gets involved when there is a constitutionally prescribed procedure

such as veto overrides, presentment, bicameralism.

Certainly those are procedures where the

legislature couldn't effectuate a rule that would be contrary to the Constitution.

Of course the argument here is that the practice is contrary to the Constitution.

So, but ultimately we have to interpret Article 32

and decide whether it's contrary to the Constitution.

Correct. And that's why I think the, again, there's no, it is a matter of

first and preface for this Court, but I think the Supreme Court,

the evidence on this is very clear. And I think the other cases, the other

state court cases that were cited I think are also instructive because they

essentially, they are all in agreement that numerous

constitutions provide for this right, but they don't prescribe a procedure.

And therefore, within... Are there textual differences between

the constitutional provisions in other states and the

constitutional provision here that we should take into account in deciding

the reasoning of those cases ought to apply here? I would say there's

obviously differences in the provisions. I'd say probably most pertinent is the case

cited, the Tennessee case, the very recent case and

my recollection is their provision in the Constitution is very similar to New Hampshire's

and that's why they came to the result that we're impressing upon this

Court that certainly the Tennessee Constitution provided

a right to petition for redraft and remonstrance.

However, it didn't require any procedure and I think the similarity

there really should inform this Court to come out

in the same way. And there's nothing in New Hampshire

history, pre-constitutional history that would inform our

decision either in favor or against adopting

the Tennessee approach? I think certainly history can be

somewhat tricky because there's a whole wealth of history. I think this was cited

in the We The People case, the DC Circuit case, which sort of looked at the

scholarship on both sides under the First Amendment and came to sort of this mixed

conclusion that there's certainly some history in favor of saying there is a right

to remonstrate and to have some sort of direct participation in

government and there's an equal amount of scholarship

that says no, it's sort of limited. And what the Court

came to the conclusion was even in light of this history really our precedent

binds us that the right is limited

to sort of request to present, it doesn't require any procedure

beyond that. So certainly I think this Court can be informed by history

but I don't think it's bound by it. And I think

my co-counsel probably can address a little bit more of history because he addressed more of that in the brief

but I guess that's it. Thank you. Thank you very much. Mr. Lehmann.

Thank you, Your Honor. Richard Lehmann

Lehmann made your list for Senate President Chuck Morse. The first thing I want to

say is starting out the contrary to what Mr. Richard said

in his argument, Senator Morse wasn't the Senate President at the time

this whole controversy started that was a prior administration, prior chief of staff,

prior legal counsel. So to the extent that he's saying Senator Morse had

anything to do with the underlying facts, that's simply

incorrect. The Senate President responded to this as the head of the institution

as the person personally involved. Secondly, I'd just like to say to the extent

that the general claim has to do with the openness or responsiveness

of New Hampshire legislature generally, there is none

more open or responsive in this country than the New Hampshire legislature.

We're the biggest state legislature in the country, so 1.3 million

people, all 400 state reps serve an average of

33,344 people each. Any state rep that's

not responsive to the concerns or complaints of their

constituents is not going to be state rep for long. Would you

though, I don't think there's any serious disagreement with everything

said thus far, but would you focus upon Part 1

Article 32 and tell me whether Mr. Richard is right is that

if we adopt the state's view, the language is meaningless.

The language isn't meaningless and as I spelled out in my brief, the language

of Article 32 has three specific provisions

and if you think of them temporarily

they make sense as the way people communicate with their elected representatives.

People have a right to assemble and consult

together upon the common good. That is the right to assemble where citizens

get together and talk about what they think the law should be

or what the public good requires. Then they have the right to give instructions to their

representatives. They communicate with their representatives individually

or as a group and

finally... I know we're going slowly here but you don't mean

just to their individual representatives. You mean to all 400

or 424 representatives? They can communicate with whoever they want to

communicate with and certainly since the time of the adoption of the

constitution it's become far easier for them to communicate with all of them and it's very

difficult and I assure you for similar or identical

e-mails to be received by 424 elected representatives and senators

in the state house. So it's a very simple matter for them to

reach out and let their elected officials know what's on their mind

and finally they have the way to request

by petitioner remoderness that the legislature take action.

The verb request does not include any response.

They request all they want and as Mr. Richard said

I believe that that provision prohibits retaliation just like

the First Amendment prohibits retaliation. It doesn't say it but it's been adopted

by every court. Now I would point out the difference between articles 31 and 32.

Mr. Richard's

brief is interesting to the extent that it certainly

explains a lot of history about England, colonial America

and the specific process involved in petitions and remoderness.

At one point in this brief I don't think it's exactly what

either the Massachusetts Constitution

say but he claims that the citizens have a right to assemble

with their legislative representatives and I submit that's not the law.

They don't have a right to go into the state house to make their

pitch to a joint assembly of the House and the Senate together.

They do have a right to petition

and to petition and remonstrate.

Mr. Richard spends a great deal of time and it is interesting

reading and some of the attachments to his pleadings, review articles and historical documents

are interesting in what that practice meant in 17th century England

and colonial America and that's all well

and good but the tactic he adopts in trying to

convince you that the legislature today is required to use

the same procedures that were in place at the time as if they were locked in amber

is really the same kind of argument that gun control

advocates adopt when they say things like the Second Amendment protects you right to have a musket

or the technology that existed at the time and the Constitution

even read in its original intent doesn't lock all the surrounding

procedures or all the very specific

components of living in the late 18th century in amber and requires to stick with

them today it guards the principles.

So you're not contesting the relevance of the understanding of the people

of New Hampshire in 1784 when the Constitution was adopted?

The understanding of what? I guess would be the question.

Of this provision. And what the practice was at that time?

The practice at the time was to request

that there be a petition or remonstrance and that the hope

would be that it would be heard in the legislature. There's nothing that I've seen in anything

that Mr. Richards has submitted that says the legislative body felt

itself required to reach every single piece of correspondence

that received. Did you find any case where that did happen?

Well he submitted the single instance from 1786 about

a petition that was adopted but petitions are adopted to this

day. It's not the same formal process. Legislators receive

communications from their constituents and they turn them into legislation.

Furthermore everybody has the right to come testify on any

bill they want. So if the subject matters of what Mr.

Richards is complaining about in this case there was an election law bill

and a second matter.

He's entitled to come and testify on those matters and be heard by at least a committee

legislature, not a joint assembly of the entire body. Basically it boils down

to your saying that citizens can't sort of put in their

own legislation. They've got to go through a representative.

Correct. Correct. Being able to testify seems very

different to me than submitting a petition of remonstrance.

I would submit a higher order of privilege than doing that.

He's allowed to go look them face to face and talk about what he wants to talk about

at that time and this happens all the time. People can propose amendments to bills that are pending

before the legislature if they choose. They can ask their representative

to submit legislation and it happens all the time. In this case

the meeting in the speaker's office that attorney Sian was talking about occurred with

either one or two. I don't remember exactly how many legislators with Mr. Richards

either of them could have put in a bill on his request if they wanted to.

I was going to say if no legislature

is willing to do it then what? Well if no

legislator is willing to do it he's free to communicate however he wants

which is apparently what he did today but there's no required response. The Constitution

doesn't obligate the legislature to respond in a particular way to individual

citizens. I would think it would be more important to

focus upon whether the legislature does nothing. What in the court do about it?

What do we do? Well

I think that the commitment of

the right to adopt its own rules of procedures to the

legislature seriously hampers the court's ability

to intervene and the predicate question to that is

whether there is a right to obtain a certain response. If the Constitution

if you define the Constitution requires a specific response from the

legislature then that constitutional rule which

is surely not expressed in the Constitution but he's asking you to employ it

would Trump or constrain the legislature's ability to adopt its own

rules? The corollary question is does mandamus or

warranto lie to redress any of that? I believe not

for all the reasons set forth in the speakers brief. If I can have

just a few seconds. You may and we'll allow the same intelligence

to Mr. Richards. Thank you. Article 31

you asked a question about says the legislature shall

assemble for the address of public grievances. Article 32

says that the people have the right to request of legislative body by way of

petition or remonstrance. Those are different words and they're different words chosen

advisedly. All your precedents say the words are chosen for a mean.

The idea of petition and remonstrance

public grievances means something different than the petition and remonstrance

that Mr. Richards is talking about and I would submit that public grievance

is a description of a legislator's

purview of what they hear from their constituents what they think public good

requires and not an obligation for them to

hear cases which is essentially what he's asking for.

Thank you. Mr. Richard you have two minutes but

I'm going to allow you some indulgence. Please go ahead. Thank you.

The first thing I want to address is avoiding article 31

is very very clear. Shall. The legislature

shall address or shall assemble for redress of public grievances.

Clearly up until 1818 this was a regular

practice. The practice remained in the statutes until 1925.

So you know that the analysis

the redress analysis isn't a legally binding instrument

there's no case law in this case. The defense states in their pleadings that there's no

relevant case law here right to write to remonstrance. They are correct

I couldn't cite any case law and so that's

why my brief was more of a historical brief

based on previous usage and custom.

I can only rely on the constitution that House and Senate journals

is preserved by the historical records in the state archives and the usage

of customs recorded therein verified by the legislature's own legal scholar.

Contrary to the defense statements otherwise exhibit

after redress analysis confirms the House and Senate journals which detail

the fact that for more than 200 years and more than

18,000 petitions were submitted. And

by the way big difference here between petition and remonstrance.

Remonstrance is the application to the legislature to repeal a law

to make a law. They want to exclude the people from their

House from the state House over the issue of only making law

that what they're advocating is the only solution they want to offer

we the people is the ability to make law

as a solution a legislative process and to your point judge

that good is the text if there's no application of

right what good is my rights if just summarily been removed

now grant the practice hasn't happened in a long time

the archives show that there are 51 remonstrances and the last one applied

was in 1825 that's a long time

and Mr. Sianzi in some respects is correct the practice didn't fall out of favor

I would say that the problem really is apathy

and ignorance of the law that's what's happened to our society in many many ways

so we don't have an educated citizenry electing

legislators and this is a problem and this is how I believe the process

fell out of favor. Your red light is on but

you may proceed for another minute or so. To the federal issue and

the cases they want to cite there's no federally protected right to remonstrance

in the first the U.S. Constitution to redress state public

grievances so all citation every case they cite

predicated on someone invoking the first amendment the first amendment

right to petition doesn't grant any of the same rights

by the state nor is there any usage in customer case law

and so I believe that the state the defense has misapplied

and all the cases that they cite here are all based

on federal first amendment cases that failed including the other cases.

Well they also cite the Tennessee case that was decided in 2020

and I believe Mr. Sianzi is correct the language there

was functionally identical if not identical to the language here

why is that case wrongly decided?

Great question judge. Language in that case in the gentry

case the state constitution of Tennessee is not like

New Hampshire our constitution and the provisions in it are much stronger

we have articles 30 and 31 the Tennessee does not

have and Mr. Gentry in error cited

the first amendment right to petition and so

that's why I would argue that that case doesn't apply because he's seeking a remedy

under the first amendment and finally the opinion

of this court I think really summarizes this case

this is the opinion that you gave in the legislature

because of the rulemaking issue the legislature may not even in the

exercise of its absolute internal rulemaking authority violate

constitutional limitations indeed no breach of state government

can lawfully perform an act which violates the constitution therefore

any legislative act violating the constitution on fringing on its provisions

must be void because the legislature when it steps beyond its

bounds acts without authority and that's exactly what they did here they want us

to not have access to this process and I'll close with this

right a revolution in the bill of rights our state is unique in that feature

it has one key caveat right of redress right when

all effective means of redress are no longer effectual the people

have a right to throw off their government and start a new one and that's where we're at

now because this is the last stop and so that's why those

were so why is the redress process so important because all

of our rights emanate from that very process when you stop

the process you kill the republican form of government

thank you thank you very much case submitted court is adjourned

for the record the chief justice is disqualified
