This is Case 2021-0014, Diana Rudder v. Director, New Hampshire Division of Motor Vehicles.

Thank you, Mr. Teach-Out. Whenever you're ready, would you have to tell me whether I pronounced your name correctly?

You did. Thank you.

Thank you.

Good morning.

Whenever you're ready?

May it please the Court.

The issue before this Court is which definition of way under RSA 259-125 applies to administrative license suspension or ALS proceedings?

This is a fairly concise legal issue with a very clear and undisputed factual background.

I'm going to be as concise as I can during my presentation today.

Can you tell me first off, as a practical matter, what effect does our ruling have on your client?

I assume that she was acquitted of the DWI below.

She was not. She was convicted this summer.

And she also, because ALS suspensions are not held in a band during appeals, she has actually already served full six-month suspension on this particular case.

The reason that the issue is not moot is because subsequent ALS suspensions carry a longer license suspension if, in fact, there was one in the future, not that we're planning on that.

Understood.

So I'm not going to repeat all of the arguments that we made in my brief, but I am going to take this opportunity to address some of the arguments made by my colleague in the state's opposition.

But first, let me set the backdrop because there's a lot of uncontested pieces of this case.

So it's uncontested that what we're talking about is a private parking lot.

It's a private church parking lot.

I'll agree that there are two sections to RSA 259-125.

Sub-1 does not include private parking lots.

Sub-2 does.

But Sub-2 only applies to four specific statutes.

And that's not only in the statutory language of 125 itself, but it's also under state versus lathrop, which is cited in both briefs before this court,

in which this court held that Sub-2, the more expansive definition of way under Sub-2 only applies to four specific statutes.

And ALS proceedings are not one of them.

Understood.

Why is your interpretation not an absurd result?

Well, it's not an absurd result because, one, the state argues that if you apply what the statutes say in this case,

if you apply that Sub-1 applies in this case, then you are not going to have this scenario where people all of a sudden start drinking and driving in these loophole zones

because specifically you can still be arrested, you can still be charged, and you can still lose your license under 265A for drinking and driving over the limit

or being under the influence in these private parking lots.

Secondly, the argument that's advanced by the state is really a policy argument.

It's that this court should apply Sub-2 to ALS proceedings because it's a good idea to discourage people from being caught in private parking lots behind the wheel

if they've had something to drink.

That's a policy argument, and that's for the legislature to decide.

But if they can be arrested in the private parking lot, how do we divorce the license suspension,

which both the arrest, the criminalization of the behavior, and the license suspension are focused on the same goal?

The answer to your question is because the ALS and DWI proceedings are divorced in virtually every other way under New Hampshire law.

The DWI proceedings happen in the district court, or in sometimes the superior court, depending on which kind of offense you're charged with.

They have a different burden of proof. They often involve different parties as a prosecuting authority.

They have different rules.

This court in Lopez versus DMV director in 2000 held that the exclusionary rule to the Fourth Amendment and Article 19 does not apply in these ALS proceedings.

In Lopez, this court held that for ALS proceedings, the criminal rules do not apply.

Right. It's almost more strict liability, if you will.

That's correct.

So why carve out a place where that more aggressive, if you will, process doesn't apply?

Well, because that's the legislature's job to carve that out or to not carve it out.

In this case, whether it's an oversight or whether it's the legislature's intent, the statute is clear.

And you actually don't need to review the legislative intent in this case because looking at the statute, it's a plain reading case.

And whether that's correct or not, this is a very easy statute for the legislature to fix if indeed they want to apply Sub 2 to ALS proceedings.

However, this court is here to apply the law and this court needs to apply the plain meaning of the law as it's written and as it's written, Sub 1 applies.

Now, the other issue here is whether the DMV and the Superior Court below aired in construing Sub 2 to apply to ALS proceedings.

And both of those bodies, if you will, inferred that Sub 2 applies because DWI and ALS proceedings are so closely related.

But that is not a valid or established method or means of statutory interpretation by this court or any other that I'm aware of.

And so they did exceed their authority in applying Sub 2 to the ALS proceedings on the record below.

Well, it's just an error of law.

Correct.

Yep.

Now, again, I don't dispute the logic behind the state's argument that this would be a good policy argument to have these ALS proceedings subject to the same more expansive definition underway under Sub 2.

However, again, that is a decision that the legislature needs to make.

And this court should not effectively rewrite the definition of way under Sub 2 to include ALS proceedings where the legislature has not.

What role should legislative history play in our analysis of this?

Well, because the statute is unambiguous, because a plain reading of the statute leads to one certain result.

I don't think that the court needs to consider legislative history here.

Plus, in this case, you have a legislative history, which is basically vacant.

You have a strong effort in 1981 to crack down on DWIs.

By the way, back then it was 0.05.

There's some rather amusing sections from some of the representatives about the amount that they drank before they drove back in 1981.

I'm concerned about how that might affect them personally.

But the ALS statutes weren't even in effect.

They didn't even come into effect until 1992, 11 years later.

So there really is no legislative history on this whatsoever.

And in such a dearth of legislative intent and a dearth of legislative history on this particular issue,

I think it would be extraordinary and exceed this court's authority to rewrite the statute to try and define what the legislative intent might have been or what it might be now.

Other than that, if there are no other questions, I'll rely on the briefs.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Good morning. May it please the court? My name is Emily Gehring.

I represent the Department of Safety Division of Motor Vehicles.

In order to understand how flawed appellant's argument is, I think it's important to understand the relationship between DUI and ALS.

DUI is the triggering conduct and the triggering criminal offense, and the ALS is merely the ramification for that conduct.

You can think of ALS as a subpart that lives under this larger umbrella of DUI, where there's many other subparts that all stem from the original triggering offense of the DUI.

Simply put, there is no ALS in this context if you don't first have the DUI.

Because they are so inextricably married to one another, it's illogical that you would apply a different definition of way the ALS context that is triggered.

But there can be administrative license suspensions for a vast majority of other civil penalties not associated with DUI's. Is that right?

That is correct. There are other types of license suspensions. Those aren't what's applying as appeal.

This is particularly the license suspension that is automatically triggered by either failing to take the blood alcohol test or taking the test and getting the blood results over a point.

Because the entire statutory scheme is so closely married, it produces numerous absurd results to apply a different definition of way in the ALS context than what you're applying.

What's the most absurd result?

I think the most absurd, it's difficult. They're all absurd. It's difficult to gauge which would be the most absurd.

Name one.

I would say the fact that other statutes are also implicated. This isn't just the straight ALS statute. The DUI annulment statute would be impacted.

The implied consent statute would be impacted. The statute that governs the admissibility.

But how A, how would they be impacted? B, why is it absurd?

So there are numerous other statutes that all use the word way. The ones I just, I can give you guys the case citations, or I'm sorry, the statutory citations if you'd like.

But all of those statutes use the word way. They are not specifically enumerated in 259-125 subpart 2, which means you would come up with a situation that you could have your DUI annuled after 10 years in some circumstances

and you couldn't in others purely on where you decided to opt to be. Same with implied consent law.

You would end up in a situation that merely virtue of where you decided you were going to drunk drive, either you did impliedly consent to have your blood alcohol tested in the state of New Hampshire or you didn't.

So it creates this situation that DUI offenders are being desperately treated under the law purely by where they decided to commit their offense.

I think that's probably the most absurd result, that this impacts numerous other statutes.

So how do we read the missing statutory reference into subsection 2?

I don't think it is a missing statutory reference because DUI is the current statute and there are all of these subparts.

All of these ancillary matters that flew from the DUI are properly read into the fact that DUI is included in that subpart.

The DUI statute treats offenders desperately, don't they?

If you're not a state driver, your license isn't immediately taken and suspended, right?

I believe that's a matter because of the reciprocity agreements with other states.

Right, so other state drivers are treated differently.

With respect to suspension.

Specifically.

Admittedly, I don't know as much about the reciprocity agreements with other states.

It is possible that they're treated differently, but that's not before the court today.

Today it's a New Hampshire driver.

Well, the statute treats drivers who drive on private ways.

That's my point.

So if the statute can treat out-of-state drivers differently, why not treat individuals who drive on private ways as opposed to public ways?

Because it's preposterous to think that there are certain places that you can go and drunk drive and by choosing the correct location,

you don't suffer the ramifications of the penalties.

Well, if I'm in my driveway, that's not a violation, right?

Right, so you would, if you're in your driveway, you're not going to be subject to DUI or ALS.

None of those are going to be triggered.

It's this situation where you're in a public place, such as the appellant.

She was in a public place that triggered her DUI.

It's absurd to think that she shouldn't have any of the ramifications of losing her license simply because she found one of these golden ALS free zones.

Like a driveway.

But a driveway is private property.

It's not open to the public.

You don't have the same risk of injuring the public.

There's not the same concern of provoking your license so that you don't hurt the public as there is in a public parking.

Her license could be revoked as part of her DUI sentencing.

I believe so.

And it was here, right?

She lost it for six months?

That was through the ALS procedure.

But the purpose of ALS is to immediately get drunk drivers off the road.

So the focus here is that as soon as you fail to take your test, as soon as you blow over the legal limit,

that goes straight to the Department of Safety that immediately treads your license and suspension so that rather than...

Unless you're not a safe driver.

In which case it falls into the reciprocity category.

I do believe you're right.

The other...

So we've discussed the fact that there's this locational absurdity to create these ALS free zones.

I think one of the other must-observe results is just the role of the hearings examiner.

So once your license has been suspended, the individual is entitled to review the Department of Hearings of Safety.

The hearings examiner is limited in scope to only looking at the circumstances of that underlying.

If appellant's reading is taken to be true, the appellant body and the reviewing body of the hearings examiner

are applying a different standard than what the officer who actually conducted the DUI stock would be applying.

So you would have this appellant body that is looking at different criteria than the...

Or the officer has to be schooled on this interpretation of the statute.

Right, which would then mean that the officer shouldn't be applying the definition of a way that applies in the DUI context

and should instead be looking to some other conduct, which is the ALS.

It's absurd. It's as if this supporting court here were applying a different standard

looking at superior court conduct than the superior court could look at it.

It doesn't make sense.

So by applying these two different definitions of way to the DUI and ALS context,

the hearings examiner's role becomes muddied.

All these other statutes become muddy.

It creates this locational weirdness.

It just doesn't make sense that when you have these two statutes that operate in complete concert with each other,

you would apply different definitions.

If we were to adapt Ms. Cutter's analysis here and the legislature thought we were wrong,

there's an easy fix.

I don't know if it would be an easy fix.

There's always a legislative fix.

There are a number of statutes that would then need to be specifically written into 259.125 subpart 2.

Or no statute.

I'm sorry.

That list or as Justice Hicks was saying, just eliminate the reference to the particular statute.

That is always a possibility.

I would still contend that that doesn't need to happen here because DUI is the overarching statutory scheme.

ALS lives within that universe.

I don't think it's necessary to specifically enumerate ALS and annulment and evidence and

apply things that all need to be specifically listed out in subpart 2 because they are so inherently red in the larger body of DUI.

Lastly, I know that this court has already addressed so far this morning whether or not the legislative intent matters in this particular circumstance.

I think it does matter because it's so clear through the legislative history that the legislature was intending to close loopholes

and to get tough on DUI and to get drunk drivers to the road.

If this court makes any finding that appellant is correct in his reading, it's necessarily creating a loophole for drunk drivers to exploit.

And it's making a loophole for drunk drivers to get right back on the road.

So it completely defies the legislative intent to get drunk drivers off the road.

Are you familiar with the case that has used the substantially related doctrine to interpreting statutes?

I'm not familiar.

So this would be the first impression then.

I believe so.

My knowledge there's no case that has teed this up.

What about the state?

Are there any other courts that have used this doctrine?

Not to my knowledge.

If there are no further questions.

Are these statutes that you referenced that would be affected by this ruling set forth in your brief?

They're not.

I can give you the insights right now if that would be helpful.

There's 265-A colon 4.

That's the New Hampshire implied consent law.

There's 265-A 11.

That's the statute pertaining to evidence and the admission of the blood alcohol test.

And there's 265-A 21, which is annulment for annulment after 10 years, a DUI annulment after 10 years.

Thank you.

If nothing further in conclusion, I would ask that this court affirm both the superior court that affirmed the hearing's examiner and finding that the same definition of way necessarily must apply both in the DUI context.

Both in the DUI context as an ALS context.

Thank you.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you.

Just a brief rebuttal.

First, I want to address the argument that this is somehow going to create all of these free ALS free zones or DWI free zones.

To be clear, this doesn't create any free zones where it's okay to drink and drive.

You're still going to get arrested.

You're still going to lose your license for at least nine months to two years, which is longer than the ALS suspension period.

And you're still going to suffer all of those other consequences, including mandatory alcohol and driving education courses.

So this does not create any kind of a free zone.

If there was an oversight by the legislature in not applying sub-2 to the ALS statutes, that is a legislative fix.

That is not a judicial fix.

What about the ramifications for implied consent, for example?

To implied consent, the implied consent law applies just with just as much force to DWI prosecutions as it did before under the reading,

the current statute requires none of the reading that I'm proposing to you.

The exact same result is going to occur with respect to the annulment statute.

This doesn't change the annulment statute at all.

The annulment statute applies to DWI convictions in criminal court.

This reading does not affect the criminal proceedings in any way.

So in your view, the fact that your client was in a private parking lot did not influence and could not be a basis for seeking to suppress the breath test?

That's correct.

We didn't challenge the breath test.

We didn't anyway, because there wasn't any police encroachment of Ms. Rudder's rights.

But if the police had violated her constitutional rights or requested a breath test where it was unwarranted, then the suppression remedy would not apply.

The implied consent law still applies to somebody, even if they're operating or in control of a vehicle in a private parking lot.

That's correct.

And this doesn't require the hearings examiner to wrestle with many different interpretations of law because the hearing examiner is only bound by a sub one and always has been.

This is asking the hearing examiner to apply one voluntary definition.

The courts apply the other.

The hearings examiner does not.

And ALS proceedings and DWI proceedings are not always hand in hand.

There are many situations in which there is an ALS proceeding and there is no DWI prosecution because there is problems with the state's evidence,

problems with the state's evidence.

And there are also many situations where there are DWI proceedings, but there is no ALS proceeding because of technical issues or evidentiary issues on the ALS side of things.

So they are not inextricable at all.

And we would ask that this court vacate Ms. Rudder's suspension.

Thank you.

Thank you, counsel.

Case submitted.

Courts adjourned.

Please rise.
