This is case 2021-0111, state of New Hampshire, versus Brian Erickson.

Mr. Brennan, take your time. We don't need to rush you here.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Good afternoon. May it please the Court. My name is Hank Brennan.

I represent the Petitioner, Defendant, and the Lower Court, Brian Erickson.

I have been admitted pro-hog B.J. through sponsoring counsel at the end of the table,

Attorney William Gilmour along with us, Attorney Rusty Chadwick.

A fundamental tenet of criminal procedure is fundamental fairness.

And we assert as a petitioner there are two main examples of how the Court did not exercise fundamental fairness in its decision

to conclude that Mr. Erickson was in danger to the community by clear and convincing evidence.

The first is that in the proceeding in the Lower Court, Mr. Erickson was precluded from introducing an extraordinary amount of

excavatory material that weighed on the issue and the conclusions that the judge ultimately found to support his opinion of dangerousness.

In fact, the Court excluded all of the defendants' attempts to introduce excavatory evidence to affirmatively show that Mr. Erickson

wasn't dangerous, but almost more importantly to rebut the government's arguments that he was.

The Court accepted the prosecutor's insistence that Mr. Erickson's contributions by being a veteran, a member of the Marines,

and also an active member of the law enforcement community was an aggravating circumstance that was a factor in the determination of dangerousness.

So that was a prior bail order in which the trial court relied on that evidence.

Does it make any difference that the trial court didn't rely on the order that's under appeal right now?

So here's my concern. We can't say that the Court did not rely on it because in the prior hearing on February 2nd,

which I did not represent Mr. Erickson, the Court specifically noted after the government's argument that he was concerned about the fact that

Mr. Erickson had specialized training or experience because of his law enforcement and military experience that would make him more capable of being dangerous.

In his findings after the hearing, which was an appeal of this initial order, the Court didn't specifically note the military experience in aggravating circumstance.

However, the government again argued that his law enforcement experience was an aggravating circumstance.

The court didn't specifically say that that was an aggravating circumstance. However, they never retracted the fact that that was the opinion of the judge.

And that was obviously an inherent bias of the judge.

Well, when you say it was the opinion of the judge, you're talking about the order he made from the bench initially.

Yes.

And that was never appealed. There were 30 days to appeal. That was never appealed. So that's not before us. Do you agree?

The appeal of the hearing, I saw it as part and parcel of the same. It was an appeal or a hearing regarding the initial decision by the judge.

And so that is why when the arguments were transferred to the next hearing, they appear to be a consistent argument between the February 2nd hearing and the February 10th, 11th and 12th hearing.

So I do think that information should be before the court, because we have a declarative affirmative sentence and statement by the court that the court believed there was an aggravating circumstance based simply on the military and law enforcement history.

So it seems, if we agree with you, why would not just remand to the trial court and ask the trial court to explain whether or not they consider this evidence?

That is a possibility. That is not going to be the relief that I asked this court to engage in for two reasons.

The first reason is if the court does have an inherent bias and somebody who has military and law enforcement experience, then there would always be the concern, at least objectively, from the community that the judge would have that inherent bias that they could not dissuade themselves of in making the determination.

But I think you're blowing it up. I know you have part two, but I understood Justice Davis' question as to why can't we just remand it?

Because if we remand it, I expect that it will go in front of the same judge that from the petitioner's point of view has an inherent bias against the petitioner simply because they have military and law enforcement experience.

So the remedy is a motion to recuse the judge?

It is. And I expect that that would likely be the process. The difficulty is the trial is scheduled for November.

The trial is what?

The schedule for November of this year. This gentleman with no record has been incarcerated with the loss of liberty for seven months away from his family and children and delaying the case further exasperates the harm of having incarceration and presumed innocent at the same time.

So that's one inherent difficulty of simply remanding and then going through the process of recusal.

The other isn't preparing for the case in December. We have an incarcerated defendant who does not have full access to prepare his case because he's behind a glass because of COVID protocol.

So timing is certainly an issue. And that's why I will at the end of the argument ask this court for the extraordinary remedy of imposing a bail condition as opposed to simply remanding to the Superior Court.

So it seems your argument, once the trial court mentioned the training that the defendant had, that there was nothing that the trial court could do going forward that would have cleansed the process?

I don't think so. And I think the standard is from an objective reasonably person in the community. And the reason why is I recognize in cases that somebody's specific training can be an aggravating factor, can be relevant to a case.

For example, if somebody is a master in karate and knows certain moves that can cripple or maim somebody, in fact does that and kills them. In a manslaughter case, we look at both an objective and a subjective standard.

In this case, however, at that initial argument and later, there are no details or specifics about Mr. Erickson's training other than the fact that he was honorably discharged from the Marines.

And other than the fact that he's a law enforcement officer doesn't mean that he has any particular or specific training that is relevant to this case.

We don't hear anything in the facts that are second hand because as we know the complaining witness or alleged victim does not need to testify.

We don't hear anything about the fact that Mr. Erickson utilized any law enforcement utilities, a gun, a car, friends, electronic information, anything that would assist or had any relevance to this crime whatsoever.

But let's assume you're right, but isn't the fact that he sped through a residential neighborhood in Exeter at 80 miles an hour pursuing police officers' lights flashing and I'm sure he saw them, by the way, given his training.

Isn't that enough to justify the court's decision that he's at risk of flight or danger?

Well, I think not. The issue regarding flight is twofold. The government's initial assertion was that this was a flight from the police and it was a pursuit.

And then, as you see in the record, the radio calls from the police to dispatch show that they did not, in fact, pursue Mr. Erickson. They followed him, but they didn't pursue him.

And I think the court did recognize that, in his opinion, that their assertions were not supported by the affidavit. But I think that's an important point I have to mention to the court.

I know I can't speak outside the record, but you'll see that I argued in the trial court and in my brief that there was no evidence that the car traveled 80 miles per hour.

And I think out of an obligation for ethics, I need to let the court know there has been subsequent information that will have me withdraw a retreat from that argument. I will not be arguing Mr. Erickson did not go 80 miles per hour.

But the court in its final order doesn't refer to 80 miles an hour. It just refers to, it makes a finding that the defendant drove well above the speed limit through a residential part of Exeter and south to Massachusetts. Isn't that correct?

It is correct. I just mentioned the miles per hour because I argued in my brief and Justice Hicks raised it and I thought I wanted to let you know.

Isn't there a disconnect, though, in terms of flight as a basis for initial bail order? Doesn't flight mean like fleeing and not showing up for trial as opposed to this is geared toward dangerousness, the high speed leaving of the scene?

So aren't we, isn't there a disconnect of the basis here?

Well, I think there is. I think the court must find dangerousness. I think the local must find dangerousness and I don't think speeding a residential neighborhood under the circumstances.

Danger by clear and convincing evidence, correct?

Yes, which is in my opinion a very high standard. I mean the deprivation of somebody's liberty is monumental. The man's presumed innocent.

So the fact that he sped from the scene, there's been no argument that articulated how that is a danger to the community. The government's argument, although it didn't specify, really suggests that there's a danger to this alleged victim.

And there's nothing about the driving of that car that presents any danger whatsoever that is specific or attributed to this alleged victim.

People drop the speed limit in a non-dangerous fashion. I mean, it can happen.

We're on record, so I won't speak from personal experience, but yes, we see it every day.

What is the evidence in the record, if any, as to whether your client was aware that the police were at that location and were after him trying to stop him?

There is none other than the opinion of the pursuing officer who admitted that he was not pursuing, that he was not the police pursued.

He was following. He opined that in that neighborhood, his reflective lights would have shown off stop signs or other signs on the road where Mr. Erickson would have seen the flashing of the lights.

And notably, the siren in that car was not activated, and there was no demonstration or legitimate evidence to support that officer opining to that issue. None.

One of the arguments you're making is that the court did not allow your client to put in certain evidence, a number of which are documentary pieces of evidence.

But the state argues that the proposed exhibits aren't part of the record before us. That appears to me to be the case that they aren't part of the record before us.

And that normally would prohibit us from, or not prohibit, but it would certainly counsel against us addressing those issues if we don't have the exhibits we're talking about.

Well, the content of the argument describes the exhibits. The reason why the exhibits weren't attached was that it was my perspective that they weren't admitted, so they weren't part of the record.

So it was a precautionary reason. I didn't provide them. I won't comment that I think that they would have been very helpful for me, but I expected that the record is what the court would review.

And in the record, it describes the argument in much of the detail of those exhibits, and it is clear from the record that every exhibit that I tried to provide that was excavatory was denied.

The court repeatedly said that the rules of evidence do not apply in these type of hearings. Well, that means the rules of evidence shouldn't apply to both sides.

And here you can see an extraordinarily different evaluation for the government as for the defense. The government was allowed to introduce any text messages, even over my objection.

Any history of the relationship, even dating back to the prior October, over my objection. And when I tried to rebut with relevant information around that timeframe to confront what the judge ultimately concluded was Mr. Erickson somehow was controlling.

I was deprived of that every time, every time.

You make two arguments about witnesses that were excluded by the trial court, one of which is Ms. Daring. And it appeared to me that there was an exchange between trial counsel, I guess, you and the court about Ms. Daring who had been in the waiting room.

And then counsel says, if your honor thinks it's unnecessary and not important, I won't press the issue. That would seem to me to be waiver of that issue.

I accept that's a waiver. There were two witnesses, Tamio Shaughnessy and Ms. Daring. Ms. Daring, I relented, and I own that commitment that I relented.

Ms. Shaughnessy, the government objected and the court would not let that witness testify. That witness would testify, as it says in the record, as to an event with a complaining witness, a alleged victim, was the initial aggressor, physically violent, and after she physically assaulted, Mr. Erickson, he didn't respond to any physical violence whatsoever,

which goes to the heart of the issue, whether he's dangerous, also goes to the issue of first aggressor, and more importantly, it confronts the government's argument, in theory of the case, that Mr. Erickson was the aggressor and he's a danger to this woman by his conduct.

This would show the exact opposite. And so the preclusion of this witness, Tamio Shaughnessy, is consistent with the preclusion of the officer.

Isn't there evidence of physical harm to the victim here?

The police described it as light scratches. She claims she was headbutted. There's not a mark or a scratch. Nothing to evidence being headbutted. She originally said she was strangled in the restraining order. She then changed it to say she wasn't strangled because there was no marks whatsoever on her neck, and said he put his hand over her mouth.

After heavy coaching and prompting by the investigator, it then turned into the hand was over the mouth, but also at some point over the nose at times a little difficult to breathe, coincidentally to meet the statute.

There was bruising on the wrist, consistent with self-defense, restraining somebody, and there was a scratch on the shin, consistent with her admitting that she kicked Mr. Erickson.

There was no striking, there was no broken bones, no medical injuries that needed any attention. There was nothing significant in this case other than a routine misdemeanor assault and battery claim based on somebody's word.

That was it for the physical evidence in this case.

Is somebody's word not enough?

Somebody's word is enough to convict, but in assessing to that degree of certainty, the court should fairly as a predicate consider all of the evidence.

If there's evidence to counter that, and it's going to be used as a basis for dangerousness, the court should not be able to simply mitigate or mute the defendant's evidence and just take the word.

It makes no sense to have an evidentiary hearing if it's a one-sided evidentiary hearing that the defense cannot participate in.

Thank you very much, Your Honours.

Thank you, Mr. Brennan.

Ms. Woodcock.

Good morning, Your Honour.

I'm Elizabeth Woodcock for the State of New Hampshire.

I just want to make two quick points and then I'll take the court's questions.

First of all, when the court initially heard this, if you look at the first volume of this sort of pre-volume transcripts of this bail hearing, on page 12 the court does talk about the defendant's military training.

But it ends with sort of looking at a different direction, and what the court says is the aggravating factor here and a couple of aggravating factors here they want to consider is to continue preventive detention,

include, as Ms. Cook said, the extensive training that Mr. Erickson has, which may seem in some ways he's capable of doing things that are more damaging than someone without that training.

Maybe more important here are the allegations that he fled the scene traveling.

I think you said 80 miles an hour through the streets of Exeter, which is horrifically dangerous to the public and provides the kind of evidence that really goes way over the top on top of domestic violence charges that are very, very serious.

So the court wasn't hanging its hat on you.

This is after the first hearing.

This is during the first hearing, Your Honor.

The court hasn't heard any evidence.

It's obviously relying on the Gerstein that's saying that the speed was 80 miles an hour.

But what the court is, I think, essentially doing there is putting together these factors.

You've been told that this guy is a veteran.

You've been told that he's a police officer.

And yet you have these actions that are incongruous with the oath that the police officer presumably has taken, which is to uphold the law and to protect the public, acting in a way that is inconsistent with that.

Is that making it dangerous by clear and convincing evidence?

Well, this, of course, is the initial hearing.

So the court hasn't heard all the testimony.

Still hasn't heard all the testimony, but go ahead.

Well, that's true.

But when you look at what the court wrote in its written order, at that point it's heard the testimony of the police officer.

It realizes that the speed that the person is going is not particularly identifiable, although the police officer is speeding and couldn't catch up with him, so he had to be going fairly fast.

The court goes on and it concludes that in addition, while the evidence presented at the hearing regarding the defendant's flight from the scene did not include evidence supporting all of the allegations in the Gerstein evidence, David.

It is clear that he ran to his vehicle, which was parked away from the alleged victim's home, then drove well above the speed limit through a residential part of Exeter.

The court also knows.

So, slaying the scene at one point necessarily established that the person would be dangerously driving around forever?

Well, not forever.

Eventually he would run out of gas.

Well, there you go.

But no, that gets back to another point.

He saw these police officers arrive.

The female police officer arrived, saw him, he looked at her, and went left.

But again, fleeing the scene, does that mean he's a dangerous driver on a regular basis?

Well, he was a dangerous driver when he was driving up to Exeter because he zoomed past the victim.

That's in the text messages.

That's one of the things that the court was relying on.

It wasn't just that he had had this altercation with her, but it was that as he was going north, he was accusing her of being unfaithful to him.

And he was repeatedly saying things to her to sort of stalk her.

He'd been spying on her earlier in the day.

And then he showed up.

He prevented her from calling 911.

The police only arrived there because one of the cops actually sort of went through and they actually had a location.

But isn't there a difference between that behavior and what a person would be considering once they've been arrested, indicted, and they're facing trial?

Your Honor, I think that goes to a different question.

And I think that really, if we're looking at this case, what the court needed to be persuaded was that this man would not present a danger to the public and a danger to the victim.

No, no, no. The burden is the proof that he would by clear and convincing evidence.

Well, correct, but the court had reached the point.

Now, if you were going to get the court to reconsider that, because they did file a motion to reconsider after the Rockingham pretrial services report came out.

If you're going to get the court to reconsider that, what you have to say is you have to say, all right, here are the circumstances that go to my client, not the victim is a bad person.

But here's how this behaved while he's been in the House of Corrections.

These are the things that we're willing to do.

When the court asked, should we just remand it for another evidentiary hearing?

It seems to me, and I know I've said this, I sound like a broken record sometimes with this court, that by taking an appeal, the defense has missed the opportunity to create the record that will persuade the trial court that indeed there are conditions of release that will assure the safety of the community.

And the safety of the victim.

It seems to me that if the court is troubled and obviously this is a difficult case.

You have a case in which the defense actions, if they are as if they will be proven to be at a trial.

But the allegations made during the hearings are very, very serious.

Agreed, but that's not the issue before us.

No, the issue before you is whether the trial court exercised unsustainable discretion in ordering him held.

And on this record, there is sufficient evidence to show that this man is a danger.

And a danger to the community by speeding through accident.

A danger to the community by speeding past the victim as she's driving north.

And if we disagree with you, do you agree that we can set bail conditions?

I do not agree that you can set bail conditions.

I think that if you disagree with the trial court, you have to remand the case to the trial court and tell the trial court to consider bail conditions.

At that point, the trial court could certainly hold another hearing.

And while I appreciate the concern of the defense attorney saying, well, we don't want another hearing,

it seems to me that a lot of time has elapsed in this case.

And the defense could then put on evidence that would show perhaps persuade the court that he is no longer a danger.

But coming to the Supreme Court and saying, I don't like this decision to me is just like that case that we had years ago, 1832, Candia Road.

They wanted the property returned.

The court said no because the state is still investigating the case.

Months went by and the state had still not charged the defendant with this identity theft or whatever it was.

Instead of going back to the court at that time and saying, hey, listen, the state has had plenty of time to bring these charges.

Reconsider what your order is.

Now that time has passed, nothing is happening.

You're, I mean, they filed a motion to reconsider, which was denied.

You're saying that in the interim a month or two after that, there would have been nothing to prevent the defendant from filing a motion based on new information.

I don't see how the court could refuse to consider new information or conditions of release that would make any sense.

Well, the more conditions of relief suggested, offered, various alternatives.

The various alternatives included him living in Massachusetts, which the precinct trousers.

Or moving to New Hampshire and wearing a bracelet, et cetera.

So how would the defendant create new suggestions?

Well, frankly, Justice Marconi, if he's been a good detainee all this time, that would go to the courts.

Yet we've had plenty of cases where courts will summarily deny further bail hearings because there is no, nothing new.

That's right, but there's, but the problem with this motion to reconsider really frankly was that it relied on the pretrial services report,

which said that the defendant would be at very high risk.

But that they could do it, right?

They could do it, but it would be a very high risk.

And bear in mind, Justice Marconi, they interviewed him.

Now there isn't any information in the report about the impression that they formed of this man,

but they formed the impression that despite all these conditions that he would be at very high risk.

And I can only conclude that that's based on the impression that they drew from the interview.

Well, that seemed like a very odd sentence to me.

That this person would be at a very high risk, but there's no avenue for exploring what that meant, right?

Right, and again, if you wanted to develop a record that was more, shall we say,

fulsome than this one, it might very well be that if you have a hearing and you called that pretrial services officer,

that person could explain what their hesitance was.

I will say in, in counsel's defense here, I think that it would be enormously difficult to hold this kind of hearing

the way that the court had to hold it.

Because you do have a situation in which people are located in different places

and trying to introduce evidence and making the record clear of those circumstances is less than ideal.

If the court is troubled, as Justice Hick certainly has suggested he is,

by this case it seems to me that the best move would be to remand it to the trial court

and have the trial court listen to the arguments that this man does not present a dangerous community.

Not that the victim is just as bad as he is because that's not what is before the trial court.

What's before the trial court is the safety of the people in the state of New Hampshire and frankly elsewhere

because I'm not sure where he was when he zoomed faster on the interstate.

Any evidence in the record of prior motor vehicle speeding violations?

On a police officer? I think that that would be probably going to reach.

No, there isn't. And there's no record of prior criminal charges or anything of that sort, Your Honor.

It's not a case in which it's more the defendant's actions on that evening

leaving the scene knowing the police had come, not allowing the victim to dial 911, assaulting her

and then the series of, which I think really troubled the trial court, the series of text messages

in which he is controlling her. You went out and you had drinks with someone.

Well, you know, that level of possessiveness is really very, very unsettling.

This court is not naive about what can happen when somebody decides that they're going to control another person's life

and those messages, according to the trial court and when I read them I have to say I was really stunned

by the level of possessiveness. That doesn't make you feel very comfortable in letting the man know.

I asked Mr. Brennan about the evidence that the defendant actually knew the police were trying to talk to him

and he said there was an evidence other than the officer had said he was driving and he couldn't catch up.

You're saying that in fact there was evidence from the female officer who arrived.

What's the state of the record in that regard?

It's in that testimony. Just take a look.

From the female officer who first arrived?

Yes, just a moment.

We'll find it.

No, no, I know I can find it here and I haven't run out of time.

If you look on page four of my brief, when the Exeter Police Department received the 9-1-1 hang-up calls,

Sergeant Devin West, Officer Sheehy and Officer Chase responded to the victim's house.

It was about three o'clock in the morning when Officer Chase arrived the garage door was open

and she saw a man who looked at her, closed the garage door and left.

Officer Chase knocked on the door and the victim responded telling the officer that her crazy boyfriend had assaulted her

and had taken off out of the bed.

According to the police officer he saw and as a police officer I think your feeling is well why didn't you just stop?

But instead he left, he got in his car and he fled the scene at a high rate of speed.

I see my time is up. If there are no further questions I would ask the case be submitted.

Thank you.

Counsel, case submitted.

Court stands in recess until this afternoon.
