And then take a break for a couple of reasons. For the record, Justice DeVine is participating

in this matter, and he is watching the oral argument on video. And once again, he will

participate fully as the record indicates Justice MacDonald is disqualified in this matter.

Having said that, counsel, I see, Mr. McMahon, that you have reserved two minutes. Is that

accurate?

Yes, Your Honor.

Please proceed.

This is case 2021-0085, appeal of Suzanne Fornier at all.

Good morning, Your Honors. May it please the court. My name is Craig McMahon. I'm an attorney

in the law firm of RAF, Young and Pignatelli here in Concord. It's my pleasure to represent

the appellates this morning. And as Justice Six noted, I'm reserving the final two minutes

of my time for rebuttal.

Now I understand, Your Honors, the details of this case are pretty in the weeds as

far as things go. We're talking about whether or not the water council aired and

finding that the Department of Environmental Services could issue an alteration of terrain

permit without the benefit of a pre-permit study to understand how threatened and endangered

species use the property in question. And whether it further aired and finding that

there was sufficient evidence for the Department of Environmental Services to conclude that

this project had been designed in a manner that would not result in adverse impacts

to threatened and endangered species.

However, I'd submit to Your Honors that resolving these questions is both easier and simpler than

the underlying procedural details of the case suggest. This isn't the first time these

appellates have been before this court on these issues. This court had previously

reversed the water council's upholding of a Department of Environmental Services

granted an alteration of terrain permit in the first appeal of Fornier, which

this court issued an order in November of 2019. As my learned colleagues will

no doubt observe to you appeal of Fornier was an informal opinion that made

binding precedent. And while that's true, it also is in germane to the

usefulness of that order here. Well, it's the law of the case. You agree with

that, don't you? Absolutely, Your Honor. And so when this court issued its order

in appeal of Fornier 1, it determined that the Department of Environmental

Services couldn't entirely dedicate its duties in this matter entirely to

New Hampshire Fish and Game. But what happened? Council, where does it say that?

Certainly, Your Honor. On page 4 of this court's previous order,

and that's sorry, page 4 of the slip-up, it may be generally appropriate for

DES to defer deficient games expertise in revising projects design. The

projects design does not in any way lessen the department's responsibility to

review fishing games proposed modifications to ensure that fishing

game has applied the proper standard. I'm sorry, Your Honor, as I missed a

line there. While it may be generally... How does that line, how does that

paragraph, or how does that sentence say what you just claimed it said?

It's this, Your Honor. The final order on the re-hearing of this case,

and I think it's important to note that the first appeal to the

Water Council was heard in September of 2019 shortly before Fornier 1 was

issued. There was a re-hearing in January of 2020 shortly thereafter, and in the

order on re-hearing, the Water Council rather found that DES staff

stated they must rely on the expertise of New Hampshire Fish and Game to

determine whether the project complies with ENVWQ 150319H. And yet in Fornier

1, the court said no, that the Department of Environmental Services had a duty

to ensure that Fish and Game applied the correct standard. Now, standard, yes.

Yes. But the requirement... Let me clarify. You're reading the

requirement for a pre-permit study into the administrative rule 150319H based

on Fornier 1 alone. Your Honor, as we also mentioned in our brief, the rule has

subsequently been amended to require a pre-permit study explicitly, which we

would argue was done to clarify the ambiguous rule that was set... And that

amendment happened post the hearings. Yes, Your Honor. But... And that

amendment was not in play in place for the review of this particular

permit. Correct, Your Honor. And so our position is that prior to it's being

amended, 150319H still required a pre-permit study. Even though it doesn't

say so. Yes, Your Honor. And it may have been amended because it didn't say

so. I think that there's a difference, Your Honor, between amending an

administrative rule to clarify a requirement and to make it commensurate

with this Court's interpretation of the rule, so as to avoid further

misunderstandings. But that doesn't mean that the pre-permit study wasn't

already effectively a substantive requirement of the rule, as Justice

Hans Marconi noted in her concurrence in that opinion. Order, rather. She

noted that though, you know, we may interpret the rule, as the

Department had previously argued, that the correct standard was to

minimize adverse impacts as opposed to entirely avoid them. Her

concurrence... I'm sorry, did you say avoid impacts or did you say

avoid adverse impacts? Adverse impacts. Thank you, Your Honor. I

apologize. All right. And so in her, in concurrence of that order,

Justice Hans Marconi noted that even if we didn't get to one of those

two standards was proper in the absence of a pre-permit study, it's

very, very difficult to make any sort of rational conclusion about

whether or not the product has been designed in a way to avoid or

minimize take, as the statute refers to it, because we don't know how

those animals use the property. Now, as we think about the facts

and circumstances of this case, as you note, it's 40 or two, and

we've already been down this much of this road before. We have

talked about the nearby Brock's Land. And so, so too, Fish and Game,

DES, the Water Council have all been down this road before. So it

seems like you're arguing like this should all be in a vacuum

tabla rasa, but everybody's bringing information to the

table and a knowledge of the area and the species and the

landing's turtle and the hog-nosed snake. Everybody's

already got that. So why does it make any sense to require a study

that the text of the rule doesn't require?

So your Honor, to that I'd say that at the time this permit was

granted, the Water Council had noted that there was a study

nearby that was being conducted. And so at the time this

permit was granted, first of all, the Department of

Environmental Service didn't have the benefit of the

decision in four-near one, which explained and clarified the

correct standard that Fish and Game was supposed to use. So in

November, or rather as late as oral arguments in 2019, the

Department of Environmental Services said the correct

standard was minimize adverse impacts. This court sets down

its opinion and says, no, no, no, it's avoid adverse

impacts. Then retroactively, when asked to testify, the

Department of Fish and Game said, yes, we definitely applied

the avoid adverse impact standard, even though at the time

we were arguing that that wasn't the standard. So it's a

little bit like your Honor, and if you'll

The testimony as to what Fish and Game had knowledge of the

species, or near one, we were talking about the standard.

What didn't change was the extent of knowledge Fish and

Game had. And now I think we're looking at applying that

testimony to the proper standard.

To that, your Honor, I would respond that first, and I'm not

trying to pull anything here, but different properties are

different. And I think that Fish and Game's knowledge of

knowledge, rather, of how these threatened and endangered

species might use a property two miles down the road that

way could be different if that property is maybe it's a higher

elevation. But this isn't a form to make those judgments. The

form is the water council, then below that the ES and

ultimately Fish and Game on the ground, and your clients

on the ground. Yes, your Honor, and this is the form

though, to determine sufficiency of the evidence. And so

saying, agree, you know, we know how from the department's

point of view or Fish and Game's point of view, we know how

Blanding's Turtles, for example, use a property down the

road. So we know enough about how they use a totally

different piece of property to conclude that the project's

been designed in such a way as to avoid adverse impacts. So I

think, your Honor, where I where I differ here from the

department is they may know vastly more, and I'm sure

they do know vastly more about these species than any of

us do in this room. But the requirement isn't, you know, a

knowledge of the species. It's a knowledge of how the species

use the property that debate was had before the water

council.

Well, your Honor, I would argue that without a study of how

they actually did use it, anyone who was taking those

arguments was guessing about how the species use that

property that you did make that argument before the

water council had that concept in front of them.

Yes, your Honor. And before we lose time, we're we haven't

focused on stepping back from the standard. The project

needs to be designed to avoid adverse impacts. Yes, your

Honor. So the design aspect is different from the

implementation aspect. Also true, your Honor, and that's

one reason why I've not yet brought up the fact that looking

in hindsight, there were adverse impacts after the project

happened. And so that could be lack of compliance with the

design as opposed to faulty design. Absolutely, your

Honor, which would not be cured by a pre permit study one

way or the other. Right, your Honor, but going back to

it had, you know, without the opportunity or the

benefit of that pre permit study, we don't know whether or

not fishing games design recommendations may have

changed. And in fact, the water council's order, and I

apologize, your Honor, I've seen running low here, but the

water council's order does reference the fact that we

had an expert testify at re hearing about what a pre

permit study could have found. And the water council

said, right, well, but the department didn't have that

before they issued the permit, so they couldn't have

known. And that's really the key of the issue here is, right,

had they done the pre permit study, we might have designed

the project differently. And in the absence of one, what we're

doing is sort of guessing how threatened endangered species use

a particular parcel of land from behavior on a different

parcel of land that may not be comparable. Even if we're

talking about, I know earlier I'd said something about

miles down the road, but I think how a species, you know,

a turtle uses the top of the hill versus the bottom of the

hill can make a big difference in whether or not the given

terrain can be modified. So our, without getting to, I'm not

asking your Honours, of course, to, to read with some of

your own tips about project design, but to say, you,

the department issued this in what I would say is a vacuum

of specific information to the parcel at hand.

It seems to me that the arguments you're making is just

as Hans Marconi pointed out, arguments you made below to the

Water Council, and it's a very deferential standard of review

we have. Clearly unreasonable or unlawful, and I don't see

how, given all of the factors here, the scientific

information, the ABLE Council below at many levels, we can

say that the decision of the Water Council is

unreasonable or unlawful. And clearly, your Honour, to that I

would again respond, the, the administrative rule is

mandatory. The permit shall not issue unless, and I think

that to conclude those conditions have been met, which

are all conditions precedent in all phrase mandatory

directives. And again, there's a 150320, I believe is

a regulation that flat out commands the department to

deny applications that don't meet those qualifications.

And I just, I think that it is impossible as a matter of

law to conclude that a project's been designed in such

a way to avoid adverse impacts to threaten an endangered

species without knowing how those species use the

property. Your red light is on.

Thank you, your Honour. That's unless your Honours have

any further questions for me, that's what I've got for

you. Thank you. Thank you, your Honours.

Council. Good morning, your Honours. May it please

the Court. My name is Chris Aslan from the

Department of Justice here on behalf of the Department

of Environmental Services. I'd like to make just three

quick points and then be happy to answer any questions

the Court may have. First, this appeal is not about

application of the correct standard. I think we've

established that, but that issue wasn't preserved on

appeal, and the record shows that in this case DES did

indeed ensure that fishing game applied the correct

standard under the DES rules. Second, there simply was

no applicable statutory or regulatory requirement for

a pre-permit threatened endangered species study

in this, for this project. And we've just heard the

arguments from the appellants. They haven't identified

any standard. This is more by implication and

a sense of perhaps possibility without that. But

frankly, there's nothing in the rule or the

statute that says a study is required. And while DES

and or fishing game do have discretion to require

study in appropriate circumstances, if they

feel it's needed, again, that's no requirement

that they do so for every project. And third, as

the Water Council found, the record evidence shows

clearly the fishing game had a considerable

knowledge of the project site, the threatened

endangered species that were in the area of the

site, and even how those species used the

property. And in particular, fishing game had

been, well, there's evidence in the record of

a site visit, numerous meetings and

communications between fishing game and the

applicant, project designer. And in addition to

that, there's evidence in the record of fishing

game having conducted or being in the process

of conducting a study of threatened endangered

species on the neighboring Brock's site, which

is near, it's adjacent to this one. And these

are all gravel extraction operations. Is that

correct? That's correct. Both the box of prior

four-year-one case dealt with a gravel operation

just to the west of this one. And this project

is also a gravel operation. Is that an adjacent

property? How far apart are they? Are they

adjacent? I believe they do about each other,

although there's open land between them. And

I think of maybe even a stream that crosses.

So it's not, they're not right up against each

other, and it may be a mile or so in between,

maybe less. But there is evidence in the

record that that study was ongoing. And in

fact, that fishing game was able to come on

to this project site, the Leighton A White

site, as part of its engagement in that

study, to monitoring of these species outside

the Brock's property and on this property. And

I would point the court's attention to the

appendix, the appellant appendix at page 313,

314, and the testimony of Melissa

Dlparowski for the fishing game. Have you made

your three points yet? That was my third

point. Yes. Thank you. All right. What do you

think the issue in this case is for us to

decide? Well, Your Honor, the issue is

twofold. One, whether as a matter of law, a

study is required for all projects under

statute or the rule. Does it matter of

statutory law or regulatory law? Well, I

think you could you could go to either

place. I think the argument here is really

based on the regulation, not on the statute,

although the regulation flows from the

statute. And the second issue is, of

course, the sufficiency of the evidence

question, which on review is whether

there is adequate record evidence to

support the Water Council's finding. And

as Justice Bassett pointed out, this is a

deferential standard of review for

administrative decision. On that point, the

Water Council had appellants, I think,

uncontroverted expert testimony concerning

culverts that could have mitigated impact

to the spotted turtle to allow safe

passage. So what consideration did the

Water Council owe to that? Well, Your Honor,

they had that information before them.

The Department of Environmental Services

submitted the de novo hearing on appeal to

the council. However, the question they

are required to answer is whether the

Department of Environmental Services

was unreasonable or lawful when it

issued the permit. And therefore the

real question is what information did

the ES have at the time it issued the

permit to support its decision. Information

that came after may be relevant to

highlight points, but it can't be used

to show that the department made a

decision to not rely on information it

did not have at that time. So I think

the council heard that information and

took into account, but did not need to

give it great weight. And so, even in

its de novo review, it could disregard

that information? That's right, Your Honor.

And I think it's important to keep in

mind that experts, by definition, always

disagree with each other on some level.

I mean, there are many ways to design

a project, and just because one expert

has a particular design in mind, doesn't

mean that another design is deficient

under the standard. It just means that

there are different levels of review

and opinions by different experts.

What about the argument that 19H has

been amended now? I think if that had

existed, we wouldn't have this case

before us today, and that it was amended

simply to clarify that that's what it

always had. Yes, Your Honor. So the

rule was amended twice, three times

actually, since four near one.

Immediately after four near one was

issued, I believe it was in December

of 2019, an emergency rule was put

in place that did not mention studies.

And then after a rulemaking process on

June 2nd of 2019, DES did probably

get a new rule for 150319H that did

indeed require the applicants to

submit a wildlife study as part of the

process. I mean, I could represent

what I think their intent is, but it's

for the court to decide whether that is

a clarification or not, but in this

instance, the immediate response was

to take into account various things

that had been raised by this case

and by other constituents of the

department, and to try out a

different approach to say, well, if

we're going to be criticized for not

having enough information, let's ask the

applicant to give us more. But that does

not necessarily, and I would say it

does not, in fact, reflect a need that

the rule was clarifying the intent

of the primary rule. And as I mentioned,

there's been a third revision of the

rule that just took an effect, I

think it was December 22nd that this

last year, so a month ago, where

the rule has been changed. Again,

the study requirement has been removed

and now the Fish and Game Department

actually has promulgated its own rules

for how it reviews these projects,

which we'll go into next month.

If the court has no more questions,

I'll sum up and we can wrap.

All right, thank you. Well, as we've

heard on appeal, the

appellants have really failed to show

that either the DES

was unreasonable or unlawful in

issuing the permit, or that the

Water Council was unreasonable or

unlawful in denying the appeal.

And based on the clear law

and the facts in this case, the state

would respectfully request that the court

affirm the Water Council's denial.

Thank you very much. Thank you.

Counsel, you have two minutes.

Thank you, Your Honors. I'd just like

to very, very briefly

respond to the idea

that

DES didn't

have this study information available

to them at the time that they

issued the permit as justification

for the sufficiency of the evidence.

I,

you know, frankly

interpret that as a concession, that there was

insufficient evidence to issue the permit.

The argument

as I understand it then is

if DES

shuts its eyes and doesn't collect

information that it needs in order to make a

determination, and then later on appeal

whether before the Water Council...

If you say they shut their eyes, the case

is over because that's insufficient

as a matter of law to comply

with any rule or statute,

regardless of what the

Water Council says.

So that's an impractical

fact pattern, if not...

No, Your Honor. It's just that the

Water Council is arguing that, well,

we didn't know about this information

when they issued the permit, so it's okay

that they issued the permit. And we're

saying, right, you had a duty to know

about this before you issued the permit.

My point is they didn't have

no information. They didn't have

any information. Well, Your Honor,

I would respectfully refer back and say

that they didn't have information about

how those species used the property.

They had information about the species.

Well, the specific question was

about the culvert option, if you

will. So

what I heard Council say was

the Water Council doesn't.

In reviewing

DES's action,

they wouldn't have to

credit that particular

culvert option

in the review of DES's

decision, not that the

evidence of the

behavior of the species was

insufficient. I think there's...

It's a pretty narrow

question. Perhaps, Your Honor,

but I think that, again, had

the study been conducted and had this

culvert idea been brought up prior to,

that is evidence that

a pre-permit study would have been

awfully helpful here. But there also could

have been alternative to

the culvert option.

Certainly, and the pre-permit study may

have revealed those alternatives.

Let me just ask Mr. Aslin pointed out

that the rule has been

amended several times.

But the rule that you're arguing off of

that

you say codifies what

the understanding was

or should have been before that,

your argument seems to be that

it required DES

for a fishing game to do a

study. I'm just looking at the

rule. It seems that it just

says that a study should be

done. Thank you, Your Honor.

I see I'm out of time, but if I could just

clarify. So

the rule says

or the operative rule

at the time refers to the applicant

demonstrating.

We can, I think,

assume without conceding

necessarily that rather than

the applicant demonstrating, that is

the applicant paying for and conducting the study

that DES could

itself order a study.

But one way or the other, I think the study

is a condition precedent to issuing

an alteration of terrain permit. But it could be

a study that

should and could

be done by the applicant.

Absolutely it could, Your Honor.

In this case

my review of the fact pattern, it seems

as though

the way that the department and fishing game

sort of does things is they do

a lot of the investigating and provide conditions

which the applicant has to agree

to abide by. But I think that, yes,

had the applicant come in and said

you know, fishing game, here's our

study, this is how it,

this is how these species use the property

that I don't think would have

drawn an objection, although that issue

wasn't, I don't think before the court.

Thank you, Your Honor. Thank you, Council.

Case submitted. Courts in recess

Anyone listening?

The court will

resume the case of

Sturgeo v. Dover at

1030. Thank you.
