This is case 2021-0344, Martin Woodford and Jennifer Woodford trustees of the Woodford Family Trust versus Breff A9 DBA Night Custom Homes.

Good morning, Council.

I'm standing. Attorney Marshall, you reserved two minutes for a bottle.

That's correct.

Please proceed.

All right. Good morning, Chief Justice, fellow justices.

This case is about the plaintiffs agreeing to purchase from my client, Mr. Knight, in the courtroom today.

A house, which they constructed over a course of approximately a year.

The plaintiffs moved into the house, accepted the house.

The purchase includes certain covenants, putting certain restrictions on the property.

And then about a year and a half later, there were some issues with warranty, most of which were addressed.

And then later, the plaintiffs served my client with an RSA 359D notice.

So at that same time, the plaintiffs were in the process of clear-cutting over 100 trees, about 120 trees in the backyard, which was in violation of the covenants.

So there were some back and forth, and we ultimately ended up in litigation.

At trial, the plaintiffs had produced two experts predominantly regarding the structure analysis on the property, because their main claim was it didn't meet our codes.

This property, after it was built, was approved by the local enforcement officer as being code compliant.

Throughout the construction, the plaintiffs themselves were monitoring the work themselves as future homeowners throughout the process.

But the real crux at trial was, is their engineers admittedly in their reports, issued reports that were based on only information they received from the plaintiff,

which turns out to be false?

So are you challenging the weight that the trial court gave to these experts?

Are you challenging the fact that they were qualified as experts in the first place?

I'm challenging that their reports and opinions were admitted in because they were preliminary, and all the estimates for damages were based on conceptual.

I filed for motion for summary judgment because they failed to produce adequate expert.

That was denied.

The judge in the case said, oh, it'll go to the weight.

So we got the trial at that point and became the weight that was given to their opinions.

I mean, it was, it's in my briefs, they testified at trial.

Yeah, we did our analysis on the foundation, assuming no rebar at all.

Assuming it was on natural fill, not ledge.

Assuming it was back filled with clay type material, not clean sand.

All these assumptions that admitted at trial were all false.

The defendant didn't object.

The defendant agreed that the experts were qualified.

We agree that they were qualified as experts.

What we disagreed with is that the court relied on a opinion that was based on false information, which they acknowledged the day a trial was false.

And estimates that were based on a report based on false information.

And then the court awarded damages based on an estimate that is completely inaccurate because there was never analysis performed.

But the defendants expert just focusing on damages didn't rely on either a conceptual plan or a repair plan.

Isn't that correct?

Well, no, our expert for the defendant went through the analysis of the foundation with the correct information.

But in proffering evidence with respect to damages was her testimony based on either a conceptual plan or a repair plan?

No, her testimony with respect to the foundation was no repairs were necessary because it met code and was structural.

With respect to the structure, in her rebuttal opinion, she said, well, they didn't do an analysis that's required,

which a trial plaintiff's expert said, yeah, we need a full analysis.

Even the report says, before you do anything, you need to do a full analysis by a license engineer.

So where did her numbers come from?

Her numbers were after she inspected the property said she got estimates as to what it would take to address the plaintiff's concerns

because that cost was the same or less than the cost of doing a complete structural analysis.

And that's what was presented by plaintiffs.

Our expert with 40 years experience, six years on the board for us, vice chair with respect to the building code in New Hampshire,

who had experienced this, testified that my client did everything in accordance with usual customary standards.

This is the practice of how homes are constructed in New Hampshire.

And so what the court, where I feel the court lost it was they have reports that admittedly are incomplete reports,

incomplete analysis, then we get the court.

I had the experts on the stand and they said, where are you source of information?

Oh, we just asked the plaintiff, he told us.

Mr. Marshall, presumably you made all these arguments to the trial court about why they shouldn't,

why the court shouldn't accord these experts any weight.

We rarely get as detailed or as lengthy an order as we got from Judge Anderson in this case.

And he parsed it very carefully.

I believe this person on this issue, this person on this issue.

How can we get behind that?

Because I mean that no reasonable person can look at reports as they were presented by the plaintiff in this case.

They'd say, hey, this analysis isn't done.

You need to have an expert engineer come in and do a full analysis on this.

What they did essentially is say, there's a 2x4 in the ceiling and we don't think it's structurally sound.

They never analyzed whether or not if that 2x4 is part of a trust, the trust was sound.

And that's what our experts said had to take place.

So we don't, how can any reasonable person look at a report like that and then say, oh,

they admittedly say it's incomplete.

They admittedly testify it's based on false information.

But we're going to go ahead and assess damages based on estimates of all that incorrect information.

No reasonable analysis can do that with respect to the building.

With respect to covenants that the court acted, I think, unlawfully and unreasonably

because they go out and negotiate where the tree clearing is going to be done.

The plaintiff signs the covenant agreement and it says right in it,

you can't cut more than 15 trees a year without written approval of the developer.

It also says the developer can cut trees without getting an approval.

They agree on clearing limits.

The developer goes and clears.

Has it all done over two days?

The first time in the initial order the judge said, well, he did it over two days

and he only filed one notice with the registry about what was cleared.

And then we clarified that in reconsideration.

So you know you missed it, Your Honor.

But where is the legal error in the covenant issue and the counterclaim?

What's the legal error?

Because as I read your argument, it sounds like that any reasonable person

would have credited Mr. Knight's testimony.

I mean, that seems to be your argument.

Well, that's part of the argument.

The other part of the argument is if you're looking at a contract,

what we feel is the purchase of the covenant.

That's the agreement.

What the court did was say, oh, well, we were presented this video

advertised in the development, which was well prior to that agreement being done.

We think that's part of why he waived it because in that particular video

on a different lot, he said you can clear back to nice backyards.

He never addressed testimony that when they were looking at it,

Mr. Knight was looking at the lot as a whole,

so you got to look at what was done in the front and sides

because he had a certain look.

Never even considered that in the covenant, you can only do 15 trees.

So the court, I think, unlawfully found that there was waiver.

How can you have waiver of an agreement for something that happened

months before the agreement?

The agreement is the meeting of the minds at that time.

You do not consider something months before.

And so then there was also the other part that he claimed was waiver

is that he alleged a discussion when they were setting tree clearing limits

about a plane if a ledge, my client, when they walked to property

said you could go back this far from where the wall was.

But what the judge didn't factor in, again,

that conversation took place before the final clearing was done.

That was prior to that.

Never factored in that what they ended up with,

they agreed upon, was the clearing limits.

That's it.

That's how it's specified in the covenant themselves.

So there was no waiver.

The judge claimed waiver.

And I say whether there's waiver or not of finding a fact

made by the trial court.

I'm sorry.

Isn't that a whether or not there was waiver based on all

these conversations and back and forth?

Isn't that a finding a fact by the trial court?

That's not what was said.

The finding a fact and taking the judge's finding a fact

and applying it to the law, I understand waiver,

that you can waive an agreement, make a waiver of a condition

agreement after the agreement is done.

But you can't say, hey, we're going to negotiate a contract

and have an agreement of the meeting of the minds

and then say, oh, factor in what happened six,

10 months ago in a video when this agreement wasn't

even contemplated and say, oh, that's evidence of waiver.

Would you address the cross appeal?

As far as the attorney's fees with respect to the clearing?

The cross appeal.

Right.

Well, I felt I was doing that.

But on the cross appeal, there are.

Does the Consumer Protection Act claim apply?

Right.

Does that apply to one of the attorney's fees

out of the Consumer Protection Act?

No.

I think the court got that part right because all the

testimony was is that my client followed all usual

and customary practices and how he advertised, built,

and constructed the home.

If this court finds that that was a violation

of Consumer Protection Act, every home builder in

New Hampshire is violating the Consumer Protection Act.

So contractors can misrepresent it

if they're working with engineers.

He didn't misrepresent that.

He was working with an engineer.

An engineer from Coastal.

I spell that out in my brief.

How the plaintiff words it in their brief is inaccurate

on the facts.

My client was working with engineers.

Mr. Pooleod was an engineer?

Excuse me?

Mr. Pooleod was an engineer?

No.

He was working for Coastal's engineer as an assistant

to the engineer.

But as testified at trial, Coastal uses, has an engineer

who develops their programs or engineer stamp programs

to enter data to get it.

And in the end, the engineer stamped it because

my client anticipated because of other issues going on

during the bill that he was going to get sued in the end.

And so it is engineered.

Even our expert along with their expert and the town

building inspector said it's usual in Coastal

Mary, New Hampshire that when you have structural

components and need engineering, that's how it's done.

You go to an entity like Coastal and they engineer your plans.

In their initial 359G notice to my client,

they were looking at the wrong set of structural beams.

They didn't even know that.

They're experts.

When they're given the right ones at trial, they said,

yeah, all those structural components are correct.

The ironic part is they said, yes,

but we think the whole structure isn't correct

and we need full analysis on it.

And even in the brief at one point, plaintiff's brief,

they quote, they say that the defendant did not engineer

the home for, quote, fitness of installation

or structure of the house.

Yet they're given opinion and they didn't do that.

That's our point of our expert.

So on the one hand, they're managing Consumer Protection Act

and saying that didn't happen, but yet they didn't

even do it in giving their opinion.

That's the problem with the order from the court,

the court's order.

As far as, and then they get into how many houses

my client said he built.

He said he built over 120.

That trial that came out, I believe, was 125.

What the plaintiff wanted to do was discredit

that he described, I think, 30 of them as remodellings.

When he clarified a trial, when he does a remodel job,

he rips the house down to the foundation,

customizes it and starts over.

So he did, he made no representation,

misrepresentations at all throughout this process.

He had every component that had to be engineered

was engineered, stamped engineering beams.

The plaintiff's own experts admitted

that all those beams were adequate.

They just say you got to look at the full system analysis,

which our experts said, that's way too costly to do.

What is more economical and feasible

is to go in, add nails in these joints.

There was one lally column because some changes

were made in the basement to make a clear span

and it didn't get caught until after

that one lally column was undersigned

and she said you got to upsize that lally column.

All the total of that, based on estimates she's obtained,

which that was part of her accreditation,

is that she routinely gives estimates like this

for these type of situations.

We're at about $18,000.

What they, I saw my red light in, I apologize.

Thank you, attorney Marshal.

Gordon.

May it please the court.

I'm Joshua Gordon.

I represent Jennifer and Martin Woodford,

who are here in the courtroom this morning.

I want to start with the construction defects,

as my brother did.

The standard of reviews knows deference

to the fact finder on all the issues

and there's nothing in the superior court's order

suggesting any unreason, illogic, or neglect.

The court reviewed an enormous record

at 13-day trial, 89 exhibits, 1,500 pages.

Except here the court seemed to fill

in some of the gaps that were left by some of the,

well I'll use the word incomplete

or not concluded structural analyses.

I don't think that's what happened.

The court was, the Knight's expert

conceded violations in every place,

including the roof and the basement issues.

She only disputed the extent of violations,

the repair methodology, and the cost,

but conceded that there were violations everywhere

and the Woodfords, both their experts,

could see those violations with their naked eye

without any prompting by anybody

by a trip up to the attic and to the basement

that there were code violations

that experts would understand

are code violations just by looking at them.

Even though things were approved

at the point of certificate of occupancy

by the local building inspector.

The local building inspector is immune from suit

and the law is that the contractor is required

to meet code and the fact that the contractor

builds to the building inspector

should not be condoned by anybody

and that's not what the law is.

So I don't think that's a defense

to the consumer protection action.

Does this support for the trial court's conclusion

that contractors in New Hampshire

typically satisfy the building inspector

as opposed to satisfying the code itself?

Is there any testimony to that effect?

Yes, there is some testimony to that

and Mr. Gill, I think, who was the framer,

talked about that.

I don't think he was an expert in any area

but he obviously was framing

and he said they had to do that

so Knight talked about that

but to the extent that's true

I hope building in New Hampshire don't fall down.

I think the more important issue

in the Consumer Protection Act

is that the court focused on

what's common in the industry

to...

It's not reasonable to believe

that a man who's been in the business

for 30 years can mistake the guy

at the lumberyard for an engineer.

He's not an engineer

and I'm sure they are competent

in what they do but this was a custom home

from the ground up

that needed engineering

and I understand Mr. Knight

might not have wanted to incur

the costs of expensive professionals

but he was building custom home

and needed an engineer

and so the fact that this is the way

it's done in the construction industry

that's great for probably

vast majority of buildings

but when it's not great

this is what happens

you get code violations

and the Consumer Protection Act

is a Consumer Protection Act

not a Business to Business Protection Act

and in this case

the Woodford's were consumers

one time consumers of

building services

and they didn't know

who at the lumberyard

what distinguishes this

from just the standard breach of contract claim

it is a custom house

and engineers were involved

but it just

seems pretty straightforward

breach of contract

and that would take it outside of 358A

is a standard contract

in the one sense

the problem here is that

or the Consumer Protection Act issue

Mr. Knight lied to the Woodford's

repeatedly and some of those lies

seem sort of inconsequential

how many houses he visited

where is the rascality

where is the rascality

the rascality is the lying

about an engineer

how about charging your client $7,000

for final plans that are never produced

charging my clients for

exactly there's

repeated lies

that Mr. Knight told

the Woodford's

what statements

are you relying on

I think the quotes

are laid out in my brief but

I only found one quote

no I think there's three or four

where he said my engineer is looking

at this I'm going to go back

and do this with my engineer

don't talk to the

architect it wasn't an architect

several three four times

both before construction

and during construction

Mr. Knight essentially told

the Woodford's

that there was an engineer

was material misrepresentation

raised in your notice of appeal

as a basis for the CPA claim

yes I think so

I guess

I think it was

I think we raised

as I read it

your notice of appeal was really talking about

this relying on the

practice that was the basis for

Judge Anderson's conclusion

and that was

the

genesis of the material misrepresentation

that the

industry practices

some assumption that there was an engineer

back behind the software somewhere

but the misrepresentations

to Woodford's

is what

the court should have focused on

and not what is industry practice

that's the industry's business that Woodford's

take no position on

is rascality something that we

determine de novo or do we give

deference to the trial court

it's deference to the trial court

rascality but I think

the issue of construction

of the consumer protection

act is the issue of law

and where the focus

is in the consumer protection

act whether it's between two businesses

over here or the business

to the consumer that's

the issue of law that

the court looks at de novo

I think the Hughes

opinion says that

and I think Sideris and

Moran the

the

citing a contractor and the roofing contract

also suggests that rascality is an objective

standard yes

yes

other evidence besides the

former

the other lot being

cleared and the representation

that

your clients could cut to the stone wall

both of which I understand

happened before this

restriction document

was agreed to the

evidence so was there any other evidence

to support the waiver

yes found the trial court

the Woodford's and Mr. Knight met

the site at some point

it's maybe more than once

and had a conversations

was that before or after

the covenants were

accepted

the covenants were accepted at

the time of contract

and so this would have been

this would have been

sometime after that

and the

the

the parties had a conversation

and the court

heard testimony about it

and determined that

he said kind of thing

and determined that

there was a waiver that Mr. Knight

encouraged the Woodford's to cut back

to the wall and it's not

just on this 2010 video

that's just corroborating

that other

that Mr. Knight himself

cut back to the wall but he encouraged

them to cut back to the wall

and the Woodford's had told Mr. Knight

that they had teenagers

who played outdoor sports

and they needed a big backyard

they told them they might want to put a swimming pool

in some point so cutting back

to the trees

making a big backyard was

discussed and that's what the court found

if there's no more questions

I'll take my seat

Thank you just briefly

I'll pick up we left off

there was a discussion

about the clearing limits

after the covenants were in place

but it's part of that as Mr. Knight

testified at trial you considered front

side yards and backyard as the total clearing

because it was his development

his control of that

and other than have a maybe a little

bit larger backyard he had a bigger

side yard and bigger front cleared front yard

that's the issue but

the covenants that specified

that at the time they set the clearing limits

certainly the plaintiff knew

the covenants and what the conditions were

and that if he wanted to cut more

it's 15 trees a year not 120

clear cut all at once which at court

testified and nobody disputed

you agree with Mr. Gordon that there were

the discussions after the covenants

that there's some dispute about

there was a discussion

to set the actual

final clearing limits which is how every

lot is done

after the agreement

was entered into because you do it just before

you pick the location of the house and set

that's why it's case by case

but it was set then and that's how it worked

there is a dispute as to what

was said in that discussion

my client disputes that he ever said

go back to the back wall

but when you

muddled through all this and you have

these expert reports but I don't believe

adequate I mean if we're going to start

letting experts speculate

and do incomplete analysis and base reports

of false testimony

as to what the facts are and say

yeah that's good proof damages where are we

going to end up and in this case we even

had Mr. Mayo give damages on

repairing some stuff inside

gave analysis on cross examination

it turns out based on his time

it took 20 days but his estimate was

for 45 days of labor I pointed

that out to the court

they're in Michigan he still based

the damages off an

incorrect admittedly false

estimate

and we get to the rest of it

this

my client

produce an expert that said listen

we're looking at their opinion

they never had the full structural analysis

plaintiff claims that their client

was this deer in the headlights

they don't know anything it's the first custom house

we built then how come

their experts rely solely on

that alleged inexperienced plaintiff

to give them all the facts

that they based their reports on

that both ways

as I did in my briefs to

back in vacate the order thank you

very much council the case is submitted

quick bites counseling

wise first
