This is case 2020-0236, Jeffrey F. Raymond,

trustee of J&R Realty Trust versus Town of Plastow.

Good morning, counsel.

I understand you've reserved two minutes.

Yes, Your Honor.

Thank you.

Thanks for bearing with me while I unpack my materials.

May it please the court.

My name is Peter Nicosia.

I am the attorney for the petitioner in this action,

J&R Realty Trust.

I want to make some preliminary comments just to focus the board

on procedurally where we're at and frame the issues a little more

clearer than I'm happy to answer any questions that you have.

So as a reminder, there are two municipal actions

that are being evaluated, that were evaluated by the trial

court and are up on appeal here.

They were dueling requests or alternative requests

for relief at the local zoning board of appeals

on this property.

One was the administrative review of the building

inspector's decision about the zoning classification.

And the second was a companion variance request

to the extent that there was disagreement

on the petitioner's view of how the zoning classification

should take place.

So separate analysis need to take place

as part of this appellate review.

The main issues are really two-fold at the trial court,

and that are up on appeal here.

One, with respect to the issue of the building inspector's

original classification and the ZBA upholding that,

the trial court did not deal with that issue

as part of its findings in its order.

Now, granted, this was an administrative review

of the record that was on file,

and that full record is part of your appendix here.

But the issue is that there are two uses

under the local zoning bylaws, a trade shop

and a contractor storage yard.

For all intents and purposes, the distinction

between those two is really the exterior storage

of materials and the exterior storage

of heavy equipment and heavy vehicles.

Other than that, the uses are fairly homogenous.

They do give some representative examples of trade shops,

which are more subcontractors, mechanical contractors,

electricians, plumbers, HVAC, and they

seem to give representative examples

in the contractor storage yard as general contractors

and carpenters.

The issue here, though, and as you'll review the appendix,

in the actual applications to the Zoning Board of Appeals,

the applicant, the petitioner here,

made the voluntary stipulations

and accepted voluntary conditions

that it would not engage in those activities

of exterior storage of materials,

heavy equipment, or heavy vehicles,

therefore taking it out of a contractor storage yard definition.

That was the application before the Zoning Board of Appeals.

The Zoning Board of Appeals decision

to ultimately find that it was a contractor storage yard

is not commensurate with what the application was

before it.

And more problematic is that the Superior Court

not only didn't engage, not only didn't agree with that,

but didn't engage in any analysis in its decision

about that particular issue.

There were no findings in the Superior Court's decision

making the determination between one user or another.

So can we decide that de novo based on the record

and reading the ordinance,

or do we need to send that back to the trial court?

The standard is whether or not

the interpretation of the local bylaw was erroneous.

And I do believe you can look at the administrative record

and make a de novo finding on that,

or you have the option to remand it back

to the Superior Court for further findings

on that particular issue.

So that's issue number one.

Now I know there is a portion

in the administrative record

where the building inspector actually commented

during the public hearing process

at the Zoning Board of Appeals

as we were making this very argument

that if you look at the face of the applications

that were before the board,

these are the stipulations

and therefore we should follow

in this other use definition.

The building inspector commented

as part of the process that he felt

that that was a very good argument.

And nonetheless, the Zoning Board of Appeals

still found the way that they did

and found the latter use classification.

And again, once it went to the Superior Court,

the judge makes no findings whatsoever on that issue,

let alone a comparative analysis of the two use categories.

But can't we review the record

and if there's evidence to support

the ZBA's decision in the record,

can't we make that determination

rather than sending it back to the trial court?

You can, but I don't believe

there's evidence in the record to support that.

The problem is that you have to take

the face of what the applications are

with those uses extracted

and compare it to the unambiguous language

of the use definitions

that are contained in the local bylaws.

That's the problem here.

Because anybody could come forward

with an application as a trade shop

and that allows the Zoning Board of Appeals

to impute to them uses they think they might do

as opposed to uses they actually are asking to do.

And therefore there's a presumption of failure.

So how does that relate

to how your clients currently using

other properties in the town?

So that's issue number two.

You know, this local hearing

and ultimately the superior Judge St. Hilaire's decision

became a referendum on a parent

or alleged violations relating to other properties

or conditions of other properties.

And that effectively dominated the lower courts hearing

and that dominated the ultimate hearings

in front of the boards.

I understand the case law

that allows Zoning Board of Appeals members

to take into consideration their own personal knowledge

and life's experiences and things of that nature.

However, what they did was they supplanted that

for any analysis about the functionality

of this particular site.

There was no analysis as to why

with those use limitations

this site could not work

or would not give rise to those types of violations.

So let me, when you look at the record

I wanna draw two distinctions.

The one site, the 213 Main Street

which is in Plastow is an undeveloped property

that had some exterior storage.

It was used as a transitional property

while they were waiting to build

what will become the flagship for this ultimate tenant

that would solve all of those issues.

There was gonna be a new warehouse for storage,

new retail, new office, new everything.

That would have resolved those issues

on that particular site.

And then the other site they considered

was outside the jurisdiction in Haverle

which was another non-conforming site

which has no similar characteristics

to the site in nature.

And again, the purpose of developing this property

was to cure all of those issues

and allow this site to be successful.

We don't know what the Haverle restrictions are.

We don't have the Haverle zoning ordinance.

Nope, nope, you don't have that.

But the problem is that the Zoning Board of Appeals

didn't go through the analysis

about what the functionality of this new site would be

and make findings on why we either met

or didn't meet the criteria

for either the use categorization

or a use variance analysis.

They just said, look at 213,

look at Lancaster and Haverle.

Those sites are not functional.

Therefore, guilty by association,

no functionality on this site.

Is the ZBA supposed to just ignore violations

in other properties?

Nope, the ZBA should consider those things

as an analysis here.

And, but they also should distinguish

between the characteristics and capabilities

of those properties.

213 had no structure on it.

Lancaster Street in Haverle was a much different

multi-tenant commercial mill building

that didn't have the site functionality

that this site was gonna have.

Neither properties had warehouses.

Neither properties had sophisticated retail facilities.

And the ZBA had the proposed site plan.

And the ZBA had the proposed site plan here.

Including the warehouse.

Including the warehouse to show all of those issues.

They were completely diverted

in terms of their entire analysis,

looking to redress and seek retribution

for what they considered to be non-compliance

on a completely unrelated property

of which development of this property would have solved.

So, but there was heavy equipment at 213.

You'd acknowledge that.

The tenant, whoever was running the business,

there was heavy equipment there.

There were some lulls there,

as you'll see in the administrative record,

which we stipulated as well,

would not be part of the site functionality on this site.

So they were gonna put those vehicles somewhere else?

Else, correct.

And again, the owner of this property is,

is not, it was a separate trust entity

that was gonna be leasing it to this end user.

The end user was the owner of these other properties.

But there was no analysis done

about why this site doesn't work.

It was just imputed because of the issues

with the other sites, which are completely different.

If there's a restriction,

the applicant would be tied to the proposal

if there's a restriction for no parking of lulls.

That, if they were to violate that,

that could result in revocation or an enforcement.

Correct.

So the purveyor of those types of violations

of a special condition is the building inspector.

But they basically just presumed failure.

They disregarded the fact

that they do have a zoning enforcement officer

to deal with those issues.

And we never got the chance to do anything.

Is I understand your position?

Compliance is a proper consideration.

The applicant's compliance at the other property

is a proper consideration,

but you need to consider it in the context

of the application before the ZBA.

In the characteristics of the two properties.

So for instance, 213 Main Street

does not have a structure on it.

There was no ability to have,

to eliminate outside storage.

We didn't have the...

But isn't compliance compliance?

I mean...

Not necessarily, because if you look at

what some of the issues were

in the administrative record,

they are not significant.

They are not dealing with

site functionality of heavy equipment.

There was an issue with a temporary sign

that was staged on the property.

Dumpsters.

Dumpsters, visibility of dumpsters.

And again, all of those issues were all resolved

and addressed by that site plan set

on how this site was going to function.

Well, not addressed, but distinguished from...

Distinguished, correct.

And the other site, my understanding is,

was actually grandfathered

as a contractor storage yard.

Correct.

What didn't happen here,

at least at Superior Court,

was a separate analysis of whether this proposal

fell into which category?

Correct.

Okay.

And the one thing I also want to make reference to

is that, and I know my time is almost up,

but this is presently a non-conforming property

with a pre-existing dilapidated residential use on it.

Zoning creep has set in over the years

on Plastow's main economic thoroughfare,

which is this road.

And we are surrounded by similar businesses,

including some other construction companies

and other contracting companies.

This would bring it into consistency

with the zoning planning objectives of Plastow.

There would be no injury to the neighborhood.

And effectively not allowing us an analysis

of the functionality of this site was problematic.

So with that, I will...

I've reserved some time to respond,

but I appreciate the opportunity.

Thank you, justices.

Attorney Cleary.

Good morning.

Charles Cleary for the town of Plastow.

May it please the court.

Starting from the beginning,

the code enforcement officer

has the zoning ordinance in front of him

and the applicant's proposal from the site plan application.

And he knows from that proposal

that this is going to be a sales storage installation

of windows, siding, roofing, decks and gutters.

The applicant's a construction contractor.

And the code enforcement officer

is savvy enough to know

that construction requires both installation construction,

which requires materials and demolition.

You can't re-side a house or re-single a house

without removing the old material.

But a contractor's storage yard

doesn't equate to, let me say,

the flagship office of a construction company

that a contractor's storage yard doesn't,

at least the way I'm reading it,

doesn't anticipate the offices and the engineers

and the planners and the contractors

are gonna be working from that.

It's a storage yard.

So I'm having a hard time comparing that

with the retail office and warehouse

that was proposed for this site.

So when the code enforcement officer

is looking at the site plan for J&R gutters

and recognizing it's a construction contractor,

he's simply trying to match it up

against the permitted uses

or the non-permitted uses in the ordinance.

Based on his general understanding

of what was gonna go on there,

siding, roofing, decks requires a lot of material.

16th.

Maybe they'll store it somewhere else.

Maybe they'll store it in the warehouse.

Right?

And we will get to that, that came up later.

But as to the office's determination,

his general assumption was this was gonna be used

for the general construction purpose.

Would you get to that now then, please?

Okay.

So in their variance request,

the applicant makes a stipulation.

Apparently, Felder was necessary to convince the ZBA

that this would not be a standard contractor's yard,

but rather they would store all the material

inside the building.

Two principles came into play

when the ZBA heard that stipulation.

One, mentioned by my opponent,

that the ZBA members can use their own experience,

observations, common sense and knowledge

to reach conclusions.

The ZBA members knew about the 213 Main Street

operated or occupied by a related company.

Jane, are you?

Have we ever stated that proposition

that a ZBA, when members are considering their own

evidence, their own knowledge of an area

that goes to compliance on other properties?

My understanding that principle is a broad principle.

It's for the benefit of the town.

You want the ZBA to take matters into consideration

that they're aware of.

They're all members of the town.

I'm not aware of any specifics

as to what limitations are on that knowledge

and observations and experience.

I would think we'd want it to be broad.

It helps them make good decisions.

It helps them understand.

And this is a site where their own department,

the town has issued five code violations.

What about the Haverhill, excuse me?

What about the Haverhill, Massachusetts property?

So the only time the Haverhill, Massachusetts

property comes up is when the appellant

makes an offer of proof to the ZBA

because they're paying attention

to the 213 Main Street property.

And it's no, no, no, that's not

what this is going to look like.

This is going to be a relocation

of our Haverhill mass site.

And the chairman, following his right to observe

and gain knowledge, drives across the border

and takes a look at the Haverhill mass site

and finds that it presents very similarly.

So I live in a ramshackle house.

And I want to build a new house.

And they go look at my old house

and say, we don't want that kind of house here.

I think the ZBA is looking at other contractors' storage

yards being operated by the same controlling entity.

If this isn't going to be a contractor's storage yard

because it has a warehouse, doesn't that impact

how they view these other properties?

And before I leave that, I'll cut myself off.

Does the Plastow ordinance have anything in it

that prohibits someone from seeking relief at the ZBA

if they have outstanding violations on other properties?

I'm not aware of that, Your Honor.

It's a good question.

But the ZBA did take this case on and heard it.

So the next point gets into credibility,

which this court has also ruled

that the ZBA has the right to assess

credibility of offers of proof.

So the offer of proof to the ZBA is,

don't be concerned.

We're going to voluntarily stipulate

that this won't look like 213 Main Street.

This won't look like Haverhill.

All the material will be inside the building.

It'll be a clean, safe site.

Well, when you say voluntarily stipulate,

really what they were doing was proposing,

not that it be voluntary,

but they were voluntarily submitting themselves

to what would be a binding restriction going forward

as a condition of approval, right?

Exactly, exactly.

So they didn't really have to rely on any voluntariness.

It was going to be the deal.

If you got the variance, that was going to be the deal.

Right, and if the ZBA had made that a condition of approval,

that would have been the case,

but it didn't get that far.

The ZBA assessing the credibility of the stipulation,

knowing what it knew about the other sites,

about the violations unremedied,

simply felt that either it's unlikely

this applicant was going to adhere to a condition

when it didn't adhere to the zoning ordinance,

or perhaps the manner of operation of this business,

either because it's so busy, staffing issues,

equipment issues, whatever the case,

doesn't have the ability to manage a site.

But how does it make sense to sort of assess the credibility

or the likelihood of compliance of the applicant

when a variance once granted runs with the land?

They could get the variance and sell the property

with the variance the next day,

and so all those issues, you're measuring it

against somebody who might not even use the property.

Correct, but the record will show

that the appellant argued this was gonna be

their flagship headquarters for the property.

We expected them to use it.

They were concerned with how they'd use it.

You say there, you mean J.R. Gutting?

J.R. Gutters, exactly.

So the tenant.

The tenant, right.

And in this day and age, of course,

all attorneys recommend their clients

use separate LLCs for each property owned,

but I think the court, and we should look at

who's controlling it, it's not completely separate.

And J.R. Gutters is the...

So how do we deal with the trial court's

avoidance of the administrative ruling?

Trial court said it was all one board,

it's all one decision.

I don't have to separately analyze, essentially,

whether this is a contractor storage yard

or a trade business.

Right.

The only thing I could add, Your Honor, on that

is in the record, in the definition of trade business,

it has two requirements.

One, the business owner has to hold state

or local licenses for the trade.

Construction contractors aren't licensed in New Hampshire.

Secondly, it specifically excludes construction contractors

from that definition at the end of it.

So they couldn't be a trade business.

That was just a hope of the appellate.

So we only need to reach the decision

on the variance in your view?

I believe so, yes.

Aren't there contrary arguments

about what constitutes a trade business?

And whether, in fact, this particular outfit

is a contractor in the way a contractor storage yard

is defined?

So it gets back to how Plastile processes

these applications.

The code enforcement officer making the initial

determination of use, simply trying to characterize it,

doesn't have the ability to look at stipulations

and evidence that the applicant submits the ZBA later.

He makes it based on what's before him,

and I think that's proper.

And in this record, someone on the ZBA said

that by submitting for the variance,

the contractor admitted they were a contractor

storage yard.

So it was an unusual situation where the appellate applied

for the variance and the appeal and zoning administrative

decision at the same time?

Not all that unusual as alternative forms of relief, right?

Right, whether they had to do it at the same time

as a question and may have caused someone

to reach that conclusion.

Right.

So the bifurcation of those processes,

is that before us?

Is that an argument that was made either to the ZBA

or the child court?

I don't believe so.

So based on the rules that the ZBA is

on to follow, based on the lack of any real evidence going

to the FRIVC arteria, we believe

that the ZBA rendered a just result on the variance

and denied it.

The accuracy and the permanency of the stipulation

would have been essential to granting that variance

because of what it knew about the appellants, other sites,

and business operations.

And it just didn't find it credible that that would

exist.

That's all I have at this time.

Thank you, Attorney Cleary.

Attorney Navotian.

Very briefly.

The administrative appeal and the variance

appeals will file the separate appeals

in front of the zoning board of appeals.

We requested separate motions for re-hearing on both of those.

They were simply conjoined appeals

at the superior court level.

And they become conjoined appeals here.

But I would submit to you that the court does

have to engage in a separate analysis of the evaluation

of the rulings on both of those issues.

That's number one.

Number two, Jeffrey Raymond is the trustee of the trust,

which is a land-holding entity.

John Raymond, his brother, is the principal

of J&R Gutters, who was going to be the tenant in the property.

Number three, there is no evidence in the record at all

about any violations of Haverhill.

There's the only evidence in the record of Haverhill

is that when we reference the property,

that is what we're transitioning to, to this property.

I believe the chairman or one of the members

went out and take a drive by to the facility out in Haverhill.

Well, the facility out in Haverhill

was an old factory mill building with a multitude of tenants

and a multitude of exterior conditions

that have nothing to do with the tenant here

or the property owner here.

Is that in the record?

That is in the record.

So if you, you know, it's unfair to impute conditions

that don't relate to the litigants here in that situation.

And then, lastly, do you agree

that the Haverhill property only got injected into this

because your client referred to it?

It did, and it's appropriate to consider it.

But if anything, that should have been a benefit to our process

because it showed the very need for the facilities

that the tenant wanted and needed to operate here

because we didn't have the infrastructure in Haverhill.

We had no warehouse.

We had no exterior storage.

We had no, nothing but more of a mill space

which was undersized for the outfit.

It was the very reason why we wanted to develop this parcel.

And then lastly, the same situation in 213 in Plastow,

it was a time period where they had just bought

this property to be developed

and they were transitioning.

And they had some exterior storage there

as a staging process to move into the next property.

There was no structure there, so.

Thank you for your time.

Thank you very much, council.

Case is submitted for some reason.

All right.
