This is case 2022-0202 Kima Lemie, LLC at all, versus town of Salem.

Good morning. I understand you're splitting time with the town.

12 minutes. Attorney Lick, three minutes for attorney Lowry, and you reserved one minute.

That's correct, Your Honor. Thank you.

Please proceed.

Good morning. May it please the court.

My name is Derek Lick.

I'm here representing the intervener below and the appellant today,

DSM MB1 LLC, that's short for Dumoulas Supermarkets, also known as Market Basket.

We are here today on a case involving a land use and a planning board matter,

but this presents an interesting case because it is much different than a typical

land use case involving a site development.

This one actually presents an issue fundamental to property ownership rights

and whether or not a property owner is going to be able to control

and have some oversight of development of its own parcel.

The facts here are unique.

In all of my years of land use practice, I've never been in a situation such as this

where an application is presented to a land use board without the authorization

of the property owner.

My client in this instance, DSM owns the property at issue.

It is a shopping center plaza in Salem.

It is comprised of multiple buildings including an old Kmart store,

which is the store at issue here, as well as a Staples, a Walgreens,

a Lens Crafters, another Market Basket store, and shared parking areas,

shared access roads, all shared by all these multiple tenants.

In this case, when submitting an application to the planning board

to reuse the Kmart store, which was then abandoned,

the less e, at that point in time, submitted an application

and used its own name and its own signature as the quote-unquote owner of the parcel.

And Judge Horan found that in as much as the property was subject to a 75-year lease,

the tenant constituted the effective owner for purposes of development of the property,

which is done pursuant to this planning board procedure.

And in this case, the focus is on what do the site plan regulations say

and how do they define an owner.

And here-

But they don't really define an owner, do they?

Well, they do, Your Honor.

They don't say fee simple absolute.

At least, I didn't read it that way.

No, that is correct, Your Honor.

They do, however, define it as owner of record,

both in the application that is completed and further down-

Does it matter whether the 75-year lease is recorded or not?

No, it does not.

In this instance.

You know, 400 years ago, a 99-year lease was equivalent to the conveyance of title.

Why isn't- things have sped up over the years.

Why isn't 75 years good enough now?

Well, there's a couple reasons in this instance, Your Honor.

First of all, here, we don't have ownership of the entire parcel.

Here, it is very important.

The lease at issue is for the box building itself.

That is it.

There is no full bundle of ownership rights that has been handed over

to the lessy for the entire parcel.

Rather, what they have is a long-term lease for a particular building on the lot.

And why does that- I agree that's accurate-

but why does that matter for interpretation of the subdivision regulation-

or the site plan regulations?

Because in the case of the site plan review regulations,

the planning board is not looking to just the building and determining

whether or not the application meets all of the criteria of the town regulations.

In fact, they look to the entire site plan.

And one of the primary reasons my client was here and was concerned

about this application and actually objected to it

is because they have serious and significant concerns about parking

and traffic in the development.

But all of those can be voiced during the hearings on the substance of the proposal.

Well, that may be true, but my client also has rights

with respect to the parking and roadways outside of the planning board process.

And what happens here is we put the cart before the horse.

Rather than letting the landlord and the tenant work out what rights may exist as between them,

whether or not this particular use will impair the rights of the other tenants

and indeed overburden parking so the other tenants can't have their patrons have places to park,

whether it'll be backups throughout the development, whether it will be unsafe.

We just heard a case- you just heard a case about an accident in a parking lot at a market basket store.

This presents a perfect scenario like that.

Market baskets could be on the hook as the property owner for what occurs in that parking lot.

And if you allow a tenant, for example, to go before a planning board

and create an unsafe condition backed up traffic on a daily basis,

people trying to rotate through the parking lot,

trying to find parking spaces while pedestrians are trying to cross.

Ultimately, market basket could be responsible.

It's for that reason that market basket should have some control

and have the ability to authorize whether or not it's tenants.

Sorry about a 50,000-foot level.

What bothers me about your argument is that as the lessor,

you had the ability to set the rules for this

and you could have laid out very clearly,

you can't do this, you can't do this without our written permission.

And evidently, that isn't what the lease says.

Well, the lease does provide that there are shared easements and obligations as between all of the tenants.

So our view that it is, in fact, in the lease.

But importantly, that's a different case.

We're not talking about what rights and obligations flow through the lease.

What we are talking about is what do the site plan review regulations

for the town of Salem say with respect to who is an owner

and who has the authority to sign on behalf of the owner

with respect to site plan review?

Well, why wasn't Judge Hurran correct in saying that in the context of these regulations

that the petitioner here is in effect the owner?

Because it would take out of the both the site plan application

and the ordinance the terms owner of record.

Both on the application, it specifically asks.

You have to identify the name, mailing address

and telephone number of the owner of record

if it's not the applicant.

And then there has to be written permission from the owner.

There would be no say owner of record though there it doesn't.

It doesn't.

But again, you have to read this in context, right?

I agree.

You're identifying the owner of record.

But then you're saying a different owner has rights to ultimately sign the authorization.

We don't think we think you have to read that together and in context.

And when you do so, reading those together means you look to the owner of record.

There's been discussion below where Judge Hurran looked further on in the application

where owner of record was even further defined when it came to a butters

and directed folks to the tax records.

It's our view, you should look at all of this as a whole

and that is what I think a reasonable person would believe

when reviewing the application and I think what the town is intending.

And I think it's important for policy reasons

that there be a black letter bright line rule.

Every time an applicant comes before a planning board.

Even if it were a 99 year lease?

Even if it were a 99 year lease, your honor.

And I think the reason for that is the planning boards and zoning boards,

they're not in a position to get down in the weeds and review leases

and understand who has what rights, how far and why those rights may go

or how narrow those rights may be.

So a bright line rule makes it simple.

If they're the owner of record on the tax cards,

that's what everybody looks to for butters notices, for example.

That allows the town to have confidence that in this case,

at least the owner of record, the one that is identified to us,

the town pays taxes for it.

We know that they have authorized this use.

Granted, there may be a dispute as between the tenant and the owner.

In this case, as to whether or not this particular use is in fact allowed

given that it's going to impact other tenants in a significant way

based on engineering studies and reviews.

But that is not for the town to decide.

And ultimately, it's not for the planning board

to have to figure out and wade through at the beginning of an application.

This case presents a perfect scenario.

If you're a planning board, you're trying to find out what to do.

You don't have the lease in front of you, but if it is presented,

you would be asking too much of a planning board to say,

well, are these leasehold rights enough to justify ownership?

Well, so are you saying the facts and circumstances

or the details of the relationship and the particular lease are...

Are you saying they're irrelevant to the legal issue in front of us?

Yes, they are.

Because here you're interpreting the site plan review regulations

and the site plan review regulations make no references to leasehold interests,

no references to leases,

and the town shouldn't be obligated to try and figure it out,

figure out what the legal rights are of the parties.

That's a bridge too far for a planning board.

I think it's very simple to let it go as a bright line test.

The towns know one way or the other is the owner on it,

and if the owner is not on it, again,

the solution to that is let the tenant and the owner work it out,

or if necessary, litigation can be instituted to find out

what the proper interpretation of the lease is.

So whether it's a 75-year lease, or as here,

maybe it's a 75-year lease,

but there are only 42 years to go if all the options are exercised,

none of that matters from your perspective.

That is true, but I think it's...

A different fact is even more important.

They don't have a full unfettered lease

over all of the parcel at issue in this case.

They have a lease over a portion of this parcel,

and that lease does not give them rights

to do whatever they want with the rest of the property.

But I thought you just said the terms of the lease

shouldn't matter to us, and now you're saying,

well, but it does matter because here they don't have

the whole control over the whole parcel.

My view of it is this, the lease does not matter

when it comes to review understanding, interpreting,

and reviewing the site plan review regulations.

But if the court is going to go there,

and if the court is going to say,

well, some leasehold rights may be enough,

the leasehold rights that should be enough

would be those that provide full total control

over all of the parcels.

And indeed a lot of the case law cited

in the briefs back and forth focus on that very issue.

There are occasions where towns will allow

a quote-unquote lease, a less or,

a less e, with full interest in the property

to go forward as an act as a landowner

because they essentially have the full ownership

of the property.

The property owners turned over all rights to them,

but we don't have that here.

We have a tiny part of the overall parcel

that ultimately is trying to go forward with the change,

but that change will impact the overall parcel

and the planning board looks at the overall parcel.

At the extent to which a town makes the decision

about whether it should be the owner of record

or less e or the extent or the nature of the lease,

that's all, those are all policy decisions

and they get embodied in the site plan review regulations.

That's correct, Your Honor.

And here it's important to remember the planning board

ultimately determined that the application

was not complete, they were not going to go forward.

They were interpreting their own site plan review

regulation saying this is not complete,

the owner did not sign.

And the trial court ultimately overturned

that local land use board's decision

interpreting its own ordinance and said,

I think being a less e is enough.

You just want to follow up on Justice Bassett's question.

You talked about a bright line task.

How does that comport with what you just told Justice Bassett,

which I heard that municipalities would have the flexibility

in developing their site plan regulations?

Well, the way I look at it is they have flexibility

in drafting the regulations and here what the town did

is it identified what it wanted, it wanted record owners.

So here the town did exercise that right,

they explained what they wanted and they should be allowed

to keep that in place.

So to the extent that's providing flexibility,

I think that's the right approach.

You should look to what the town has said

in its site plan review regulations.

I suppose a town could define an owner

in its site plan review regulations as something else.

Somebody with a 99-year lease, somebody with a 99-year lease

over the entire parcel.

I wouldn't object to that so long as it's being interpreted

based on what the site plan review regulations,

how they read.

So I think that is the flexibility.

The town can draft the ordinance however it wants.

Here our position is when you read this as a whole,

it's clear what the town wants.

The town wants a record owner as identified

on the tax rolls and provided they do that,

then they are in fact treated as an owner.

Just to confirm because this is interpretation

of the regulations that's the NOVA review.

That is correct, your Honor.

The standard here is the NOVA review.

You folks will take a first look at it

and it's your determination that controls.

Thank you.

Thank you, Attorney League.

Attorney Lowery.

Pardon me.

Good morning.

May it please the court?

I am Susan Lowery.

I represent the town of Salem this morning.

I am here to speak not about the lease

or the interpretation of the lease.

The only thing that I am here to speak about

is the zoning ordinance and the interpretation

of the zoning ordinance.

We have no position on any of the respective

property rights bringing from the lease.

And that's really the whole point.

Attorney League touched on this.

From the town's perspective,

the town does not decide property rights.

If you look at 674, 43, and 44,

that outlines the authority given to the planning board

to review site plan review.

Pardon me.

44, 674, 44 outlines a whole page of things

that the planning board may do,

things that the planning board shall do.

In that list, it includes,

that they shall provide procedures

for the board in reviewing site plans.

That would include the procedure

to require the owner of records permission.

I would also point the court to 676.4,

which gives the planning board the power

to determine when the application is complete.

This court is, I know, well aware

that municipalities only have the powers

that are expressly granted to them

by the legislature.

They can't go beyond those.

And as an extension, the planning board

then is so limited by these statutes.

The regulations were adopted by ordinance?

Yes.

When was the ordinance adopted?

This specific permission was adopted,

and I am just going based on my memory,

but it was over a decade before this even took place.

Before what?

Over a decade before this particular application

came before the board.

So it wasn't, it hasn't been from the beginning,

but it has been for quite some time.

Can you just clarify?

As a former chair of a planning board,

I should know the answer to this,

but that was a while ago, so isn't it right

that the site plan review regulations

are adopted by the board after public hearing?

They don't go to the vote of the town.

The site plan review regulations, that is correct.

The zoning ordinances themselves,

yes, go to through the town.

But the board, presumably whatever we do in this case,

the board could come in and clean up the regulations

to clarify what they meant or what this word meant

or make them uniform.

That's a process that is fairly easily accomplished

through proposed revision, public hearing,

and then the board adopting new regulations.

Isn't that right?

Yes, that is expressly given to the planning board

under 676.4, yes.

And I mentioned these two statutory provisions,

674.43.44 and 676.4,

because as you noted earlier, or asked earlier,

it is de novo review.

And when we're interpreting zoning ordinance

and site plan review regulations,

we have to look at the context surrounding these regulations.

So it's not only the other regulations

that are around it, but these statutory provisions

that outline the parameters of the board's power.

Thank you very much.

Good morning.

May it please the court?

My name is Tim McCaffrey,

and along with my co-counsel, Courtney Hears,

we represent Transform, the Appalee in this case.

And also present today with us is Michelle Kenney

on behalf of Chima Leamy, the other Appalee in the case.

What we do know, Your Honors,

is that although the planning board

when it adopted the regulations didn't tell us

what an owner is, because they didn't define the word owner,

they did tell us what it isn't,

because what we have to do is we have to look at the words

that are used.

And one of the principle rules of construction is

if a legislature uses a word in one place

and doesn't use the word in another place,

we presume that's intentional.

They've demonstrated the ability to use the word

and have chosen not to do so.

In this case, a council is asking this court

to take a word that is used in Section 7

and then basically apply it in Section 2.

And that's what this court can't do.

They're basically saying in Section 7

the regulations use the phrase

owners as recorded in the tax records.

That's a fee owner.

That's synonymous with a fee owner.

And what they're saying we should do

is take the words as recorded in the tax records,

basically a fee owner,

and move those words up and insert them in Section 2

where they're not present.

This court...

What about the application, the language in the application?

Owner of record?

Yeah.

We are, in this case, an owner of record, Your Honor.

We have a recorded lease memorandum.

So there is a memorandum of lease

that summarizes the rights conveyed,

and that's been recorded of record.

But then under that theory,

there are two owners of record then, right?

And there could be two or three or four or five

if they're sub-leases.

So owner of record could be...

It could.

More than one.

I don't think there's anything in the application

to suggest that there is only one entity

that could sign the application.

I think that you have to be an owner.

In fact, we can also look at the words in the application

in Section 2 where they say,

this is at page 17 of the record,

name, mailing address, and telephone number

of owner of record.

It doesn't say of the owner of record,

and it doesn't say of N owner of record, right?

It doesn't tell us what it means,

whether there can only be one owner.

And I think that what's so important here is

that's why what counsel has asked this court to do,

adopt a black-letter, bright-line rule,

is so extraordinary, right?

This court has never done that before.

We cited in our brief the Snyder case.

In the Snyder case, there was a leaseholder

who wanted to participate in foreclosure proceedings

because that tenant was going to be evicted

by the foreclosure proceedings.

This court analyzed their rights as a tenant

and decided that they should have notice

of those proceedings and therefore get access

to government.

What the court did importantly is didn't say,

we're adopting a bright-line rule.

You're either the fee owner for purposes of notice

or you're not.

They said we're going to look at the party's respective rights

and decide whether they have a sufficient interest

in the property.

But that whole sense of that opinion

was that because you're trying to protect

the interests of somebody's property rights,

so you're going to read it that way.

In that circumstance, it sort of flips.

One could argue that that same principle

flips things here and that the person

with some property rights that are quite significant

has rights to protect and ought to get notice.

Well, I don't think it necessarily flips

the rights from what we have here.

And to demonstrate that point,

I would direct the court to the case of Michelle.

In Michelle, the court was considering

whether an easement holder had the right

to submit an application for a permit,

not the fee owner, just the easement holder.

And again, what the court was looking at

is does an owner of an interest via an easement

have the right to access its government functions

and apply for a permit.

This was then discussed by this court

in a subsequent case, town of Lincoln.

In town of Lincoln, what the court said was,

the court said, and this is at page 1189,

in Ray town of Lincoln 172, New Hampshire 244.

In Michelle, referring to the Michelle case,

it was crucial to our analysis

that the right to apply for a doc permit

was reasonably necessary for the easement holder

to enjoy the full scope of the easement.

In this case, it is absolutely necessary

for the lease holder of the building

to be able to access its government

for purpose of applying for the use

for which they want to use the space.

And in fact, the DSM in this case signed a lease

that granted my client the right to use this space

within the building for any legal use.

Let me ask you, your argument before saying,

well, your client's owner of record

because the lease is recorded.

So if the lease weren't recorded,

then your client would not be an owner of record

and you wouldn't be able to make that argument.

Does it turn on whether that lease has been recorded or not?

No, I don't think it turns on whether

the lease has been recorded or not.

But I think what's trying to be articulated

is that you have to have some true ownership interest,

because in the very sentence above

where they use the term record owner,

they also just use the word owner.

And so this court is left to decide how broad

do they want that term to be?

Do they want the term to be incredibly narrow

as DSM advocates, or should it be more broad?

And it was, I think, this court,

again in the case of Michelle,

that said we're not going to fall back

on a narrow interpretation

if we're not told to do so by the law or the regulation.

In the case in Ray Michelle at page 103,

the court found that the easement holder,

the beneficiary of the easement,

qualified as an owner for purposes of submitting a permit.

The court wrote,

we acknowledge that these are broad definitions.

We see no reason, however,

to limit the meaning of the terms

when the legislature did not see fit to do so.

So what DSM is asking this court to do

is to insert words into the regulations

that more narrowly define what an owner is

because the regulations don't themselves do that.

What we suggest should happen instead

of reading words that aren't there

and doing so in a way that narrows

what the term would ordinarily mean.

What should happen is what this court did

in the town of Lincoln case

and in the Michelle case and in the Snyder case

and should instead take a look at the rights

that my client has under the lease.

So that your approach there,

it means that the Planning Board

has to assess the particular terms of the lease

to try to figure out how it applies

to a particular application.

Is that right?

For sure.

Yes, they do.

But doesn't that contrast to the,

I think what everybody agrees to here

is our job is to interpret the site plan review regulations

period, not for this case, but for every case.

So how could the terms of this particular relationship

somehow affect that analysis?

Well, I think that already happens.

First of all, I do want to address the point

in answering your question, Your Honor.

No one is asking them to make binding decisions

as to what rights the parties have.

But it is their regulation that says

they're going to hear applications from owners.

And there's no way to decide to hear

or not hear applications without deciding who an owner is.

If they want to be able to apply

a narrow definition to that term,

then they should craft that narrow definition

in the regulations.

But they should not be here asking this court

to do it for them.

So instead, what they're going to have to do

is they're going to have to consider

when an application is signed,

whether the party signing the application

has sufficient status as an owner.

And if that party puts forth sufficient information

to establish that they are an owner,

then the town will hear the application.

An owner or the owner?

They didn't tell us that.

If they had said in section two of the application,

the owner, then we would know that there can only be one.

And then I think what the board would have to do

is they would have to say,

okay, who's got the greater rights?

But instead, what they said is owner, right?

They didn't say owners.

An owner, the owner, they just said owner.

And there's no question based on what this court

said in the Michelle case and in the Snyder case

that certainly we have ownership rights.

Transform has ownership rights.

In fact, we have the most important sticks

in that bundle of rights.

The lease, the 75-year lease,

gives us the right to use and enjoy the property

for any lawful purpose,

which is essentially every purpose.

We have the right to derive income.

Wouldn't your client have a cause of action against TMS

or wrongful withholding permission in this case?

It might be liable to lost profits,

all kinds of good damages.

That case is pending, Your Honor.

So I would say yes.

But what's happened?

Of course you would. You're right.

That's right.

That case is pending.

It's stayed right now by agreement of the parties

pending the resolution of these other issues.

But what is important here is that what DSM is doing

functionally is exercising a butter's rights

that they have the opportunity to present

to the planning board.

But they're trying to recapture

what is essentially a veto power over this process.

In the language of the lease,

they conveyed to my client

the right to use the entirety of the property

that is the subject of the application

for any lawful purpose.

That should be sufficient for my client

to ask the planning board to allow us to change the use.

In my client's case, this is about...

What if it's not a lawful purpose?

Well, then nobody can do it.

But they would be entitled then to say,

no, you can't do that.

That's absolutely right.

They could sue us for a breach of the lease.

And I don't expect the planning board would approve

an unlawful purpose.

But certainly, yes, if we are operating

outside of the scope of our rights under the lease,

then that would provide DSM with a cause of action

for breach of lease, which is a separate proceeding

from the planning board proceedings

that we have asked to be allowed to participate in.

All of the concerns that DSM has articulated

relate to parking, relate to access, congestion,

all of the rights that they have the opportunity

and ability to put forth their position as an abutter.

They're trying to give themselves some sort of

super abutter status by claiming,

hey, we're the fee owner.

We own the dirt underneath the building.

But our client will be robbed of its lease hold right

to use the property for any legal purpose

if this court gives DSM a veto vote

over our access to the planning board.

And if that's what the planning board wanted to do,

that's what the planning board should have written

into the regulations.

They're instead asking this court

to now do it for them ex post facto.

So let me just ask you, I think you said

you agree that we should be interpreting

these site plan review regulations

irrespective of the circumstances of this case,

the particularities of this lease, right?

It's a question of law for us.

Certainly reviewing the regulations

and their scope and their definition

is a matter of de novo review for which this court

should not, according to the case we cited in our brief,

I think it's the Dartmouth case,

with no deference to the planning board's opinions

as to what these words mean.

But also not taking into account the terms of the lease

of the particularities of the relationship

between the lessor and the lessee, right?

No, I disagree with that, Your Honor.

I think that in the case of Michelle,

the court took into account the relationships

between the easement holder and the fee property holder.

In the case of Snyder,

the court took into account the extent of rights

of the lease holder vis-a-vis the property owner and fee,

and in the case of Town of Lincoln,

the court looked specifically at the scope

and extent of the easement that the town held

in deciding that in that case,

given the goals and objectives of the legislation at issue,

the Town of Lincoln was not a fee owner

based on the very limited rights

that they had as a result of the easement.

So again, in Town of Lincoln, this court said

you are not a fee owner

because the easement gives you very limited rights.

In Ray Michele, this court said you are a fee owner

because the easement gives you broad and expansive rights.

And so I don't think there's any way around

looking at the rights that are granted by the lease,

which is why DSM's request that this court

adopt a bright line rule is so dramatic.

Thank you, attorney. Thank you.

Thank you. I'd like to use my one minute

to address one key point that I'm afraid

is getting lost in the shuffle,

and that is what property rights are we talking about

and what property are we talking about?

On a couple of occasions, we've heard the fact that

the tenant believes that it is in fact

an owner of record because its notice of lease is

quote-unquote on record.

But we have to take a step back for a moment.

What rights do those convey to the store itself?

To the store itself.

The tenant cannot go to the planning board

and present a plan of the footprint of the store

and go through site plan review.

It must present a plan of the entire parcel

showing parking, traffic aisles,

all of the other uses on the lot.

It is because we are before planning board

site plan review looking at the entire parcel

that we need to be clear as to who is owner of record

of that parcel, not a sub part piece of that parcel.

That is pivotal in the analysis

and why in our view the bright line test

should in fact stay in play.

That is owner of record as shown

on the tax records for town.

Thank you. Thank you.

Court is adjourned.
