This is case 20220084, Albert S. Brandano versus the superintendent of New Hampshire School

Administrative Unit 16 et al.

Morning. Obviously the court looks a little different today. Chief Justice McDonald and

Justice Bassett are disqualified from this case. Justice Hicks will be participating

but is not here today. Sitting by special assignment is Judge Stephen Horan.

I have reserved two minutes, Your Honor.

Thank you.

Thank you. May it please the court? My name is Jim LeBeau from the law firm of Warren Reno,

and I have the pleasure of representing Albert Brandano in this matter.

As the court knows this is a right to no case, and we're here this morning because the trial

court erred in denying Mr. Brandano's request for attorney's fees, erred in finding that

the SAU conducted a reasonable search for responsive documents, trial court erred in

permitting the SAU to avoid producing documents linked or attached to responsive email,

and the trial court erred in permitting the redaction of identities of individuals

employed by the SAU and contained in responsive documents.

On July 4th, 2020, Mr. Brandano submitted eight right to no requests, and there's no

dispute that they were narrowly tailored. On July 7th, the SAU acknowledged receipt

and asked for extra time, 45 days to be exact, to respond to request number three,

which involved emails, also asked for extra time to respond to request six and seven.

On July 16th, Superintendent Ryan provided documents purportedly responsive to request

six and seven, then stated, quote, we look forward to completing our gathering of emails

for item number three, so we can send them to you within the 45 days that we previously indicated.

In the interim on August 16th, Mr. Brandano sent an email to the superintendent

and informed him that certain documents were missing from his previous production.

He also stated that specifically that there were certain contracts and invoices

for a consulting business known as two revolutions that were also missing,

no response from the SAU. On August 23rd, the self-imposed 45-day deadline

to respond to request number three, Mr. Brandano sent an email to the superintendent,

informing him, today is your day, for the request number three, as a response,

there were no documents and no response. Four days later, on August 27th,

Mr. Brandano again reached out to the superintendent and informed him that they were

in violation of 91A. He said, quote, Superintendent Ryan, you are now in violation

of section 91A4. Your inaction, as well as violation of the spirit of the law

for full disclosure, leaves me with no other option than to proceed under New Hampshire state law,

91A7 violation and 91A8 remedies. This may be splitting hairs, but is that violation

strictly limited to those documents under request three that were not produced within

the 45 days promise, or does it also include the later identification of so-called missing documents?

So that was primarily focused on the failure to respond to request number three, at least that's

how we've read it. Okay, thank you. But it's not a waiver of the failure to respond to the

previous, fully, full some response to the previous. It just seems that would be a

slightly different timeline, if you will. Right, I agree, your honor.

After receiving that, any we would submit any reasonable person would conclude

that they were in violation of the right to know law. Nevertheless, the SAU did not respond.

Having heard nothing from the SAU since July 16th, despite multiple inquiries,

on September 28th, Mr. Brandano was forced to file this lawsuit in order to obtain the

requested documents. By way of timeline, at the time he filed the lawsuit, it was 86 days

after providing the right to know request, 36 days after the August 23rd deadline,

and 32 days after Mr. Brandano expressly informed the SAU of the 91A violation.

The sheriff served the SAU with our lawsuit on October 5th. Nine days after service of the lawsuit

on October 14th, Mr. Brandano received the first communication from Superintendent Ryan,

the first one since July 16th, which included six invoices, including two purchase orders

related to DEIJ training from consultant to revolutions. Superintendent Ryan explained in

that email exchange, quote, although they may be governmental records of entities,

other than the SAU, they are not within the scope of the SAU's obligations under RSA 91A.

Fast forward a couple months to December 2nd, 2021. The same exact invoices are provided by the

superintendent to co-citizen Elizabeth Faria, stating, quote, we are providing you with all

documents requested during the time period identified, which constitute governmental records,

as defined in RSA 91A. Your point there is the different characterization of whether

these records are governmental or not. Are we comparing the scope of Ms. Faria's request

to Mr. Brandano's request? Here's the part of that, Your Honor, is in Ms. Faria's request

are the same invoices for DEIJ training that has been

not characterized as governmental records, they're the same records, the same exact records.

And her request was similar or identical to Mr. Brandano in terms of language or description?

As far as I know, Your Honor, it was as far as I know, it was a request to the SAU,

the SAU responded and you can see their response at Appendix 182. So on October 14th,

they're not governmental records from the superintendent's perspective, but on December

2nd they are. Troubling was what was contained with the documents provided to Ms. Faria is a

three-page summary of invoices for DEI consulting for individual schools, and that summary can

be found at the Appendix 200-202. These were clearly responsive to Mr. Brandano's request

number seven and to date we never received them from the SAU. The SAU argues that the SAU never

contracted with or paid two revolutions for any DEIJ related work or trainings, and yet within

the documents provided to Ms. Faria is a quarterly invoice for professional learning

for leadership on DEI from two revolutions, billed directly to the SAU attention David

Ryan. Granted, this is at a time period that is after Mr. Brandano, but keep in mind that

the two purchase orders that we received from two revolutions during the relevant time period

were actually signed by SAU's Molly O'Keefe, Executive Director for Finance and Operations,

and billed directly to SAU 16. The public bodies under Censabella have a statutory duty to respond

diligently to all record requests regardless who makes the request, and we submit that that was

not done here. We are scheduled for a hearing on October 20th. Unbeknownst to Mr. Brandano,

as of October 18th, SAU had printed six files containing 1,186 pages of emails,

presumably responsive to Mr. Brandano's request number three. We surmise from the print date

that the search for responsive documents did not occur in earnest at least until after the

lawsuit was filed. Is there a nexus there between the print date and the active search date?

Well, that's the problem with the lack of information about how any search was conducted

for email. Keep in mind, Your Honor, that we came into the October 20th hearing without any

response to requests. Mr. Brandano didn't provide the SAU with any search terms to

apply to its search or any specific modifiers that you were looking for?

Well, his request, all emails or other written communications between any DEIJ committee chairperson

or other group leader or facilitator and any SAU 16 officer concerning a DEIJ committee or DEIJ

activity was pretty clear and they admitted during the hearing that it was narrowly tailored.

Mr. Brandano certainly would have engaged in such a conversation with

the SAU but none never came. They refused to provide the documents and they're at the hearing

and one of the issues that we're challenging is obviously the adequate search. The only

information about how they searched for emails at the time of the hearing was, quote,

the SAU is still reviewing the two years worth of emails that may be relevant to petitioner's

requests and after a necessary review for redaction of personal, private or otherwise

confidential or exempt information, the SAU intends to make a prompt production.

There's no information about how they're conducting a search for emails. In fact,

at the hearing the trial judge asked counsel, did you disclose the methodology to the petitioner

like search terms, date parameters and that type of thing. The response was we did not.

During the hearing we made the point that in fact I stated they haven't fulfilled their

responsibility to conduct a thorough search and in fact we didn't we didn't get the email

response until December 16th. Keep in mind this case was dismissed on December 9th

so we only had a short window of time to look at 941 pages of emails and file a motion for

reconsideration which we did, which was denied. So we never had a full and fair opportunity

to examine anybody on documents because we didn't have them until after the case was

dismissed. I think what's important here, one of the most important points of this is

is the lack of fee award in this case is troubling. Obviously fees shall not be awarded

unless the court finds that the SAU knew or should have known that the conduct engaged in was in

violation of the chapter. On August 27th the SAU knew because Mr. Brandano informed them that

they're in violation and then they ignored him for 32 days. I'm not sure how much longer he

should have waited before filing the lawsuit in order to get access to these these documents.

So in your in your request for relief you're not asking for us to remand the case for trial

here. You want us to rule as a matter of law that the trial court aired and to find in your

favor? Well there's a couple things your honor because we want the this court to rule that

the trial court aired in its interpretation of the right to know law and rule in favor of a

request for attorney's fees. But there are other things that still need to need to be done

which is the lifting of redactions of individuals names in the responsive documents,

the order to the court below or at least to the to the SAU to provide documents

that were attached or linked. So you have not had an opportunity to discuss or

well discuss the redactions? None none because the court the court or with the posing part.

None your honor none your honor and we'd love to have that opportunity but

we just we just have not had that opportunity and and and now we have plenty of questions

because of what we received and we'd have a reasonable basis upon upon which to examine

somebody for for that purpose. And I see my light is on so I'll take my seat.

Still have your re-buggled time.

You're going to eat. Good morning your honors. May it please the court Mike Eaton for the

Epilees SAU 16 and its superintendent David Ryan. I'd like to start before I get into

the arguments I wanted to address today with just responding to the email search issue.

So as you know your honor indicated there there really is no nexus here between these

print dates and the search terms. Well how do we know that? Was there evidence

presented to the Trump court to that effect? Yes yes so not only in the verified statements

of Superintendent Ryan in the motion to dismiss but also as the appellant noted in

the email that Mr Superintendent Ryan sent to Mr. Brandano itself which indicates that

the SAU looks forward to completing its gathering of the emails. So these this this location of

the emails the search for the emails started when the requests were received of course it

was a lengthy process. I think we have to keep in mind that although the the email request was

narrowly tailored in terms of what it sought the scope was quite broad so we dealt with two

years worth of emails. We dealt with a number of specified individuals, superintendent,

associate superintendent, all assistant superintendents, several other identified titles

past and present. So when I inform Mr. Brandano that you need more time why just ignore his

communication? Well your honor that's a good question and I think that in an ideal world

yes it would be great if we if public officials could respond immediately to to every follow-up

email. The circumstances were such that it just did not happen. Importantly though it's not

required under the law so I think the legislature has left some room here in saying look you need

to respond within five business days indicating you're gonna comply you're not gonna comply

and here are the reasons or you need more time and to set a deadline apparently and and to set

an estimated deadline yes and this is what superintendent Ryan did by saying he anticipated

this process would be completed within 45 days I'm sure as the court understands he didn't

have the scope of those emails in front of him at the time no public agency is going to

so he didn't know that it was going to be you know initially more than a thousand pages

of emails and and in the end 941 pages that were produced so you know obviously anticipated

deadlines can't be the final deadline that's not what the the law requires. So once you've given

that notice that you anticipate estimated 45 days here is it your argument that it's open ended

I mean when when does the obligation close? So and this is specified in the right to no law

and the court actually addressed this in the Salsetti case to which we cite the analysis is the

reasonable necessary time to produce the records so after that response is given you know we look

at it from a standard of reasonableness and and judging by the case by case basis the

factors the circumstances here I mean obviously we can all recognize this was during a very

challenging time for many people but certainly educational agencies dealing with COVID and

remote learning and hybrid learning and all these different things. And was that part of the trial

courts equation? Yes yes it was so this again was presented in the verified motion to compel

the trial court reference COVID in in its order. So we do judge this by a standard of

reasonableness and I think that reflects and to narrow the inquiry for us here it is whether

after a 45-day time limit was established taking another 32 or so days in this case the trial court

determined that was reasonable as opposed to six months or nine months later. Right exactly yeah

and and to be clear the records weren't produced within the 32 days they were produced later but

yes that's that's what the trial court found and and I do think that represent you know the

legislature could choose certainly to set an absolute deadline they could choose to require

status updates or things like that but I think it reflects the idea that these are busy public

officials you know who have day jobs and other responsibilities in this case certainly a

constitutional responsibility to provide an adequate education to students so I think you

know it's a difficult balance but it is judged by standard of reasonableness and the court found

that the time it took to produce those 941 pages of emails to not only locate them based on the

request but to review them and produce them. But Mr. Bandeno didn't get any response until he

filed suit so how can we how can we support the trial courts ruling that the lawsuit

was not the reason why the documents were produced? Well because Superintendent Ryan had been

very clear from the get-go that the SU intended to produce these documents he as the appellant

acknowledged in his reply brief Superintendent Ryan reiterated in his second email that they

intended to fulfill that that request and of course they did ultimately do so but there are other

cases where this has occurred obviously the Salsetti case ATV versus the Department of

Transportation actually involved documents that were quote recently discovered at at or around

the time of the hearing on the petition New Hampshire right to life it took them three

months to produce a smaller set of documents there were financial documents in in that case

and they those were produced after the lawsuit as well. So again we just go back to this

this standard of reasonableness and I think it's it's fair to ask the question you know

why why couldn't you have just responded but I think the reality here is that you know these are

busy public officials and we can't expect them to respond immediately to to every single email

and more importantly that the law doesn't require that. So it's little interesting bit of a conundrum

the case is dismissed before the email production was made I think the trial court

anticipated sort of a continuing good faith effort but yeah with the dismissal of the lawsuit

had your client just done nothing we would be in a different posture so that is a bit

curious as to procedurally what Mr. Brandano's remedies would be

had the production not occurred right now we sit here with what are his remedies given that

the redactions might be at issue if he's not accepting of the representation that these are

privacy related redactions people who aren't involved that kind of thing so what's the remedy

right. So a couple things on that the trial court did leave some room for that for there to be

a potential non-production in saying and I believe the final paragraph of the order

if this production doesn't occur then you know he's not going to dismiss the case he'll

revisit the issues but if the production occurs then it then it would in fact be dismissed

with respect to issues that may arise from the production of the emails such as redactions or

documents that are referenced or things like that that was raised in the motion to compel of

course the appellant did in fact have a full and fair opportunity to address those issues and he

did so in the in his motion to compel we filed a response he filed a reply the judge issued an

order and he did not appeal that order and that was the third in the series of orders

correct yes the order motion free consideration and then the motion to compel yes yes

so I'd like to just like to briefly address the district versus SAU issue I know this has been

heavily briefed and the trial court spent a lot of time on it so I'll be brief here but I think it

can be settled with the language of the right to know law itself it very clearly delineates between

school districts and SAUs in terms of public agencies and their responsibilities obviously

we know the superintendent reports to the school boards they control the superintendent

and this raises and actually importantly the districts can at any time would draw from the

SAU or opt not to use the superintendent so superintendent doesn't have control over these

districts doesn't dictate their functions certainly provides administrative services

but substantively these districts are autonomous so was that a basis for the delay that he was

waiting for authorization on how to respond to the request no so so the requests were

specifically directed to the SAU and the superintendent responded with the SAU's records

now once the lawsuit was filed it became very clear that the appellant was seeking records outside

of this particular public agency and so as a courtesy again reached out and you know in the

spirit of of helping Mr. Brandano out gathered these records and and produce them as the

tribe were found though voluntarily providing records you're not required to produce is not

a violation of the right to no law so absent that courtesy reach out with the SAU have had any

responsive documents have they been separated into two categories those that are SAU documents

because I understand the distinction yeah and those that would need school district

authorization and or a direct request to the school district are those separated out

yes yeah they are and in the two revolutions example is a great example so and and we

we outlined this in our brief they're the SAU did contract with two revolutions

on non DEIJ services so for example competency based education which is obviously not a

DEIJ service they use this entity called visions to do this DEIJ training for the SAU

level committee and it appears that some districts and I think one the Exeter school

board decided not to proceed with visions and went and dealt with two revolutions directly

paid them directly and so those would be district records so where does the trial

courts handling of this issue leave us the trial court assumed without deciding that

the records requested by Mr. Brandano were government records and then just moved

on from there what do we do with that right so he the judge did decide that the records

that were produced were government records and that the emails if responsive would be

the language of the order was the records requested by Mr. Brandano our government records

correct as I read the order his analysis was the government or the records requested

by Mr. Brandano were government records as they applied to the SAU not as they applied to the

districts and and that was when he got into the invoices issue and found that those

invoices that were produced voluntarily were not required to be produced

so the issue with respect to the redactions was that something that the trial court

addressed in the motion to reconsider or the motion to compel the motion to compel

I believe there were does that issue then before us it's not before you know I believe

there are two documents that the appellant did raise in the motion for reconsideration

which arguably might be properly before the court those those particular documents

though are clearly not SAU documents one was a middle school principal I believe

sending a book list to to some other middle school teachers or something like that

but the certainly the remainder of their adactions there the remainder of the documents

large scope of the documents are not properly before the court and one final note I I'm running

at a time I would just like to know what the court noted in the ATB watch versus department

transportation case and that is that bearing something that has an official function

is narrower than bearing bearing on an agency's business and so when the appellant

goes through insights to all these superintendent services like identifying

consultants and curriculum and all these different things certainly what the districts do

may relate to those issues but they're not an official function of the SAU

and and that's what's important here is that the SAU certainly provides some services

but the districts they're their own entities the districts don't have their own payroll

company the SAU does that right right yes the SAU will assist in administrative things like

like processing and and on that note I would I would just note that you know administrative

functions were not within the scope of the request in terms of processing payments the specific

request was for expenses incurred for DIJ services at least related to that issue

and just briefly I won't go into any more detail on the motion to compel issue but I would just

like to note a few arguments that the appellant raises that were not preserved specifically the

affidavit issue and whether the trial court aired in considering the verified sworn statements of

superintendent Ryan in lieu of an of an official affidavit that is is supported by the trial court's

reasoning for the court's reasoning to do that but it also was clear that that's what the trial

court was doing in its order and that issue was not raised in the motion for reconsideration

or any time thereafter until this appeal the same is true of the argument that the

trial court failed to analyze whether the SAU should have known it was in violation of the right to no

law obviously the court found that there was no violation so there was no reason to analyze that

issue but certainly that issue was not preserved as well as as the appellant didn't raise it in

his motion for reconsideration uh unless the court has any further questions thank you

thank you Ernie LeBeau thank you runner um first um I think if this court were to affirm the trial

court's order as it relates to attorney's fees I think you're going to invite government agencies

to simply um uh to meet the five-day deadline pick a reasonable date in the future ignore

that date and then ignore the citizen call their bluff if they get sued they're off the hook if

they can concoct uh post hoc excuses and that's what happened here uh the SAU is arguing that um there is

no law requiring a response but part one article eight of the New Hampshire constitution says

government therefore should be open accessible accountable and responsive responsive and

responsive to whom responsive to the people and mr brandano is certainly uh is a citizen for whom

this law was effectuated um there's a statement there was a statement uh to you justice not have

been that the the redaction issue wasn't sufficiently uh preserved it was in our

motion for reconsideration um and we identified and you'll see it in our motion we identified

several um emails that are to and from uh SAU individuals that identified DEIJ committees

that are developing curriculum and curriculum is a statutory obligation of the SAU under RSA 194

C so to suggest that these are some sort of involuntary um um committees is is is not accurate

and and and the documents don't bear that out and we would like to know who on those committees now

these are committees that that are made up by people who are employed by the SAU or consultants

employed by the SAU and their names have been redacted and if they're if they're dictating

curriculum for the children we'd like to know who they are thank you your time is uh time is

up that's a quick two minutes thank you thanks to both counsel the court will

be in recess till this afternoon thank you
