The court is now in session.

This is case 2022-0498, State of New Hampshire versus Matthew Ryan Fritz.

Before we hear the first argument, the court would like to acknowledge and welcome the presence of

interns from the US District Court for the District of New Hampshire and the United States Attorney's Office.

As well as from our Superior Court, and I believe we have our clerks with us from the Superior Court.

And of course our own interns in law clerks.

So good morning, welcome, and we look forward to visiting with you later in the day.

Attorney Woodcock.

Thank you.

I understand you've reserved two minutes.

Yes, thank you, Your Honor.

Elizabeth Woodcock for the State of New Hampshire.

I have one quick correction to make in my brief because I misunderstood what the defendant was actually charged with in the spirit court.

And the two charges that the district court had dismissed at the conclusion of his case were not re-brought.

And I'm not certain that they could have been, say, were both class B misdemeanors.

Having said that, that doesn't really change my argument.

The argument is this, that the trial court dismissed the case during a hearing on a motion to suppress

on an issue that was not for the trial court.

The defendant had raised a question of whether the state should have had a second

breadth sample for the defendant to test.

And whether that failure to do that violated the defendant's due process rights.

What the court dismissed the case on was whether the state had

current certification that the intoxicator was operating properly.

We know that the certification that the state introduced at the trial was out of date in the earlier.

At the trial or at the hearing?

In the hearing, I'm sorry.

In the earlier trial, the intoxicator was not out of date.

And we have information from the state that they provided all that information to the defense.

So the defense wasn't challenging that.

It was the court, Sue Espante, saying, really out of the blue, you don't have this,

the correct certification, even though that's not the issue that is before the court.

And therefore, I'm not only suppressing the evidence, but I'm dismissing the charge.

Now, that could be possible, I suppose, if we were in the circuit court in the district division.

But it's not possible for the Superior Court to hold suppression hearings and trials simultaneously.

The rule specifically says that that can't be done.

There's a good reason for that.

The reason is that frequently the trials in the Superior Court are jury trials.

Juris don't typically get to hear suppression hearings and

then hear evidence that will be suppressed.

But the state could go forward with the case without the intoxicator results.

Is that right?

I'm not certain that's the case, Your Honor.

But I think that the problem here is that was the issue that was being raised before

the court in this suppression hearing.

And the court seemed to have just kind of jumped in to say your case is sort of

fatally flawed at the jury trial stage.

When that wasn't the issue before the court, and that wasn't the stage that the court was at.

It also seems to me that the court could have been a little bit less probably.

Draconian?

Pardon me?

Draconian?

Draconian, maybe impatient.

I don't want to call the court draconian because that seems kind of over and extreme.

But it seems to me that if someone asks for just a brief recess to make sure that

they can get the correct document, unless the court has a very hectic schedule,

it would seem to me that it would be within the court's discussion and

really more appropriate in the case of justice.

And here, despite the fact that the term would seem to be used during

the discussion was continuance, what was really at issue was a 15 or 20 minute recess.

Is that what the state was asking for?

It was at most a 20 minute recess.

He misused the word continuance.

I don't think that he wanted the, he had his witness there.

And what about the drug court's expressed concern that this would establish a

precedent in terms of interrupting cases made flow and allowing parties to go out and

get the evidence they should have brought in the first place?

I think that that can be a concern, Your Honor.

I would never, ever want to say that the court would always be

exceeding its discretion and saying no.

But in this case, I think all the prosecutor really needed to do was to

make a quick telephone call and it struck me.

I mean, it shows by age that the court said, well, we have to,

in another case, we have to get a fax.

And I thought to myself, even I know that you can get these things by email and by text.

And they move a lot more quickly than facts.

And the judge here not only mentioned that there could be a fax,

that it would be an easy cure, right?

That's right, the court said it would be an easy cure.

And I think that the court was really concerned about its schedule.

That would be a different matter because then you'd be stopping for

10 or 15 minutes and you've got, well, we know what it's like.

We have a whole courtroom of people behind us.

And if the court had that kind of schedule or had made that kind of record,

I think it would be a different matter.

Well, the court allowed the state an additional 10, 15 minutes to

prepare its witness at the outset, right?

I think the witness was a few minutes late.

I don't think that it was, I don't think that the court was allowing

additional time for preparation of the witness, although it may be wrong.

The hearing was supposed to start at on the half hour.

And I think it actually got started, I think eight minutes later.

That's not from my standpoint, my experience, very unusual.

There can be a lot of reasons for that.

I think that the other thing, if you read the transcript and

listen to the recording, it's obvious that the computer system they're using

to present the evidence was not working particularly well.

And so the actual time that the court was hearing testimony is shorter

than what is reflected by the length of the transcript because

they're trying to get it, get the documents to load.

And there's a lot of conversation about that.

I don't think that the hearing was going, at least technologically,

as smoothly as it might have.

But that should have prompted the court just to not only suppress the evidence,

but just to dismiss the case.

Are you arguing there's legal error here?

Is this governed entirely under the unsustainable exercise of discretion standard?

Well, I think that dismissing the case is legal error.

I don't think that the court can do that under the Superior Court Rule.

If it were, as I said earlier, if it were the district division,

maybe you have a different situation because those hearings in the trial

can be held concurrently.

And I'm not certain that that is necessarily always of that rule,

because a lot of times in the district division,

the testimony that would be given in a suppression hearing would be really

virtually the same as what would be given in a trial.

But in this case, we had other witnesses.

And there were other witnesses who were prepared to testify.

The court actually acknowledged one of them.

And as it turned out, that particular witness

would have cured this particular failure.

Other witnesses who were prepared to testify that day,

or if there were a trial?

No, they were prepared to testify that day.

Including Mr. Howe?

Yes.

And what they were going to testify on

is that the intoxicizer had actually changed over the years.

And there had been an addition or a model of the intoxicizer

that could allow the police to take a second breath sample.

And now that no longer exists.

And in 1984, a unanimous United States Supreme Court

in California, V. Charmedata, said

the fact that this particular intoxicizer model had changed

did not affect a defendant's constitutional, federal

constitutional due process rights.

And is it your position that the certificate isn't

required to get the intoxicizer evidence into the case?

I don't know whether it would be required at a trial.

I think it would certainly be preferable

because you want to make sure that the jury has all

of the information that it could possibly have.

But the issue here is whether the intoxicizer test was reliable

or anything of that sort.

The issue really was whether the state

was required to provide the second sample

so that the defendant could test it.

And that was what was raised in the defendant's motion

to suppress.

If the court could have gone forward

with that, regardless of the fact that the intoxicizer

certification was out of date.

That was the issue.

Why did the state renege on its stipulations?

I'm not certain why the state reneged on its stipulations.

I think that it may have been, after further consideration,

perhaps the state wanted to introduce additional evidence.

I haven't spoken to the prosecutor,

and there isn't anything from the record.

But it seems to me that if you look

at the legal issue that was before the court, which

is the second sample, is that required?

Is that a due process violation not to have it?

If you look at legal issue, the court really

it exceeded its discretion in suppressing the evidence

so quickly, and it certainly exceeded its discretion

in dismissing the charge.

Well, the state's argument was that a second sample is

not required because the initial sample is inherently reliable

given this new technology.

Then that might be the basis for why Mr. Howe

would testify, for example.

Or the maintenance slip was necessary, right?

I think of this as a legal issue, not really a factual issue.

The legal issue is whether the state is required

to have the second sample.

So at trial, if the state showed up,

and it had no ability to show any reliability of this sample

that had been taken, I think that that would be grounds

for dismissing the case.

Because then the state is asking the jury

to consider the reliability of these results.

But in this case, that's really not

the issue that's posed by the motion to express.

In this case, are you constitutionally

required to have the second sample?

And that's an open question under our constitution.

It is.

It is.

And in the appendix that the defense provided,

there is an order by Justice Shulman who

decides that the state has to have that second sample.

So it's a live question in a certain sense.

Can you just clarify, when you began your argument,

you said that you needed to recast some of your argument.

Can you clarify, is it still your position

that not all of the charges in the Superior Court

were required, BAC, or not?

I don't think that they replot those other charges.

From our conversation with the prosecutor,

he said that he had not brought the other charges.

And I'm not certain that he could have,

because they were Class B.

So you're talking about the underlying DUI?

Yeah, the driving under the influence.

I had thought, based on these pleadings, which I'll say

had been charged with three things,

I should have been more careful.

I should have looked at the case summary and not.

That probably isn't accurate, and I just didn't click.

So a BAC is required for the charges

we're talking about here in the Superior Court?

It would be, yes.

But as I say, that still doesn't change the legal issue that

was before the court.

I see my yellow light is on.

If the court has no further questions for me,

I will yield to Mr. Johnson.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Attorney Swenson.

Thank you.

May it please the court, Carl Swenson

representing Matthew Fritz?

I would like to start with the judge's denial of the state's

motion for a continuance or recess.

I don't think it makes a difference what

we refer to it here.

We know what we're talking about.

Are we talking about 15 or 20 minutes?

That's what the state and the prosecutor at the time

suggested it might be.

But I think it's important to note

that that was speculative.

I think the point was we don't know how long it may be an easy fix

or it may not be.

And I think that's significant.

So to deal with that continuance issue to begin with,

I think it is important to consider

the audio recording of the hearing itself.

Because I heard terms like court being impatient or even

draconian.

And I think listening to the audio

shows that that was not the case here.

We have a judge who was measured.

He was patient.

He wasn't acting out of animosity or frustration.

The kind of situation where an unsustainable use of discretion

might happen.

That was not the case here.

And listening to that recording really illustrates that.

In fact, just reading the transcript

does not show the last year that was going on actually

during the hearing.

When the judge said, look, I've been in your shoes

before prosecutor, and that's the way it goes,

he wasn't mocking the prosecutor and saying nice motion,

which from the transcript you might not realize.

He was sympathizing with it.

And it was actually a good nature

to exchange at that point.

But what's the harm in allowing the state

to continue with its evidence?

If this witness didn't have the information,

why not let the state put Mr. Howell on stand

and see what happens?

I think that's where the trial court at that point

may be reasoned decision and explained.

This is a precedent that I don't want

to set in this kind of situation, which is going to happen.

Again and again, this is a DWI case.

We're dealing with intoxicizer results

where we have a fairly complex statutory scheme.

They know, the state knows, they're

going to need to present these certain documents

to certify it to the defendant.

They know they're going to have to do that at trial.

But that wasn't the issue that the defendant relied on

in filing the motion to suppress.

It had to do with the second blood draw.

So how did the state have any notice

that that was going to come up as opposed to a trial

where you're going to have to put that evidence in?

Well, I think that's where it is interesting.

Because you're absolutely right.

When the defendant filed his motion

to suppress the results from the intoxicizer,

it was a purely legal issue.

And it was a due process challenge.

There was an order attached from Judge Shulman,

the same Rockingham Superior Court

where this was being held.

So we had some very persuasive authority there.

This is a violation of our due process.

Relying on Cornelius, which was a still good law

in the state of New Hampshire about the need

to provide the second sample on such old machines

that still have the capability of providing the second sample.

But if the court had decided on those grounds,

we wouldn't be here today.

And the court expressed that.

And I understand the problem was

the prosecutor, as suggested,

reneged on the factual stipulation and said,

no, that's not what we're arguing.

The prosecutor never submitted any legal response

to the argument or to Shulman's order.

Instead, the prosecutor said, I'm going to call an expert.

This was with minimal notice.

I'm going to bring in a machine with no notice

and I'm just going to object.

And I'm here by saying, I don't need to explain

the basis for my objection.

And clearly what he did, as was suggested,

is that he was going to try and say,

look, this machine is so reliable.

We don't need seconds.

We never did.

These new machines are no better than the old machines.

Well, getting back to the certification,

do you acknowledge that you received a copy of that

at the circuit court level?

No.

In fact, and I don't think the trial court,

the superior court at the hearing would have been

or should have been looking at any evidence

that was submitted at the district court level.

I know it was litigated below,

but no, I don't think that's part of the analysis

because this is a de novo appeal to the superior court

and that's simply not on the record,

so I'm not sure about that.

I think the question is, or at least I would ask,

as a matter of fact, was the intoxicizer certified

on the date of the arrest?

That was established in the circuit court, wasn't it?

I don't know that it was.

I don't think that's on the record.

I think everybody presumed that it was certified,

but that doesn't mean there was ever any evidence

that it was.

So I assume you didn't represent the defendant

in the circuit court?

No, no, and in fact, this was different prosecutor,

different defense attorney at the superior court

than there was at the circuit court.

So this was new judge, new parties on both sides,

and so I don't know that anybody knows

whether or not that was established.

Well, the trial court seemed to have been very concerned

about establishing a precedent here

and getting on the slippery slope for recourse for continuance,

but that might have been misplaced.

He made a finding that there was an easy fix here.

So as a matter of fact, the ruling here is for easy fixes,

you could get a 15 or 20 minute continuance,

as it were, or recess, so it doesn't seem to me

that you're definitely going down that slippery slope.

I think the judge was concerned that while it may be an easy fix,

we don't know that.

And if this is such a straightforward, easy thing

to have ready to go, then the state

should have it ready to go at the hearing,

and we don't have to have a 15 minute or maybe longer

continuance in the middle of a hearing.

And again, I think this is one of the more basic discretionary

decisions that a trial court had.

Should it matter to us that the defendant

had the benefit of several continuances

before that had delayed this hearing for weeks?

I think what's important to notice in this case,

the defendant was able to notify his attorney

and they filed written motions for continuances

in advance explaining he just can't get a ride.

He's not going to be able to make it.

In fact, the second one, the defendant did appear by WebEx.

This wasn't a case of the defendant just

blowing off his attorney or not caring to show up in court.

He couldn't make it.

He showed up by video and he made it on this case.

So those were written motions to continue ahead of time

with the reason.

And again, in this case, the state, their witness came

late, the witness showed up at Matt with the prosecutor.

So the judge accommodated the state,

allowed them to go out the hallway and meet.

So they restart the hearing.

I think it was about eight minutes late.

And again, there was also the minimal notice

provided about the extra.

No notice about the fact that the machine was going to be there.

And the judge at the outset said,

this is a simple legal issue.

This is a due process, John.

Can't we reach that?

And the state said, no, we don't

have to explain why we're objecting,

but we're withdrawing any factual stipulation

and we're going to show that this black box, literally,

and toxelizer at 5,000, put out the correct number.

Is your position that the certification, the written

certification, was necessary for the state to go forward?

Could a witness testify to the certification,

as opposed to the document?

Yes, I think the statutory scheme is quite clear.

It means what it says, that without this particular

certification, that the evidence shall not

be admissible at any hearing.

And then it follows from that,

because this was a motion to suppress

the pretrial hearing on the admissibility

of the toxelizer results, that once those are ruled

to be inadmissible at the hearing,

they shall not be admissible at trial.

So this was the judge correctly applying the law

and the rules of criminal procedure

to say, now there may have been a constitutional issue

that we all assume we're going to address coming into it.

But we now have an alternative ground

to dismiss, to suppress this evidence.

And I think the trial court correctly made its decision

based on this issue, rather than needing

to go on to the constitution.

It wasn't the state entitled to some forewarning,

some notice that there was going to be this alternative ground?

I think it was the state that relied

on this alternative ground of proving

that its toxelizer was so accurate

that the factual premise that Judge Shulman,

or the defendant's motion was based on was incorrect.

So they shifted it from a due process argument

to an argument about the factual accuracy of this machine.

And so it did become crucial, and it

was grounds to make that inadmissible.

Couldn't the trial court have exercised its discretion

and said, OK, well, we'll conclude the hearing,

but I'll accept this certificate to be filed by fax afterwards,

given to both parties.

Why wouldn't that have been a reasonable way to proceed?

And I think that is what the state's motion to reconsider

was proposing.

It was telling the judge, look, we

think this was our error, but we can correct it.

We believe we have the documents.

And I think the court considered that

and issued a ruling on the motion to reconsider

and said, you know, I'm still not

willing to set this precedent that we're

going to allow the state to reopen the case or continue

mid-hearing in order, because they've now discovered

a better way that they could have submitted that evidence.

That's just not the kind of precedent

I think that trial court, understandably, wanted to set.

Can't imagine the number of times

after a hearing or a trial, I thought of ways

that I could have possibly admitted evidence.

That's not something the court's likely to entertain.

But isn't it a little unusual for the court to suesponte

bring this issue forward and dismiss the case?

Why not let the parties discuss the evidence

and let the defendant take that motion at the end of the hearing?

I think the fact that the defense attorney maybe

didn't take it right away and the judge did

goes to the judge's credit.

I think the rules, the law is quite clear.

It shall not be admissible without a preventive maintenance

check.

Black boxes, whether it spits out a number of 0.16 or above,

means either this person goes to jail, mandatory minimum,

or not.

So it's crucial that they're maintained and they're checked up

and we can rely on.

It's very hard to challenge the results of an intoxicizer.

Was it proper for the trial court

to relate back to his experiences as a prosecutor

as a basis for this decision?

I think it was an informal act

of I sympathize with you prosecutor where you are

and I understand you're in a tough position trying

to make a very difficult motion here.

So I think to that degree it was understandable

and within his discretion.

I don't think it makes a difference either way.

I don't think it demonstrates impatience or animosity

or anything like that.

But a court can unsustainably exercise its discretion

without being impatient or without raising its voice

or having harsh exchanges, right?

Yes, yes.

And I think given the decision that the judge gave

and the opportunity he gave to both parties

to make their record and their arguments

shows that this was a discretionary decision that he made.

And just noting my yellow light is on,

it seems with the position that the state is taking now,

they would agree that the state could not

go forward, an aggravated DWI charge in the Superior Court.

Therefore, if the court was correct,

as I maintain to suppress the evidence and exclude it,

therefore, the next step to dismiss it

was not premature and was legally correct

because they could not have possibly gone forward.

There are no further questions.

Thank you.

Dr. Wachuck.

Thank you, Your Honor.

The only point I'd like to make

is that it wasn't the court's obligation

to start to make the arguments of the defense.

The defense should have made the motion to dismiss.

The court should have heard argument on that.

And instead, what the court did was

it took matters into its own hands

and dismissed the state's case during a motion to suppress.

And that is not contemplated by the rules.

The court has no further questions.

I would ask that the case be submitted.

Thank you very much, counsel.

The case is submitted.
