This is case 2020-0132, Kevin Brown et al. versus St. Cobain Performance Plastics Corporation et al.

Good morning, Attorney Hannon. You will be arguing first in this matter, and I understand you reserve two minutes.

Please proceed.

Again, may it please the court. Hannon, number 2269896 for plaintiffs. Again, who are with us here today.

The benefits of early detection of serious latent disease are well recognized by medicine.

Early diagnosis improves the prospects for treatment, prolongs life, minimizes pain and disability.

It mitigates the harm of toxic exposure. Mitigation is something the law promotes.

It reduces the harm or the cost of treatment for the exposed person in a medical system.

And it's inequitable for the exposed person or the insurance system to pay for the cost of diagnostic testing

when that intervention is, number one, medically necessary, and number two, caused by tortuous conduct.

Here, what defendant asks you to do is have the common law turn a blind eye to those suffering tortuously caused toxic exposure.

Again, they say defendants can tortuously expose people to proven hazardous substance, and we have no responsibility for remedying the harm.

Harm is an important issue that I'll address. It's the exposed person who doesn't have insurance or can't get insurance

or the insurance system that's supposed to bear the economic harm of defendant's tortuous conduct.

And their only remedy is to wait until serious latent disease has advanced so far that it has become obvious

and the benefit of early detection is lost. It's contrary to every guidance in medicine.

Shouldn't you be making this argument to the legislature? Why shouldn't we take the Michigan approach and say this is not for us?

This is for a different body.

Absolutely not, Your Honor. So, in this situation, there's an underlying tort.

There's negligence, trespass, and nuisance. That's required proof under the Bauer standard. It's one of the guardrails.

Fill me in with causation, please.

I'm sorry?

Fill me in with the causation element.

The causation element is the tortuous conduct causing the significant exposure and the increased risk of disease.

Do any of your plaintiffs have unquestionably unsafe levels of PFAS in their blood system?

Again, Your Honor, that's not part of the pleadings. It's not part of the proof here, but it doesn't make any...

I was just curious.

It doesn't change the analysis because defendant says here, even if you had PFAS in your blood, then that doesn't show injury.

That doesn't show harm.

And to go back to the question about the legislature, here, Your Honor, number one, the claims are founded in common law.

Number two, you're analyzing whether or not there's a remedy under common law.

That's what this court does.

The court analyzes whether or not the claim, the remedy here, under common law is consistent with the restatement,

and the other common law that the court's established over time.

It seems to me that you're looking for a remedy when there's no injury.

There is an injury.

And for that, we need to go back to Section 7 of the restatement of torrents.

Section 7 of...

Before we get off the legislature, I mean, we are confronted with this interesting situation where the legislature, the governor,

and all our elective officials in the two branches have decided expressly against adopting a claim for medical monitoring.

And as Justice Hicks observed in the previous argument, this is a very, and I think to which you agreed, or would agree,

this is a complex area with lots of competing considerations.

And against the backdrop of what the legislature hasn't done, why should we do this?

Well, Your Honor, in this case, actually, the record shows in the finance that indicated the legislature passed the bill.

And the governor vetoed it.

And there were insufficient votes to overcome the veto.

And that's our legislative process.

Your Honor, number one, the common law is before you here, and the need to address the remedy is now before you here.

And how are you going to pick?

You're going to give more weight to the veto than you are to the houses of the legislature passing the bill?

The court shouldn't do that here.

And the court shouldn't give credence to failed legislation, one way or the other,

because as the case we cited, now forget it, but the case we cited,

recognize that there can be many reasons for failure of a bill.

And the court isn't here to analyze that or second guess that.

The court is to look at the common law and to look at whether there's a remedy under this court's common law.

And that's why, again, we go back to the restatement of tort.

The restatement of tort, Section 7-1, does not define injury as physical injury.

It defines it as an invasion of a legally protected interest.

And it restatement notes that the most usual form of injury is the affliction of some harm.

Section 7 doesn't limit recoverable harm to physical harm.

Section 7, comment B, defines harm as the loss or detriment to any person,

including detriment to physical well-being or pecuniary advantage.

And this court has consistently found pecuniary advantage to be an invasion or harm to pecuniary advantage

to be an invasion of a legally protected interest.

It did in the Cody case, Smith v. Cody.

The costs of the extraordinary medical expenses were part of the invasion of a legally protected interest.

Historically, though we've done that with caution, you'll agree with that.

Absolutely. And if we look at the tort cases over time,

what we can see, Your Honor, is that you've historically recognized

a legally protected interest in pecuniary harm.

You've done so in a number of cases.

As I mentioned, some others are Porter, Fisher, Heston, Tessier, Silva,

without proof of present physical injury, where you've also recognized interest

in avoiding non-pecuniary harm.

And where those interests are emotional, you've put guardrails on those.

You've required, but the guardrail is not defining the injury.

It's proof of genuineness of the harm.

But your claim isn't based on emotional distress.

Correct.

Correct.

Your damages are purely economic.

They're not purely economic, as the Sadler case recognized,

and consistent with Board or Brooke.

They're not purely economic damages because of the significant exposure

of the increased risk of disease and the medical necessity for diagnostic testing.

Are emotional distress cases or bystander liability cases instructive?

I mean, there is an invasion there.

There is, take the Corso line of cases where the parents in that case

were emotionally harmed by witnessing the automobile accident involving their child.

But we've insisted that there would be a physical injury associated with that.

And that, again, gets back to this concept, this notion of a linchpin.

Where is the standard here?

What are the guardrails?

Right.

Well, let's look at Corso and use that as an example.

Corso recognized the interest, the injury, as the protection against emotional harm.

Corso said we're going to put guardrails on what is harm that's recoverable,

requiring physical injury, in that case to prove the genuineness of the injury,

I mean, genuous of the harm.

And again, distinguishing the injury from the harm.

So Bauer does that here.

Bauer doesn't say, and as in the Superior Court did,

but Bauer doesn't say just any old exposure,

just like the court hasn't said in its emotional distress claim,

just any old emotional distress.

Bauer says significant exposure.

Increased risk of disease, requiring the medical necessity of diagnostic testing.

Those are the linchpins, and it's very consistent with what the court has done here

in past cases to put a guardrail or a limit on the claims.

Again, it's not just any claim.

And so here, Corso really helps us.

And in Siciliano, the courts said,

well, we're not going to, we're going to analyze bystander liability to third persons,

and where that person hasn't witnessed the injury or the harm or the accident,

we're not going to extend that.

But again, it is instructive.

It has a guardrail, a linchpin, that limits the recovery there.

It's limiting the expansion of the tort.

And actually, the important thing is here,

and I'll give you an example, Your Honor.

I think I've got a second.

In the Hanson case, here's what the Hanson case said.

Mirror exposure to an allegedly harmful substance, however, is not enough for recovery.

Courts have set forth several criteria for determining whether a plaintiff is entitled to recover the cost of medical monitoring.

Such criteria prevent unnecessary litigation and unwarranted recoveries.

So the medical monitoring cases that in the states that follow the restatement like New Hampshire does

recognize the Bauer standards are these limitations, these guardrails,

consistent with, for example, Corso, consistent with the analysis in Siciliano.

In the Sadler case, when it rejected Metro North floodgates comment,

it said any given plaintiffs will still be required to plead and prove the essential elements of their underlying claim.

Including that the defendant's conduct caused the need for the medical testing.

Again, here, that's the guardrail, the lynchpin.

Without Bauer, you wouldn't have that.

We accept the Bauer standards as putting those guardrails on here,

as if the court finds, and understandably, that it needs guardrails.

And the other thing to say is, there are safeguards,

and I wanted to say this is really a high burden.

And again, the records in these cases have showed that this is really a high burden.

And allowing the remedy of the cost of medical monitoring also doesn't change any of the safeguards in traditional tort law.

You've got to prove the elements of the underlying claim.

You've got to prove legal cause and cause and fact.

You have to, you still have the safeguards in civil procedure.

Because it's expert testimony, you have the safeguards of Doug Bearer and RSA 51629.

Defense can make factual challenges, as you've heard in the previous argument to each one of these claims.

Each one of the Bauer elements is going to be challenged here, and that's your lynchpin or safeguard.

Thank you, Attorney Hannon.

Attorney Felmy.

Good morning, May. Please, the court.

I'm Bruce Felmy, and together with my co-counsel, Mark Sheffo, and the district court action, we represent St. Cobain.

It's obvious from this morning's presentation that, of course, it's familiar with the breeze, familiar with the issues.

I'm not going to repeat things I may address some points Mr. Hannon's made,

but what I really would like to do is to talk about four things, and let me just first identify them.

I want to address this idea that the mandate of a present injury, which has been 200 years of a requirement in our common law,

is somehow either preserved or not challenged by what the plaintiffs are alleging.

This is a dramatic change to say you do not have to demonstrate physical manifestation from this exposure in order to have a recoverable action.

So how does it differ from the individual that's in a car accident, suffers no injury, yet gets tested,

and the tests are compensable because he's involved in an accident, but there's no physical injury?

Well, the cases that are used, for example, in the Friends case, the example in Champion in New Hampshire,

these are cases where people are hit, they have hit in the head, they have bruises, they have cuts,

they have various injuries. I mean, it's hard to argue that these claims that there's no injury,

and then somehow there somehow undoes the present injury factor.

Every case of that sort involves somebody who was exposed to a traumatic act where medical professionals

says we have to examine to determine if there's neurologic.

Mr. Hannon would say that this exposure is rather traumatic, so that's solved.

This exposure is traumatic?

Are you claiming it's benign, Mr. Filming?

Well, let me just talk about what we have in terms of exposure.

The amount of product that we're talking about in patients' bodies, number one, is in 95% of Americans, virtually everybody.

You asked my member of the class, you're in, all right?

Let's be clear.

You and I have likely never met anybody in Southern New Hampshire that since the average amount of blood serum is four parts per million,

we've probably never met anybody that wouldn't be in the class.

Now, they may not be in Mr. Hannon's class, they would be in the next class to come along.

These are ubiquitous amounts of product.

This is also a product that is used in so many different ways.

This is not just used in, you know, St. Cobain or TCI's product.

It also is related to injury results that we're concerned with that cover the entire span of adult illness.

This is not like mesophilioma, which is so to signature for asbestos.

This is high cholesterol, thyroid disease, various cancers, colitis, things which are pre-existent,

which operate outside any connection with PFOA and how we're ever going to go looking for it.

We then get to the issue, and this is the plaintiff's case in the district court, and we have a pretty fulsome record there.

Their experts have tried to determine what the medical benefit would be from doing this testing.

And the results are at such a minuscule level.

And if you see on page 35 of our brief, we've simply presented it, but the appendix lays it out.

So just take renal cancer.

They are proposing a 90-year period of searching for medical diseases, including renal cancer.

The projection with respect to renal cancer from their experts over that 90 years is that they would find 0.04 cases annually,

not a full human case, 0.04 cases, new cases for every million of population.

Was that your second point out of the four?

That's the second one.

Okay.

So the second point is...

This is the clearest case for not applying medical monitoring.

You talk about substantial exposure and the like.

We're talking about such a minuscule yield on this to apply that to the state of New Hampshire, that ratio, Your Honor.

0.04 against a million.

We're slightly over a million at about a million four.

That takes 17 years.

A 17-year period is expected from their experts to yield one additional case of renal cancer.

Can I go back to 0.1?

Sure.

An injury?

One of the cases of both sides of sighted is the state versus exon mobile case.

And this court stated that the injury in that case occurred when MTBE entered state waters.

And I don't think there's any dispute here that PFAS, PFOA, is detectable in the ground waters of the individuals in the Merrimack Valley District.

So isn't it just completely anomalous that an injury occurs when the state's waters are polluted, but when the citizens of New Hampshire drink those waters, there is no injury?

Well, I think there's...

I don't think it's anomalous because we're talking about what would be a toward action that would lead to a remedy of medical monitoring.

I mean, there was property damage that took place according to the court in the exon mobile case.

That gave rise to well monitoring.

And that's a part of these cases.

Our district court case has a property damage, but the property damage case is not going to result in essentially the population of New Hampshire being subjected to 90 years of testing.

And testing does involve inconvenience and risk, and depending on its intrusiveness, it does have an impact on the lives.

But to do that and to do it at the cost that is projected here, the cost projected for that searching for the one case in 17 years or more in the case of the class here is $780 million.

It was $71 million in the TCI case.

It's $780 million is sought.

And the class has been certified in the federal court?

No, we are having a class certification hearing on the 30th of November.

Is resolution of this impact certification?

Could very well, I suppose, but I don't know that the decision will be done by then to make that difference.

Well, it bears on it, but it's not, they do operate in a separate direction.

So even if this, help me out please, even if this tort element were cut out of the federal class actions, you're saying that the property damage claims exist there that would survive?

Because we haven't touched them yet?

The court has actually said he's going forward, Judge Alpence said he's going forward with the property damage claims.

Now, if he doesn't certify the class, they aren't going to survive.

Thank you.

What's number three?

Well, you know, number three is the issue of the clear case in terms of the law.

You know, this discussion of the Hanson case in 93, I want to just address the jurisprudence here.

In 1997, the Buckley case is decided by the US Supreme Court.

That is the watershed, the lynchpin, the place where there's an inflection point.

Prior to that, you had a number of cases going down the medical monitoring road.

Since then, no high court, really other than the Donovan case in Massachusetts, which is so unusual because of their subcellular requirement,

I come back to that, but the courts in the United States are not adopting this in general.

It is a minority view and the reasons and their scattered reasons, but primarily it's the policy.

It is the view which is our, everyone's used the term guardrail.

The limitations we place on actions in tort and negligence is that we have to have a personal injury now,

and we're not going to fight for preserving future injuries.

And that's drummed in to every judge and trial lawyer in New Hampshire.

It's more probable than not, no future injury.

Is Donovan Massachusetts case understood by you as requiring a physical injury?

Well, it's highly controversial and what they have said is a subcellular manifestation would be.

I think that is seen to be by many commentators a huge stretch.

I think the Donovan court said it's some evidence of it.

Other courts have said no.

And I think that it has not really, the Connecticut court says we're not sure we might follow Donovan.

It is hardly the sort of landmark that the Henry case in Michigan is or the Wood case in Alabama.

In any event, it would require different pleadings, a different theory of the case than we have here.

You'd have to plead it differently.

You know, I think what's happened in this matter is that the plaintiffs are trying to drive the cause of action with the remedy.

They're saying this is the remedy we need.

And you know, I think the Wood case in Kentucky addresses that the best and it's been commented on in other cases.

You know, and the comment was it is not the remedy that drives or supports the cause of action.

It is the cause of action that drives or supports the remedy.

And we know the remedy and we know how to deal with personal injury actions.

And we know in this case that the number of people that would be benefited or found through this process is so small as we spend $780 million,

that we then come right into where Buckley and Henry and the recent case in Chicago and Perry come down.

And the point is that the cost benefits, the impact on the justice system,

not just the resources of the court to handle this because these are staggeringly complicated cases.

We've been going since 2016 across town.

We've got over 400 pleadings in the docket.

We don't have a trial date yet.

And this is taking up a huge amount of cost and time.

So these are complicated cases.

What would be the court's involvement if medical monitoring was found?

I mean, do the plaintiffs and class members get a check for 90 years' worth of medical monitoring or whatever?

Well, it's one of the reasons why the Bauer standards are so controversial

because Mr. Hannon keeps coming back to him.

In Bauer, it was really a lump sum settlement, very critical of that.

And it results in, unfortunately, you know, a lot of new cars being bought

and other things happen other than people, you know, going through monitoring.

Some courts establish some sort of a court administration process.

But if you look at the appendix in our action as to what the $780 million is

and say what court or court system is going to be able to do these?

$300 million for, you know, this item and imaging.

And who's going to coordinate that?

And coordinating with insurers and the like.

Point number four?

Well, number four.

When we talk about New Hampshire and the bedrock rule of law,

I think the negligent infliction of emotional distress cases are powerful.

Almost every court that has addressed this issue has come back and talked about their law on that.

And certainly the Corso line of cases makes it plain that for policy reasons to,

we had Justice Grimes' dissent to not let the genie out of the bottle, as he described it,

we are going to have physical manifestation of harm.

Now, these are cases where we're talking about mothers and fathers that see the child run down

in the intersection, they die in their arms.

These are crushing damage cases.

I know something about them.

These are cases where these people for the rest of their lives deal with the impact of that

and because they're not hit or injured personally with the actual accident,

they are denied a remedy unless they have physical manifestation.

You could never square that line of law and that's there to keep boundaries on the limitation of liability.

That's what it's there for.

Nobody doubts the compassionate nature of those injuries.

And to say we're going to create a doctrine that allows us to spend decades and decades

looking for these additional cases for people who don't have a doctor saying you're going to get sick,

they don't have any injury, they have submitted, they have no personal injury.

We spend that, we run exactly into what Justice Breyer says in Buckley,

which is the risk we have is for those people who are relying with real injury claims on the justice system

to provide them a reliable way of having their claims adjudicated

and to have those resources and that time to say nothing to the time that has related to the tragedies

of the last three years for the justice system, trying to manage and get justice to people during a pandemic,

they cannot have the inconsequential claims, even though they may be heartfelt and they may be afraid,

we're not going to let those damage the availability of justice for those people who come with real claims.

And I think that point is telling particularly in New Hampshire with respect to negligent infliction of emotional distress.

And I think that if we apply this here with no ground rules, with no guard rules,

and simply say we're going to let experts and their lawyers go off and come up with these classes,

as Breyer says, there's tens of thousands of products and emissions and people that come in.

The West Virginia experience is outlined in the case in Michigan in footnote 12,

describes exactly what happened there. It was not pretty.

The Corona course in the Court of Appeals in footnote three discusses it as well.

Hundreds of thousands of litigants came in after Bauer with the Bauer rules to litigate their cases.

One of those cases, they brought people in from seven different states to come in and litigate toxins

because the Bauer doors had been open and it's been challenging to manage that ever since

and it is not getting better. And I'll leave you with this.

None of those cases present the difficulties of causation and the miniscule yield on the search that is sought to be undertaken

or the costs that this presentation has.

This is the poster child for a medical monitoring case that is unworkable.

It's impractical. It's inconsistent with New Hampshire law. Staggeringly expensive for what?

To yield every some number of decades one additional case. It should not be undertaken.

Thank you.

Thank you, Your Honor.

I'm going to whip through a couple of these points here.

The restatement says the most usual form of injury is the inflection of some harm.

This is not the remedy driving the bus.

The Metro North case made comments. It never addressed standards like Bauer.

It never analyzed the restatement of torts.

And Sadler, Meyer, ExxonMobil and Donovan have all been decided after.

Bauer is decided in 1999. There's no evidence here of floods of claims.

And the individual experience, in one case, should not define the common law here.

You're not advocating for the Donovan standard in Massachusetts, are you?

You just strictly Bauer's.

Strictly Bauer, Your Honor.

The defense made much about costs and time of this program.

Of course, those are facts. This is an issue of common law.

Our expert, it's in the appendix, Appendix 5, 113 to 121.

It's actually in the TCI record.

Says that this is the actual minimum number that you would find.

So let's put this in perspective.

And this is why it's a factual issue that you've got to leave.

Leave to the trial courts.

St. Cobain and TCI began releasing Pofoa in 1986.

The contamination was not disclosed until 2016.

30 years of exposure.

30 years of exposure to a chemical that increases the risk

not just one, but multiple health endpoints.

Multiple health endpoints.

Mr. Family mentioned this.

These are risks that plaintiffs will carry for decades.

Thank you very much.

Court, thanks all parties for their briefing and argument in this case.

Both cases are submitted.
