This is case 2020-0592, the New London Hospital Association, Hank, versus Town of Newport.

Morning, Council. Justice Bassett is disqualified from this case. We're going to proceed with this panel of three.

And Attorney Johnson, I understand you reserved two minutes.

I have reserved two minutes. Thank you, Your Honor.

Please proceed.

May it please the court. My name is Matt Johnson from Divine Nobleman at Branch,

and I represent the Appellant, the New London Hospital Association, and its appeal.

The central issue on appeal is the trial court's determination of the efficiency of the evidence

on the fourth factor of the Elder Trust Test previously established by this court.

The trial court aired an evaluation of this fourth factor.

For that reason, New London Hospital asked this court to reverse the trial court

and find that New London Hospital is entitled to a charitable property tax exemption

for tax shares 2015, 2017, and 2018. Those were the three consolidated shares that were tried.

Factor four requires the applicant to satisfy the requirement that his income and profits are used

for no other purposes than for that which New London Hospital was established.

Since 1918, New London Hospital's general purpose has been to provide health care.

And its current articles include a general purpose, and I quote,

to provide other facilities, services, and products for the care of persons

afflicted with illness or disabilities. And that can be found at Appendix 2 and Page 4.

The court has long held that the provision of health care services is charitable

under the New Hampshire Common Law and RSA 7223L, which includes in part,

quote, to perform some service of public good or welfare,

advancing the physical well-being of the general public,

or a substantial and indefinite segment of the general public.

The court also repeatedly has held the purpose of the charitable exemption

statute is to encourage the operation and work of charitable institutions

and that the statutory purpose should not be afforded by strained, over-technical,

or unnecessary construction. That was first cited in YMCAB Portsmouth back in 1937

and more recently in the Marist Brothers decision.

New London Hospital submits. This is exactly what happened

and what the trial court did when it concluded that New London Hospital

had not satisfactorily explained its use of income to satisfy the fourth

Elder Trust Factor. Now the court reviews sufficiency of the evidence decisions

to NOVO, both the Marist Brothers case and the Elder Trust case,

make that point clear that the sufficiency of the evidence is the standard

and that is NOVO. Contrary to the town's arguments,

after a week plus of testimony and introduction of hundreds of exhibits

regarding how New London Hospital operates, the trial court only noted

two potential reasons why New London Hospital did not satisfy the fourth factor

and I'll address both of them. New London Hospital submits that

the only fair reading of the trial court order is that it found that

New London Hospital had paid reasonable compensation and accepted that evidence,

otherwise the court would not have written the order the way it did.

I would have said it failed in showing that factor because one of the components

of the fourth Elder Trust factor is reasonable compensation.

Trial court did say that New London Hospital did not satisfactorily

explain itself on its use of income and that is why New London Hospital

submits that this is a NOVO review. New London Hospital further submits

that the trial court was run factually and legally on the two points

and I'll address both of them. First on the patient referral policy,

the trial court suggested that it showed that New London Hospital operated

to advance the economic interest of Dartmouth-Thichcock.

This is a written document, the court can look at it. It is at a Phoenix 2

at page 63. The patient referral policy to which the trial court

addressed is expressly voluntary by a term, by its terms.

It sets no requirements that New London Hospital has to refer

patients to any Dartmouth-Thichcock related specialties.

Moreover, there was undisputed testimony at the trial,

even supported by the test witnesses that there could be clinical

benefits for referring patients to specialists. New London Hospital

also testified to the ability of specialists to visit Newport Health

Center which helped alleviate some of the material issues in

Newport by providing better access to care and eliminating

some of the barriers due to transportation. These were concerns

that were repeatedly addressed and highlighted in the community

benefits reports that New London Hospital is required to provide

and file with the Attorney General's Office. Those are all included in Appendix 2.

So in your view, the trial court didn't engage in any credibility findings?

The trial court engaged in no credibility findings. There is nothing in the

order to suggest that the trial court engaged in any credibility final

findings. The order says it was not satisfactorily explained. There is no

suggestion that the trial court found any of the testimony

incredible or not believable. So we're just looking at the four corners

of the patient referral policy as to this element of the fourth factor?

I think you're looking at two factors, Your Honor. You're looking at the four

corners to start with because it is a voluntary policy.

So I submit that how can it be

enough to look at voluntary policy and for the trial court to rule

that therefore that showed an advance in economic benefit of Dartmouth-Hitchcock?

Make a broader point. What's the other? The other point is that

even beyond that, evidence was submitted about

what actually happened and that Dartmouth-Hitchcock has specialists, patients are required

and so that there are clinical reasons why

and there are no credibility determination. I mean we go back and read the transcript

of the trial and is that what you're suggesting we need to do?

I would submit, Your Honor, if you go back and look at the trial there's no credibility determinations relative

to the use and need of specialists and referring a

patient to Dartmouth-Hitchcock or others. The trial court made

no credibility findings. I find it entitled to reject evidence.

It doesn't have to accept it. We just need to explain himself a bit more.

Perhaps, but there is nothing suggestive of the court order that

he evaluated on a credibility determination. He evaluated

as I read his order on a sufficiency of the evidence basis which is

why I articulated the other point. Does the DeNovo standard

apply to the cross appeal? The DeNovo standard applies to

sufficiency of the evidence so I think it's a DeNovo across the board.

Another point to make that the court

overlooked is Dartmouth-Hitchcock is a non-profit.

So the fact that you are referring specialists from one non-profit to another

non-profit I think cannot be, was ignored by the

trial court. There was evidence submitted that was uncontroverted relative

to the non-profit statement of Dartmouth-Hitchcock. New London hospital

we introduced the articles of agreement, the community benefit forms,

community health needs forms, the community assessments forms, the 990s

all from Dartmouth-Hitchcock. All were introduced as full

benefits into the evidence and the court discounted that fact. The fact that

that one charity refers another patient to

another charity for the provision of clinical care cannot be a reason

to deny a charitable tax exemption. I note that in elder

trust the non-profit in that case paid an income

to a for-profit entity to run the facility and that

for-profit entity two of the board members sat on the

stock in the for-profit entity and this court said that was not enough

to deny a charitable exemption and in fact granted the charitable exemption.

So if there were a referral to a for-profit hospital does that change

the analysis? It does not change the analysis if there

is a clinical reason and if you go back to the referral policy, the referral

policy says you have to refer patients in an ethical and a moral manner

and it may very well be that the best service for that patient

would be refer that patient to a for-profit hospital. The

charitable tax exemption should not hang on the clinical

decisions that a doctor makes while working

for someone in a hospital or at Newport Health Center to serve

its patients. It would be kind of scary if it did. Yes, Your Honor.

Agreed. Similarly, the other point in Harris Brothers, the local

non-profit paid 99% of its income

upstream to the parent non-profit and this court said

that that was not a basis to deny the exemption and in fact

reversed the trial court on a sufficiency of the evidence standard and found that

the found that the Harris Brothers was entitled to a charitable

tax exemption. The other point on this issue is the court, the truck order

also overlooks the benefits that moved on a hospital

received by this relationship which were lower malpractice costs

that were maintained alone that allowed the Newport Health Center to be built, integrated

medical records which improved patient experiences, access to

specialists which I've touched on. This is a non-profit referring patients

to another non-profit that has the same clinical and health

mission. Also, the affiliation agreement between Dartmouth-Hitchcock

and New London Hospital is clear that it expressly

prohibits both entities from taking any action that would

serve their charitable status under federal and state law, so not just

federal law, but state law. That is found at appendix two, at page 28

at paragraph 2.4. Would you like to address the cross appeal?

Your Honor, I believe on the cross appeal

a couple points on that. Mostly I believe

that we've covered those well in brief. I have two quick points on the

second factor. This is exactly the hypothetical strained

analysis of this court that said repeatedly should not be done.

There was evidence as since 1918 of the use of New London

Hospital and Newport Health Center when it started as a health care facility

that has a clearly recognized share of purpose. On factor three

there was an abundant testimony regarding the use

of Newport Health Center disputed as a primary care facility

and that is a provision of health care services and qualifies

state law. There was no evidence that they were using Newport Health Center for some other

purpose other than providing health care to Newport residents

and the surrounding area. Were the payments

to New Hampshire Imaging strictly for services provided?

Yes. They were 100% for services provided.

New Hampshire Imaging was set up so that hospitals that did not have the

means to buy equipment all by themselves pooled their resources

to buy radiology services and every 990 specifies

exactly what those services were for. There was no evidence at trial

that the court found that the New Hampshire Imaging services were not

for charity care. The court appeared to be

wanted more explanation but the explanation was provided by

CEO Bruce King who testified undisputedly as to what the purpose

of New Hampshire Imaging was and that it also never operated as

a profit, never generated a profit. If there was money left over the costs

were reduced to all hospitals. Can you speak to the trial court's concerns about

reasonableness of the compensation paid to the CEO

absolutely. Under the fourth factor.

My read of the court order was that the court found that we met that burden

on the reasonable compensation otherwise why say that and say

but I have concerns the way the paragraph is structured

and if that is not the interpretation of the order

the New London Hospital submitted multiple

real time documentary evidence of the market studies and data

and compensation analysis that went on a regular and annual

basis to assure that it was paying its providers no more than market conditions

and thus there's nothing in the court order that goes into the details

that suggests that the court discounted that testimony or

incorrectly. I read the court orders saying

yes you prove the reasonable compensation but that

was not enough because I had concerns about the referral policy

and concerns about New Hampshire Imaging.

The language is a little bit

it could be more direct. Understood.

Understood but there was evidence it's all in the epics

that we provided the documentation of the actual real time

market based compensation studies that were provided

and tested so that New London Hospital was not paying

excessive compensation to any of its providers.

The trial court got the first three factors

right in this order but it got the fourth factor wrong

under the efficiency of the evidence test just as like the Marist brothers cases court

review the evidence the court should find that the trial court

paired in finding that New London Hospital did not meet its burden

of sufficiency of evidence on the fourth factor

I see my time is my last final minutes

at my last point being the court should reverse and grant the extension.

Thank you Attorney Johnson. I understand you're

proceeding for eight minutes and Attorney Serge for seven.

May it please the court? My name is Cary Roman.

I am here on behalf of the town of Newport and I'll be speaking on elder factors

two and three which I realized opposing counsel only touched upon

and my co-counsel will be talking about elder trust factor

four so I'm happy to take questions at any time.

What is the standard review? I knew you were going to ask that your Honor so I'm ready to answer that.

In Marist brothers versus Effingham the standard review was very clearly laid out

so where the trial court has made factual findings this court

must uphold those factual findings unless they lack evidence

support or are legally erroneous and I think that applies to

factor two, three and four. Of course applying the law

to the facts is a de novo review. Marist brothers sets out a very clear standard

of review and it's a more recent case that I think you can look to in terms of applying that.

I want to make two important points right from the start

number one at the trial court the burden was on New London

hospital to prove that it's a title to this exemption and I think during

the pleadings and in the briefs that

point gets blurred. It was not the town's burden to

show that there was other evidence to disprove that. They had to meet their burden

first and then the burden obviously could shift. Our position on factors two and

three is they simply did not meet that burden based on the evidence that was presented.

And what's the standard of preponderance of the evidence?

Well so that speaks to yes I'm going to focus I wanted to speak on a factor four

but on factors two and three it is preponderance of the evidence you're on but I

maintain and I'll explain why that the evidence simply was

not sufficient. It did not meet the preponderance of the evidence for the trial court

defined as they did. You apply the very long

since 1937 case law common law that you guys have decided at this court

applying that law to facts of this case I don't think that they met the

preponderance of the evidence on two and three. So you also see it as a sufficiently of the

evidence issued then? So that I feel like that

the burden and the evidence is a little bit complicated because and I'll

use factor four as an example that in terms of

having to prove that none of the profits went anywhere

other than its charitable purpose right you have to submit some evidence on all of

those points and then once the evidence is in it's a sufficiency of the evidence

that point is the evidence sufficient on where that money is going

so I do feel like that it's a little bit nuance that there are

those two ideas of preponderance of the evidence and then once you have the evidence

so move that into factors two and three. For factors two and three I feel like

it's either way once the evidence that

was submitted so I feel like they at the first point the evidence they said it was

not sufficient to meet that preponderance of the evidence standard

and I'll explain why and then secondarily

once you take all of the evidence that they did submit on those

factors it wasn't sufficient to prove those legal factors of whether or not

they were obligated to perform the charitable purpose and whether or not they actually

performed and used the Newport Health Center for the charitable

purposes. The important thing I want to say here my second major

point that I want this court to remember when they're when you're deciding this case

is that it's not whether they are they are a charitable trust

that is part of the analysis under RSA 72 but that is not the analysis

so the community benefits forms and the charity and all that

information that they submitted is a small part of a much larger analysis

and the statute says that specifically you can't just look to the community benefits

and whether or not they're a charitable trust. It also doesn't matter that there are

501c3 or a non-profit. They have to be that in order to

be a charitable tax exemption property but that's not the

standard and there's a reason for that because this court said

in 1937 I believe in the YWCA case that

they addressed it head on and it hasn't come up yet but there are standards

under our law that under the Constitution every

taxpayer has to pay its fair share of the tax burden and what's happening on these

tax exemption cases is that you're taking in this case

$200,000 a year in taxes and saying

Newland and hospital you don't have to pay that. That gets shifted to all the other

taxpayers in Newport. But isn't that a policy determination by the

legislature? It is. In establishing the charitable tax exemption

It absolutely is Your Honor and in that YWCA case

this court tackled that head on to say is that constitutional

you don't have these exemptions and the court in that case said

it is if the exemption serves the general

welfare. So this ties into this very broad principle

I have argued in our brief and this goes more to factor 3 in how that Newport

property was used but they're absolutely

in your cases every time in the last since 1937

the seven seminal cases

tax exemptions which were granted this court

in six of them talked about this idea of altruism

benevolence and generosity they didn't use those exact words every time

but in some of the cases they did but if you look at those cases and it starts

with YWCA it's the city of Franklin it's in elder trust

elder trust even talks about and I think it's important I don't normally quote

from cases on oral argument but I want to just because that's our seminal case

in elder trust they said that the articles in incorporation sufficiently

describe its discretion and define an enforceable charitable

obligation even without an express reference persons of low

and moderate income we know however as it follows

the exact same line we know however that the actual provision of

such services to such persons of low and moderate income

may be an important consideration in analyzing the third factor

and that's what has to be done here on your cases

bear that out the only case that doesn't talk about that is Marist

the reason is if you look at Marist closely no one rated it

just on points two and three how is the evidence insufficient

the evidence is insufficient let's talk about point three first

the evidence is insufficient because you have to look at Dartmouth Hitchcock health involvement

and I the trial court did not look at those facts

by them the evidence was unequivocal and undisputed

that Dartmouth Hitchcock health as the sole member of

New London hospital ultimately had control over how

New London hospital was operated and in the appendix your honor

if you look at the bylaws we need to do essentially

two charitable analyses one of New London hospital one of Dartmouth Hitchcock

you could or it could

New London hospital and Dartmouth Hitchcock set up their structure this way we didn't require them to

they set up this way if they didn't want to have to do that right if they

then they just set up their bylaws their articles of

agreement and the article to affiliate they could have set it up differently would it make a difference

I think it would if the sole member were

a for-profit hospital well I think that would be yes

it wouldn't make a difference in terms of the facts of this case because

regardless if it was a for-profit or a non-profit you have

sole member who is making the controlling decisions

of New London hospital I just want to call from the bylaws

sorry but if Dartmouth Hitchcock is another non-profit I guess I'm not

getting the connection the sole member connection

if it doesn't matter if they're a non-profit or a for-profit I'm just

not getting the issue yes your honor so the reason is that

because number one we did not have documents

and evidence and information on Dartmouth Hitchcock we had

three pages of their amended articles and we had

some information but in terms of their actual operations where their money's

going how they operate they failed to carry the burden because they didn't establish

that Dartmouth was a charitable can you just briefly discuss point two

yes so for point two my focus is

my time has stopped is that this obligation factor that they have

to be obligated to perform the charitable purpose so my point on

factor two is how on earth can New London hospital be

obligated that is enforceable to perform its charitable purposes

if Dartmouth Hitchcock Health as its sole member and I quote from the bylaws

has the power to reallocate the assets and resources

of New London hospital in a manner which DHH reasonably

believes is in good faith consistent with the purpose and in the best

interest of the integrated academic health care delivery system

throughout northern New England not even focused on New Hampshire

how on earth can there be an enforceable obligation on

New London hospital when Dartmouth Hitchcock has that type of. And that's something that we need to decide

based on the four corners of the bylaws. Yes your honor because

our case for the RSA talks about the charter and any other documents

and the case law elder trust says when you're looking at factor two you look at

the founding documents so that would be the articles of incorporation

the bylaws and in this case also the articles of agreement with DHH

those are the documents that control New London hospital's operations

so you absolutely look at those. It's a don't know review of the

interpretation because there are contracts right a legal interpretation

that's a don't know review but then of course it's a sufficiency of the evidence about whether

or not the trial court applied the facts and I feel like the trial court here did not even

discuss those aspects of the bylaws or the articles of agreement.

Thank you attorney Roman attorney Serge. Good morning Mr. Chief Justice

members of the court. Matthew Serge from German Woodson on behalf of the town of Newport

as attorney Roman suggested I'm going to be focusing on factor four

of the appeal. Of course the opposition to the trial court correctly

concluded that the taxpayer failed to satisfy its burden of proving factor four

and therefore its decision should be upheld and I want to begin with the basics

which is 72 23 Roman five which is the statute that brought up here.

It is very clear it states in part that none of the organization's

income or profits may be used for any other purpose

other than that for which the organization is established it says

none is done not most and none is used in a number of other statutes following

72 23 for individual

organizations non-profits and religious entities. Now

by way of background I know the Marist case well

I was on the losing side of that case but I'm here to tell you today that we need

to look to Marist as hard as it's to say as a loser that

that is the case that provides a guidepost here on factor four. It's spent six pages

on this fact and what I pulled from it and it's in the brief

are really two criteria that we're looking at number one what benefits did the

taxpayer receive in return from payments out to

just called them third parties now. We're looking at a quantitative and a qualitative

analysis in that regard. Number two where

funds used for any purpose other than that for which it was established and in Marist

we know what happened there and what the US province that a substantial

amount of money was spent to the province and there was substantial evidence in return

presented to the trial court that this court found persuasive that

answered both of those criteria throughout those pages.

Now I gather you're still upset by that. I'm not anymore. I got over it a while ago.

But the bottom line is that payment for services is legitimate.

I beg your pardon. Payment for services received. It's absolutely legitimate.

If I may here's the bottom line with all this. It's simple. We've heard this phrase a lot

in the news. Follow the money. Simple as that. Follow the money.

Where to go and how is it used? Those are the questions we're asking.

And we're looking at vis-a-vis the taxpayer in this case in London hospital.

But before I get into the evidence and my time is short I want to focus on a couple things

that we're not arguing. Number one we're not arguing that a charity organization

cannot affiliate with whether nonprofit

or for profit or provides money for services may for profit

but you can do that. That's okay. We're not saying that's off limits.

But again we've got to look at the money. We've got to see where it went and what you got in return.

Or if you didn't get anything back how is it used? Like in Marist for example the province

the buckets of money you're concerned about are what?

I beg your pardon. What are you concerned about? The payments to Dartmouth and the payments

to any New Hampshire imaging? We're concerned about a number of things.

We'll get to in just a moment. If I may. Mr. Chief Justice.

I know here is on the taxpayer at the trial line. It was a lot of talk about the standard review

but keeping the eye on the ball the taxpayer carried the burden to prove to none of the

income or profit. Does that mean you have to get down to the payment on everything? No, of course not.

But you've got to have some evidence on everything that you've done to show for them.

And there's a reason for this too. And there's a reason property tax exemptions

they're a big deal locally. And here we're talking about

$200,000 of tax money that is not being realized by the community if the exemption is granted.

So there's a substantial benefit to the taxpayer. There's a concomitant

substantial burden on the rest of the tax base. So that's why this

statute is set up the way it is. It's a strict analysis. It's not over technical.

It is what it is. But there's substantial burdens here.

So when we look at the evidence in this case or the lack thereof which is really the problem

Number one, the trial court didn't find that

taxpayer satisfied factor four but four to issues.

It simply highlighted those two issues which is the referral policy

in New Hampshire imaging as two reasons among others why the evidence was

insufficient. Now, number one starting with

this relationship with DHH, again looking comparison

of the merits, the evidence here was lacking in terms of what they got back

quantitatively and qualitatively from DHH in comparison to merits

where we had detailed testimony that lasted, I remember that trial lasted over

half a day going through everything that the camp was receiving back

from the province whether it's retirement benefits. Are you talking about patient referrals?

Not yet. I'm just talking about the simple fact of being affiliated with DHH.

The taxpayer sends money to DHH. It's in the 990s which is in the

really tax forms that are in your appendix. So the affiliation with

Dartmouth-Gitchcock is what you're focused on. Right now

that's one of their arguments. Just the affiliation and so there needs to be a

concomitant benefit. Well, one of the arguments being raised is we're

affiliated with DHH and they provide benefits to us. So anything we do to them is covered

that doesn't violate fact before. We're saying the judge found among other things

you didn't meet it and that's one of the reasons why it might not meet it. But I'll move on

because we had expert testimony that's in the record and it's at the fifth

of the transcript of the trial, excuse me, the transcript 5 where it talks about

DHH referral policy, DHH receiving increased revenues

while NLA is decreasing revenues throughout the years.

Doesn't that own integrated health system works? It depends

on patient acuity and you're talking about an academic medical center

20 miles away and I mean just those raw numbers

I looked at them and it looks like they're from the hospital association. I don't know

how their evidence of anything beyond that these patients

may have been particularly acute and needed to be at Dartmouth-Gitchcock.

Sometimes perhaps but we don't know that. It wasn't all presented in the evidence

and that's part of the problem in terms of that. This is not

a different situation. This is a health care integrated

health care system according to their founding documents. There's no question this is complex

and that's part of the problem. This is a complex organization with very complex structure

and when I read the brief and I feel that the argument being made that it's a

town's fault or we're being too hyper-technical we're not. But you choose to get an exemption

to go through. But let me move on because I know my time is short. On New Hampshire imaging

one thing that's extremely important there. This is a pooled resource, a number of

entities fund this, including four profits.

It's in the transcript. There are a couple of four profits involved. Money is paid to us.

It's in the 990s. You can see 500,000, 600,000 annually.

Right, but I expect money is paid to a for-profit food delivery service.

Yes, Justice Hans Marconi, that's correct. It probably is.

But here we're talking about New Hampshire imaging and the judge did cite this.

And if you look at that record you will see very little in the way of what quantitative

qualitative benefits were received back from the imaging. The services provided.

The services provided.

There were allegedly some services provided. The problem is a payment they make

it's not a dollar for service, it's not for service rendered. It's just a payment they make every year.

Find a budget. Everybody chips in and they put in a certain amount that they feel is fair.

Their share. So again, we don't know

exactly what was received back for that payment. But more importantly

before I lose the time, and I know my time is up if I may, the

990s, it also talks about other independent contractors that received

payments. If you look at the bottom of that, the form. It's

in the appendix. We've all cited the pages on the

990s independent contractor payments. There are five main payments. And at the bottom

there's a line that says, any other independent contractor paid more than $100,000

annually. How many were there? Including the ones that were listed.

And there was a, not including the ones listed, there's a minimum of seven

that were paid in these years at issue. In fact, in 2018 it was

54. Thank you, Attorney Sir, it's your time, sir. Welcome. Thank you.

Thank you, Your Honor. A couple points. I'm going to work

backwards. I'll work backwards. On the fourth factor, New Hampshire

was testimony of Bruce King, the CEO of exactly what it was for, which

was for shared radiology services. That is clinical provision

of care. The 990s list all of these services

that this court has noted. A non-profit can contract

with for-profit entities to provide services. And as this court noted

in the provision of medical care these days, these are integrated delivery systems

and it's an integrated web. And we present

it as evidence before the trial court. All of those relationships

are all in the 990s. They were all provided to the court.

On the testimony about what benefit New London Hospital received,

Mr. King, the CEO at the time, was on the stand for multiple

days and testified in detail of exactly the benefits that

New London Hospital received from being, from the affiliation of Dartmouth

including the ability to have access to patients and specialists

that they otherwise would not. And equally important to be able to have

someone come two days a week, or one day a week, where they

would be able to hire a doctor for five days a week, but they needed one day of care.

And because of Dartmouth-Hitchcock they were able to do that. And finally

on the factors two and three, I take issue with how the

standard review was articulated. You can't have it be you have to meet

a preponderance of the evidence and then it's a sufficiency of the evidence.

That's a circle. That can't be right.

And finally, relative to trying

to make Dartmouth-Hitchcock the bogeyman here, there's no

evidence presented at trial. The Dartmouth-Hitchcock did

any of those things that they're using or speculating

that Dartmouth-Hitchcock could have done relative to New London Hospital

in the relevant tax years. Dartmouth-Hitchcock is a charitable teaching

hospital. They have an affiliation agreement. They both have sworn

on written contractual documents to respect each other's federal

and state charitable organization. And that's the end of the

story. Thank you. Thank you. Countable cases submitted.

Courts in a brief.
