This is case 2020-0742, state of New Hampshire versus Tyrese Harris.

Attorney Johnson. May it please the court, Christopher Johnson, on behalf of Tyrese Harris, I reserve one minute for rebuttal.

The issue in this bail appeal is whether the state demonstrated by clear and convincing evidence Mr. Harris' guilt of murder.

Our plan this morning is to make first a point about the standard of review, second address the question of what elements the state has to prove to meet that burden.

And third, address here some of the points the state did not prove. But I'm happy to take the court's questions at any point.

So beginning with a standard of review, I assert that it should be de novo because there's no issue of credibility with respect to the one witness who testified.

And so there's no respect in which the trial court would be in a better position than this court.

Indeed, this is a kind of sufficiency claim as to which it's this court's routine practice, I think, to review those claims de novo.

But we've never said that there's a different standard of review and that there can be de novo.

Well, I grant it. But I think the standard of review is sort of a doctrine that exists or applies where it applies because it serves a function.

And I think many bail appeals are based on kind of disputed fact findings.

And there, of course, it would be clear and appropriate that there be a deferential standard of review.

This appeal, I think, we'd be often under this statute, but particularly this appeal where there really, this is a very unusually public homicide.

And so the facts about it as relevant are largely not in dispute and are unlikely to be much disputed trial.

It'll be the legal significance of the facts.

So I think in that circumstance, because there's no function to deference, there shouldn't be any deference.

With respect to the elements.

It's not a function. It sort of defines subject matter jurisdiction.

It defines the scope of our review. It's a fairly significant doctrine.

And here it's a really important threshold issue.

I agree it's an important doctrine.

But I think in a hierarchical court structure, deference doesn't exist, I think, or let me back up.

In a circumstance in which a trial court could go one of several different, make one of several different kinds of decisions, any one of which would be fine,

it would be appropriate for this court to grant deference to that.

So for example, if there's a discovery violation and the question before the trial court is, do we exclude the witness?

Do we continue the trial?

Like any of those could be the right answer.

This court would defer.

Similarly, when the trial court's in a superior position because of fact finding, it saw the witnesses.

Deference is appropriate because the trial court is in a better position.

But my point is that when those kinds of circumstances don't apply, because we're in a hierarchical court structure and it's this court's duty to decide questions of law.

You've defined what you believe that the state had the burden to prove.

Tell us how the state fell short.

So let me focus first on self-defense, because we have two different arguments.

The state needed to prevail on two separate points to demonstrate a life sentence conviction.

So with respect to self-defense, it was reasonable, the state did not disprove that it was reasonable to fear that D.C. was about to use deadly force.

You don't need a weapon and you don't need to verbalize a threat to reasonably appear to be about to use deadly force.

It's enough that D.C. reasonably appeared that D.C. was about to cause serious bodily injury.

Here we have his rage.

We have that in the middle of traffic he got out of his car, which is a strikingly unusual thing to do in the place that he did it.

That he tried to open Harris's door, that he spat upon him, that he reached in through his window and grabbed him.

All of those supply the reasonable appearance that he was about to beat up, Mr. Harris.

And that's what the law requires in terms of this first point about self-defense.

It's to be a reasonable appearance that a reasonable person in Harris's position would perceive that he's about to suffer serious bodily injury at a minimum.

So you're saying that the state was obligated to prove the negative of that?

Yes.

Just as at trial the state is obligated to disprove self-defense now, a qualification.

If the record doesn't contain evidence from which a reasonable fact finder would see self-defense as an issue, the state doesn't have to disprove it.

This is not something they have to disprove in every case, but the record here contained sufficient evidence to, you know, if this were the analogy at trial,

sufficient evidence to get a jury instruction.

And once there's sufficient evidence to get a jury instruction at trial, the state has to disprove it.

What about the state's argument that self-defense doesn't appear in the bail statute?

I think the answer to that is, I mean, this particular statute's language doesn't say, you know, it doesn't prefer the elements of the crime either.

The proof is evident or the presumption great.

It is clear, I think, that the whole point of this statute which mandates pretrial detention without any individualized inquiry into flight risk or danger,

the whole point of that statute is that it applies when we can know to clear and convincing evidence that the defendant's going to get convicted at trial for a conviction that carries a life sentence.

So that sort of substitutes for what is ordinarily in bail.

You have to talk about flight risk. You have to talk about danger.

And so because this whole statute is about sort of looking forward to trial and predicting what's going to happen, one of the things they have to disprove at trial is self-defense.

So that would make self-defense a unique defense under this statute in order for the trial court to consider it in the bail statute?

I think this trial court would have to consider in this bail statute anything that at trial, if there's evidence sufficient to raise it as an issue, the state has to disprove beyond a reasonable doubt.

So it doesn't include affirmative defenses like insanity as to which the defense bears a burden at trial.

Anything.

The state would have the burden.

But it's the things the state has the burden on at trial because, again, the whole point of this is that we're going to hold people pretrial without any individualized consideration because we're sufficiently sure they're going to get convicted at trial of a life sentence crime.

In that sense, where the proof is evident.

Right.

It's where the proof is evident.

And so the proof isn't evident that the state will prevail at trial unless the state can disprove self-defense by clear and convincing evidence.

So some evidence that the defendant fled would be inconsistent with self-defense and that was presented to the trial court?

Yes.

But again, and as I tried to express in the brief, the law doesn't, you know, it is not an element of self-defense that a person after this

shockingly sudden, unexpected, incredibly traumatic event behavior actually.

You know, people could feel terrible regret after an event like this and do some of the foolish things Mr. Harris did.

And that doesn't mean they weren't entitled by self-defense.

And here we have, maybe as I said, kind of unusually a pretty good factual account of what exactly happened.

This wasn't behind closed doors.

And so we, you know, the fact that he did, you know, a 20-year-old man did those things after this kind of shocking, unexpected event

doesn't carry this least burden of clear and convincing evidence to disprove all the things that we do know about the rage

and the reaching into the car door, to trying to open the car door.

Second thing, the state I think didn't disprove, or if I may get my polarities confused,

but one of the, another feature of self-defense is the first aggressor disqualification.

People who are first aggressors are disqualified from claiming self-defense.

But it doesn't apply here because there's no basis to find that Harris, by displaying his middle finger

and by tossing the metal object, had a purpose to cause death or serious bodily injury.

That's what the state would have to show is that when he did those things,

he had the purpose to cause death or serious bodily injury.

That's what the first aggressor disqualification is about.

You can't sort of set up a situation where you're provoking somebody to use deadly force against you

and then use it back against them.

The things he did, you know, and nobody's defending them,

is a vast difference between displaying a middle finger and tossing an object that isn't going to hurt anybody.

And the physical altercation that D.C. initiated when he came at him

and tried to open the car door and spat upon him and grabbed him.

Wasn't there some factual disagreement about whether, in fact, the decedent grabbed into the car,

grabbed the shirt or something?

I don't believe so. I think not every witness saw everything,

because there's people with different vantage points in the cars that are always on.

There was one witness who presented various bits of...

Right. It was one police officer who sort of summarized the totality of what all the scene witnesses observed.

But I think, crucially, Judge Nicolosi in her order sort of accepted that

and that would act as part of the factual description that she saw of what had happened.

So it's part of the fact findings with which we have no quarrel.

Final thing with respect to self-defense is there's no duty to retreat.

It would be another thing that could disqualify a person in the abstract.

But Mr. Harris was in a place he had a right to be, and the statute is very clear

that if you're in a place you have the right to be, you don't lose the justification of self-defense

by exercising deadly force when deadly force is presented to you.

And again, finally, my final point.

We're asking here for a modest remedy.

All that we're asking for is that the state didn't establish this one basis

for mandatory pretrial detention of a criminal defendant,

remand for the individualized determination to have the court look into flight risk,

look into danger.

And whether he can be detained under those bases is something to be considered on remand.

But the state didn't meet the showing.

It has to meet to make all of that irrelevant.

And so we'd ask the court to reverse.

So what is the threshold showing that has to be made in order for the trial court

to be obligated under your proposed standard to go down the self-defense road

and do that analysis?

So I think it would be this.

And here again, the trial court notably did.

The trial court perceived that there was a sufficient basis in the officer's testimony

to raise the issue, and it was certainly argued by the defense.

I think it's the analogy for bail hearing to what one would have at trial is

is there enough in the record to get a jury instruction?

And I think the standard there is some evidence.

Is there some evidence from which a reasonable fact finder at trial

could equate on the basis of self-defense?

So here is there some evidence from which a court adjudicating a bail,

this bail issue could find the state hasn't shown by clear and convincing evidence

that Mr. Harris acted in self-defense.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Good morning, Your Honours.

And may it please the court, Adriana McCullough for the State of New Hampshire.

I'd like to start first by responding to something Attorney Johnson said

about the purpose of bail under this statute.

He talked about bail looking forward to the trial,

but that is not what bail is about, whether it's under 597.1c or 597.2.

Bail, historically, has always been about assuring the defendant's appearance at the trial

and then assuring he will submit to punishment after the trial.

And in State v. Fergal, this court in 2010 went through a very long history

of bail in America and talked about how English bail rules sort of formed our bail standard.

And in every sort of law...

But those are the two analyses that the defendant's looking to have made by the trial court.

Right now we're under the all or nothing part of the statute.

So how does that relate to those two factors that you're talking about?

So 597.1c, this court has held, is still about fundamentally dangerousness and risk of flight.

This court found in that Fergal case that because the state has to prove the proof is evident

or the presumption great that the defendant committed some sort of crime punishable by life in prison,

those two factors are inherent in that proof is evident presumption great.

Because any crime, at least in New Hampshire, that has that sentence

is inherently a very dangerous and violent crime.

So do you disagree the state has the burden to show by clear and convincing evidence

that there is no self-defense?

Yes, I would disagree based on this court having never held that before.

And in Fergal, this court held that 597.1c is just about the state's case in chief.

It's just about the facts that the state presents to the court

to meet that clear and convincing evidence standard.

At least that's what this court said, proof is evident, presumption great is clear and convincing evidence

that the defendant committed a crime punishable by life in prison.

In this case, and in Fergal, the charge was second degree.

Regardless of the state's eventual burden at trial to prove the absence of self-defense?

Yes.

The absence of self-defense.

Correct.

Or any other pure defense or even affirmative defense that the defendant could raise at trial.

And that's based upon this court's jurisprudence that self-defense or any pure defense

does not become an element for the state to disprove until trial.

Until the defendant has the burden to put on some evidence.

And it has to be more than a scintilla of evidence.

And the defendant has the burden at trial to do that.

And if this court were to hold that the state had to disprove self-defense in a bail hearing

this court would have to then also shift the burden to the defendant

to put on some evidence of self-defense at a bail hearing

and then shift the burden back to the state, which is what happens at trial.

And a bail hearing is not a mini-trial.

A bail hearing does not look forward to trial.

A bail hearing looks at the state's case.

But it's a stark deprivation of liberty, you'll agree with that.

I would, Your Honor.

And this court went through a litany of other rules in other states

and in England that talked about bail.

And I think in 40 states, at least in 2010,

40 states have a statute very similar to this one

where if the defendant commits a capital offense

or an offense punishable by life in prison, they will be denied bail.

And that is different than committing any other offense

where the court would consider dangerousness and risk of flight

in the 597-2 standard that this court is used to reviewing on bail appeals.

And trial courts are used to doing every day at arraignments.

But this statute makes a specific, it changes,

sort of what the landscape is for the state.

And instead of it being about the state putting on evidence of dangerousness

and risk of flight and then the defendant rebutting that

with some other mitigating evidence,

this statute is just about what evidence does the state possess

at the bail hearing, which is early on in the life of the case

to show that the proof is evident or presumption great

that the defendant committed the crime.

I thought you said earlier, correct me, please,

that the normal factors, dangerousness, risk of flight

were subsumed within proof is evident and presumption great.

They are.

They are.

And this court held that in Fergal and said they are inherent.

But in this case, the trial judge didn't consider

either of those factors, correct?

No, she did not, but not explicitly

and not in the 5.97.2 context.

But she did in some way talk about them

when she wrote, when she found facts in her order.

And I say that because she talked about the defendant's conduct

when she's talking about in one of the first paragraphs

about all of the facts that are relevant

to whether the defendant committed second-degree murder.

And the fact she pulls out,

talk about the defendant's dangerousness

because she says in a span of three seconds

the defendant, or the victim gets out of his car,

walks to the defendant's car and is shot in the face,

a vital area.

And those facts are, I think everybody would agree,

inherently violent.

And so we are talking about dangerousness.

And because those facts prove a crime

that's punishable by life and death,

we are now, or sorry, by life and death.

We are inherently talking about risk of flight

because, and I know that this court quoted

Judge Justice Blackstone in Fergal,

what would a man give up to avoid losing his life to prison?

And so that risk of flight is already addressed

and the dangerousness is already addressed

in finding those facts.

And I say that because the point of bail

is about dangerousness and risk of flight

and it just so happens that in this particular statute

to satisfy those requirements,

the court is looking at the facts of the state's case

to prove whatever charge the state has brought

that is punishable by life in prison.

And you mentioned that this takes place

at an early stage in the proceedings,

but let's assume that the defense,

the self-defense defense, emerges later.

Would there be a bail review hearing?

So the defendant is, I think, always allowed

to file some sort of motion to amend bail

and I could see a case where that would happen,

whereas the defense attorneys are investigating the case.

Maybe there's some evidence that presents itself

that warrants self-defense.

However, because the court has not held

that the state has to disprove self-defense,

it would be improper for a defendant to file a motion

to address bail under 591 or under 597.1c

because self-defense is irrelevant

to whether the defendant is held

without bail under that statute.

That may be relevant if the defendant

were held under 597.2 if any of those facts

about self-defense mitigate a dangerousness finding,

but it would not be relevant to a finding under 597.1c.

At any point?

At any point, whether it's a month after the arrest

or a month before trial.

And I think that would also be true for any other pure defense,

whether it's competing harms or defensive property

or even any affirmative defense

that a defendant may investigate and raise at trial.

And that's because bail does not look at the trial.

Bail is about what evidence the state possesses

at the time of the bail hearing.

And in 597.1c, is that evidence or are those facts

evident or create a great presumption

that the defendant committed a crime punishable by life

and prison?

That's all that this court has held.

And I think that's all that this court should continue

to hold in creating the standard

for the state to approve under this statute.

What is this standard review issue?

So speaking to that,

I think the correct standard here is unsustainable exercise

of discretion.

I agree that there may be no credibility challenge

in this particular bail appeal,

but the court down below still needs to find facts.

And those facts that the court found,

whether they're contested on appeal or not,

are still owed deference.

And so because those facts are owed deference

and because the trial court then applies

the standard for bail release to those facts,

the proper standard here is unsustainable exercise

of discretion.

How is it not analogous to a sufficiency review,

which I think is the defendant's argument?

Sure.

This is not a trial because it is a bail hearing,

and this court has routinely held

that the unsustainable exercise of discretion

is the correct standard for bail hearings.

And I think that the court's reasoning

in doing that is because it is so early on

in the case and because the standard

of proof below is not

beyond a reasonable doubt.

It is here clear and convincing evidence.

In other bail issues it would be

probable cause for flight risk

or clear and convincing evidence for dangerousness.

And so because it's that lower burden down below,

the court can defer to the facts

that the trial court is in the best position to find.

So you're saying that we could disagree

with the court's finding,

but still sustain the order in this case?

Yes, Your Honor.

I think it depends on how you decide the issue

that I'm arguing about whether self-defense

had to be proved or not.

But I do think that the court,

based on the way that the order is written below,

you could find all of those same facts

that the trial court found.

There's nothing in the record to suggest

any of those facts are incorrect.

But it sounds like your argument

that the unsustainable exercise of discretion

standard is the appropriate one here

is based on the premise

that there were factual findings made below

and we should defer to the trial court on that.

Yes.

So what if Mr. Johnson says

there were no material facts in dispute

and these are the facts

and if we have a circumstance

where there are no disputed facts,

then is the standard different?

Is the standard then de novo

because there would be no reason

to defer to the trial court?

No, and that's because bail is still discretionary.

I know that the statute here says

it meets proof is evident presumption great,

the court shall hold the defendant

but that decision about proof is evidence

and presumption great is a discretionary decision

that the trial court makes.

And usually this court is held

when there's a discretionary decision

based upon facts that the trial court finds.

We review those decisions

under that unsustainable exercise of discretion standard.

De novo is usually reserved for

strictly legal interpretations

or even statutory interpretations.

But because here we're looking at bail

and if the trial court made

found facts that it then applied

to its discretionary decision

to hold the defendant without bail,

the proper review should be unsustainable exercise

of that discretion.

If there are no further questions,

I would rest on my briefs.

Thank you.

Very briefly, a hypothetical occurred to me

which I think gets at the distinction

between the state's position in mind

with respect to flight risk and danger.

So imagine a case like this one

except that the evidence of self-defense

was even stronger than we have here.

Let's say there was a video.

And further imagine that the defendant

in the course of being captured

was shot and paralyzed but survived.

So you have absolutely no concern

about flight risk, absolutely no concern

about danger.

And if the state's interpretation

not despite those individualized circumstances

not justifying detention

despite the strong self-defense

because they can meet the burden

on the elements of murder,

that defendant would have to be detained.

It's mandatory and that can't be the law.

Thank you.

Thank you very much, council.

Case submitted.
