I will let you know. Do you want to announce first?

Yeah, go ahead.

This is case 2020-094, Craig and Solomon versus locked 3.3, Stonybrook, connector LLC at all.

Thank you, Claire. The court will hear the first case and then take a brief recess.

For those of you who are here for the second case, I'm Mr. Solomon. I understand you have reserved two minutes.

I have your honor. Please proceed.

Thank you. May it please the court. I, in my oral argument, will approach the case from three separate perspectives.

The first is to discuss the case law surrounding the elements of a constructive trust.

The second is to address whether or not those have been pled in the court below.

And thirdly, will be to address the analysis by the trial court and arguments raised by the other side.

And in the course of discussing this, I will suggest to the court that applying the existing case law

would result in the relief which I am seeking, which is a remand for a hearing on the merits.

There has been no evidentiary hearing in the Superior Court.

And to rule otherwise would be narrowing the existing case law and the elements of a constructive trust.

To include, you know, some of the arguments raised by the defendants and by the trial court,

which include factual patterns which are included within the penumbra, if you will, of the constructive trust document,

but which do not limit it. They're merely examples. That's what I would suggest.

So, turning first, the elements of a constructive trust I would suggest are contained within the Walts v. Young case.

First test is whether or not legal title to property is in the hands of the defendant.

Isn't it that it transferred from one party to another?

That's correct. That's part of it.

And the property didn't transfer as between the two parties to this case?

Well, that's, Your Honor, that's a narrow interpretation.

What did transfer was my experience and knowledge to, I'm going to say, Mr. Selene, just for purposes of...

But that couldn't form the corpus of a constructive trust, your experience and knowledge.

That's not property in the sense of a constructive trust.

Right. But what was transferred was a 25% interest in the Exeter property.

That's the argument that I would make. That was transferred to me.

And now that was sold and that interest was retained by Mr. Selene, and that's what was unconscionable.

But that 25% interest would have been pursuant to a contract, right?

Actually, the trial court said there was no contract.

Right. Well, that was where my question was going.

So that 25% arises from a contract that the trial court said didn't exist.

Well, that's correct. And that's why, you know, the constructive trust count then becomes the focal point of this appeal.

Because the constructive trust takes a look at the promise that was made and the fact that there was no contract

because what we did to memorialize it was the Willows LLC agreement.

And that the Willows never was involved in ownership of this property, taking any appeals.

It was simply to memorialize what we had agreed to.

And then that contract failed because it was abandoned when I filed bankruptcy.

That was one of the provisions of the agreement that it would be void if you filed, right?

I'm sorry. It would be invalid or void if you filed for bankruptcy,

which you did apparently within hours of the signing of that agreement.

Well, that's what's been suggested in the pleadings and I'm not sure one way or another.

It was within a couple days anyway.

Well, I certainly filed on that date, but the issue if we had a hearing would be

that I disclose that to Mr. Salin and when did I do it.

That's a factual issue, which may or may not be relevant to the trial court.

But there's no dispute that because you filed that 25% provision became no longer enforceable.

Right. And I referenced it in the pleadings as an example of what had been offered to me by Mr. Salin

and what I accepted. You know, that was an attempt to memorialize it.

And then in the pleadings, I suggest that when that happened, we agreed to go forward nevertheless.

And that's the crux of the constructive trust.

You know, I have suggested in my pleadings that we had this confidential relationship

which caused me to repose trust in Mr. Salin.

And what was the basis of that confidential information?

What did the trial court have before it to establish that relationship?

I included in the pleadings examples of, first of all, in a very general sense

that we had been close friends and acquaintances since 2008.

Secondly, that Mr. Salin approached me about this arrangement.

Thirdly, that...

The arrangement whereby you would enter into a business relationship with a client?

Yes.

And do you acknowledge that violates rules of professional conduct?

Well, it does if it wasn't done knowingly.

But my suggestion in the pleadings is that he approached me.

The Willow's agreement which eventually failed was drafted by his client,

including the operative language that it was to be for services rendered by his attorney, I'm sorry.

And, you know, so there is an exception, as I understand it, to the rule

that if he's got full knowledge of it and has had the opportunity to have it reviewed by independent counsel,

that that's an exception.

And I think that's pledged.

In terms of a confidential relationship, isn't it key to that that you have a justifiable belief

that the person will act in your best interest?

Yes.

And why is that the case here when they're your client?

Well, because, you know, if you look at those cases, Your Honor, you know,

the client has the right to trust in the confidentiality of the attorney.

What I'm arguing is I had the right to trust him and he's the one that betrayed the trust.

Because, you know, not only were we close friends, but, you know, he had gone so far

as to use my computer for personal business.

Well, trust is different than understanding that he'll act in your best interest.

What's the basis for a belief that your client would act in your best interest?

Well, because he approached me about, you know, given me 25% of this interest in this property,

if I perform services for him.

When I filed bankruptcy and we discussed going forward, you know, we did it on a handshake.

I told him, it's paragraph 41 of my pleadings, that I trusted him like a brother.

He never said no, no.

He never said, after he paid me $10,000 in the spring of 2016, and I continued to work on this for another three years.

He never said, oh, no, you know, the deal's off because you filed bankruptcy.

He never said, oh, no, the deal's off because of your issues with the bar.

Never said anything.

I continued to work.

We continued to meet on, if not a weekly basis, a couple of times a month to discuss the status where we were on this.

So I trusted him.

He knew I trusted him.

We proceeded on that basis for almost three years after the only payment he made.

Let me ask you this.

In the trial court order that you're appealing, the trial court suggested that if you had any remedy at all,

it would be in quantum marijuana.

And do I read that correctly?

That's what the trial court said, yes.

And why did you not file a motion to amend to institute a claim for quantum marijuana at that point?

Well, because the case was not about the value of my services.

It was about the 25%, which I had been promised.

And I would not have been truly expressing the basis for my claim if I had claimed quantum marijuana.

So you were seeking this expectancy interest.

Is that accurate?

Yes.

Why wasn't that an asset of the bankrupt estate?

Because I filed a Chapter 13, which, you know, the assets are not...

Did you disclose this as an asset in your Chapter 13 reorganization?

I can't honestly address that one way or the other.

I believe I did the first time, but maybe in subsequent filings I didn't.

But I'm not sure you're wrong.

So the second issue that you raised with regard to, I think what you called DICTA,

the trial court's suggestion that you filed quantum marijuana,

do we really need to decide that issue or can you just waive it?

Because it seems to me it doesn't make a difference one way or the other.

I don't think it does either.

So, yes, I'll waive it.

And you're not challenging the trial court's entry of summary judgment

on either the contract or the fraud claims?

No, I looked at it and thought that probably the best focus was on the constructive trust

and put all my eggs in that basket, I guess.

And again, what is the property that we're talking about here

that you want the constructive trust in?

It seems to me when we're talking about the transfer of the property,

you were saying, well, there wasn't a transfer of property.

No, no, I'm saying when the property in question

in which I had been promised a 25% interest was sold,

Mr. Selene received cash and a mortgage which was accruing interest.

And that's what I'm seeking to impose the constructive trust on is 25% of the cash

plus 25% of the mortgage and interest, less than $10,000,

which I acknowledge I was paid.

And that $10,000 was for past services render or was it a retainer?

It was for services rendered.

It was in the spring of 2016.

There were two $5,000 payments.

I submitted two invoices which were not itemized in terms of time.

And I have looked at the records and one of them was clearly marked on account

and there were apparently two versions of the second one,

one of which said it was on account and one of which didn't say that.

But as alleged in my pleadings, Your Honor, at the time that $10,000 was paid,

if I had been being paid by the hour, there still would have been

about $40,000 unpaid at that point.

And I continued for another three years after that to perform services.

You read, I'm sorry, go ahead.

I was going to say your argument is 25% was a rough equivalent to the value of your work.

That's not exactly my argument, Your Honor.

I put that in there to suggest that the 25% was not unreasonable.

Your red light is on.

Thank you.

You still have two minutes, reserved.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Mr. Griffin.

Thank you, good afternoon, Your Honors.

May it please the court, Attorney Kyle Griffin appearing on behalf of lot 3.3

Stoneybrook Connector LLC, Seacoast Shearwater Development LLC and John Selene individually.

I apologize if I cover some ground that's already been addressed with Mr. Solomon.

Mr. Solomon's complaint originally had three counts against the defendants.

In this case, there was a count for breach of contract for fraud as well as constructive trust.

As the court's aware, the fraud and breach of contract claims were disposed

by the trial court for summary judgment and the constructive trust claim was dismissed afterwards.

The defendants would argue that there are three essential elements to a constructive trust which are set forth in Imre, a state of cast.

That a confidential relationship existed between two people, that one of them transferred property to the other.

And that the person receiving the property would be unjustly enriched by retaining the property.

We don't believe that Mr. Solomon has put sufficient facts to support any of the three essential elements.

So starting with the confidential relationship, although there's no prior precedent on this issue,

we don't believe that the attorney-client relationship in which Mr. Solomon and Mr.

Selene had would support a confidential relationship under recent case law.

So in the sense of-

Would a principal agent relationship qualify?

I don't believe that, I believe that potentially that would qualify, but because of the rules of professional conduct,

that having an attorney being able to establish this type of confidential relationship for the purposes of a constructive trust,

I believe just goes against all of the attorney-client rules that are supposed to be governing this type of relationship.

I don't believe that Mr. Solomon should have had an expectation that Mr. Selene would be acting in his best interest.

And that's really what you have to show for a confidential relationship.

Just because they were friends at one point in time, Mr.

Solomon's alleged that they were business associates doesn't dispute with that.

But we don't believe that the facts pled, and especially with the circumstances surrounding Mr.

Solomon's representation of Mr. Selene, that that qualifies as a confidential relationship.

But if it's established, they were partners, let's say, that could.

If they were-

Partners in this business arrangement.

Yes, if there was a partnership between Mr.

Solomon and Mr. Selene that would supersede the attorney-client relationship,

that would be a fact that maybe sufficiently pled to-

But what was that pled?

There's a broad allegation that they were business associates.

But I don't believe that that, it says that from 2008,

this was in Mr. Solomon's complaint until the events leading to this litigation.

Mr. Solomon and Selene have been close friends and business associates.

So this type of relationship in the work that was being performed by Mr.

Solomon on behalf of the defendants was legal work.

This wasn't some type of business relationship or association where they each had separate roles.

This was an attorney-client relationship.

Do you agree that a confidential relationship for the purposes of a constructive trust

doesn't have to be a familial relationship?

Yes, I do agree with that.

A lot of the case law deals with familial relationships.

However, I don't believe that that is a necessary component.

Many of the cases do refer to that as being the confidential relationship factor,

is that there's a familial relationship that obviously did not occur here.

I think the second element is the most important reason why this court should uphold

the trial court's order on the motion to dismiss is that Mr.

Solomon hasn't pled that there was any transfer of property from him to Mr. Selene.

I don't believe that the 25% would qualify as actual property.

And if you're reviewing the prior cases on constructive trust,

it mainly deals with real estate, life insurance proceeds, or

money transferring between two parties, and that's certainly not the case here.

Does the law say anything about maintaining a trust where it's a contingent transfer?

I don't believe so.

Because this was a contingent transfer.

It was no transfer of anything unless the property was sold, right?

Correct, yes.

It was a 25% interest in the development of the property.

And the property was subsequently sold as the parcel that existed at the time

that the Willows Agreement was executed.

So it really was, I wouldn't consider this a contingency fee agreement under the rules

of professional conduct because this wasn't really a civil case.

Mr. Solomon was performing zoning work and

I'm appearing on behalf of the defendants at the zoning board for the town of Exeter.

But the commitment to pay 25% was also contingent on not filing for bankruptcy, right?

Yes, it was, and it was essentially terminated upon Mr.

Solomon filing for bankruptcy, which was on the same day that the agreement I was

executing amongst the parties.

And that was the court's basis in granting summary judgment.

One of the most important factors in the court granting summary judgment.

With respect to the contract claim?

Yes, with respect to the contract claim.

And the court's analysis in this motion to dismiss the trial court

basically talks about the unjust enrichment element not being satisfied by Mr.

Solomon's pleadings.

We would also agree with that analysis that if there was a contract in place,

which there was a Willows contract, then unjust enrichment wouldn't be the remedy.

And then it also, that Mr.

Solomon would not be entitled to the profits of his client because he was

the attorney representing the defendants in front of the zoning board and

doing all the legal.

Well, that's a question of value, right?

I mean, isn't that really a question of value?

He's not entitled to profits.

He might be entitled to under quantum marrow at the value of the services.

So I don't see those two things as being equivalent.

I would agree with that in the sense that quantum marrow would potentially have

been Mr.

Solomon's correct claim or account he should have brought before the court.

And I believe the difference between quantum marrow and

unjust enrichment is quantum marrow where you have to prove the value of your

services where unjust enrichment is more of an analysis on whether or

not the benefit conferred, it would be unconscionable for a person to retain it.

Back to the transfer of property issue.

Is it not the case that in decedent estates, for example,

if there is a transfer by the decedent to a family member,

maybe because of a will that was altered under, undue influence or something.

Another family member can seek constructive trust on that asset.

And the transfer of property was not between the person seeking their

expectancy, i.e., I was supposed to get a third of the estate and

now it's all gone to my sibling.

So I'm not drawing the connection between they're having to be a transfer of

property between the two parties in this case.

There has to be some sort of transfer of property.

There does have to be a transfer, yeah.

Okay, and I don't believe that Mr.

Solomon has pled that and I completely understand your position regarding

those other types of transfers because the person bringing suit for

constructive trust a lot of times had no part in the original transfer.

But in all of those lines of cases,

there was a transfer that occurred which triggered someone bringing in.

So here the transfer, wasn't it the sale of property to a third party?

I don't believe so.

Are there any more questions from the judges?

I don't have any more.

Thank you, council.

Thank you.

Mr. Solomon, do you need your two minutes?

Not all of them, Your Honor.

Sure.

I just want to emphasize what I addressed before.

That the basis of the confidential relationship

is not whether or not Mr.

Saline could rely on me as his counsel, but

rather whether I relied upon him based upon the items that I put in my pleadings.

And these are questions of fact and

I've recognized that at the trial court I'd have to establish them by clear and

convincing evidence.

But they are pled, I believe well-plied and

for example, I'm not included in the pleadings but

what I would call an offer of proof in Superior Court.

I corresponded with potential lenders, held myself out to be a partner.

Mr. Saline reviewed that correspondence before it went and

never said boo.

So that's once again a factual issue that would be addressed at the Superior Court level.

Mr. Solomon, can you just clarify the transfer of property

on which you rely to satisfy the element of the claim?

The transfer of the property would have been from,

once again I'm going to say Mr. Saline to the purchaser

which was a vol vol dealership next door to this property.

I thought you said that the transfer of property was your 25% interest or something like that.

My 25, I'm sorry.

So I just want to make sure I understand exactly what you say satisfies

that element of constructive trust.

What's the transfer of property?

I had a 25% interest in piece of property on Portsmouth Avenue in Exeter.

That property was sold without my knowledge or consent and

I never got paid my 25%, that's the argument.

Your red light is on, thank you.

Case submitted, court stands in recess.
