This is case 2220431, state of New Hampshire versus Brandon Boggs.

Let the record reflect the fact that Chief Justice McDonald is disqualified. In this case, an attorney Rothstein, I understand you've reserved one for rebuttal. Is that correct?

That's correct.

Let's proceed.

Thank you. Matt, please. The court name is David Rothstein. I represent Brandon Boggs.

At trial in this case, the state relied on two scientists, DNA analyst and a serologist.

One scientist helped to formulate a rule that she disregarded.

The other had to be told over and over and over again to follow the rules. He disregarded them.

The DNA evidence should have been excluded before trial because the analyst ignored the methodology. The DNA evidence should have been excluded at trial as a discovery sanction due to the state's failure to fully disclose the misfeasance of the serologist.

On either basis, Boggs is entitled to a new trial. And I'll take questions on either issue.

There's to the discovery issue. Am I correct that the state did produce some evidence of Mr. McMahon's prior disciplinary measures?

Correct.

And there were five reports that were excluded somehow?

There were. So as I understand the record, Your Honor, before trial, the defense was aware of seven, the call corrective action reports.

And the defense had those, the defense, I believe, that the deposition of Mr. McMahon before trial.

So those reports that the defense was aware of, they ran up until November of 2018.

So then Mr. McMahon testified at trial and on direct examination, he was asked a question by the prosecutor about having received corrective action reports,

presumably to try to take some of the sting out of cross-examination.

And Mr. McMahon stated that he had a total of 12 corrective action reports.

As of that date?

As of that date. And that date is a few years later because of presumably coronavirus and a number of other factors.

So there was a pause at that point and it was learned that there were five corrective action reports and two affiliated reports that had not been disclosed to the defense.

The defense was learning about that information for the first time at trial.

So the defense, the trial pause and the defense was given the corrective action reports and then there was a discussion about what type of sanction should ensue.

And the discussion about sanction, obviously the defense in this case, take the position that the court's proposed remedy was inadequate.

Remedy in this situation, in the discovery violation situation, is a function of fault and it's a function of prejudice.

The trial court here found essentially no fault on the part of the state for the late disclosure.

Well you don't, you maintain, you agree with inadvertent?

Do you not?

I would not use the word inadvertent your honor, what I would say is this.

The prosecution here had a witness and it had disclosed corrective action reports.

It was at a deposition where the witness was deposed about those.

The prosecution had a continuing obligation to disclose as it would with a police officer.

For example, if there's a police officer who subsequently to investigation to the docking of the case as a report under the EES, it's the prosecution's obligation to disclose that.

I would draw that analogy here.

I would not say that it was inadvertent.

The trial court said that it was inadvertent and the trial court essentially excused the prosecutors trying the case because apparently there had been a switch of prosecutors

and they were, I don't know how new they relatively were, they were relatively new to the case.

But it's the obligation of the Hillsborough County Attorney's Office to disclose this information.

It is also the obligation of the New Hampshire State Police Lab employees just like it would be the obligation of the New Hampshire State Police to update and disclose this information

because under Lucius, the New Hampshire State is the state and the New Hampshire State Police Lab is part of the state.

So I would not, I certainly would not characterize this as being in the category of bad faith.

I would not categorize it in the category of being intentional.

I would categorize it as being culpably negligent on the part of the prosecution in the case rather than inadvertent or mistaken

or something that was mistake act.

So why wasn't the trial court's remedy sufficient?

The trial court's remedy was not sufficient because it did not apprehend the prejudice of the defense in getting this information in mid-trial.

The trial court's proposed remedy was to redepose Mr. Manin to take this, I think, toward the end of the day and to say,

look, you can just redepose it, you can ask him about these things and there you go.

Easily remedial.

The trial court failed to misapprehend the impact of receiving this type of information at this juncture in the case.

Now while the defense certainly knew that Mr. McMahon had a history of malfeasance, as far as the defense knew,

stopped in 2018, there were remedial actions taken and that was it.

Now the defense is finding out that these things continued throughout a three-year period.

There were five additional incidents.

These are not minor matters.

I mean, one of them is taking a silver pen and obscuring a fingerprint on a sample, shedding into samples,

switching slides, switching samples.

These are not, these are very significant errors that had been ongoing and continuing that the defense didn't know about for that period of the years.

But presumably they were brought to the attention of the jury the next day.

They were brought to the attention of the jury the next day, but I would analogize this case, your honor,

to other situations where the defense in the middle of trial is confronted with a situation either by the volume of discovery

or the nature of discovery where a proper defense attorney would want to and would be entitled to take the time

and to have the ability to do further investigation.

If you re-depose Mr. McMahon, you're stuck with his answer.

You say, you show him the report, you say, oh, you had this report for obscuring a print with a pen.

What happened there?

Well, I obscured a print with a pen.

Well, what happened?

Well, I got a corrective action report, and they told me not to obscure prints with a pen.

You have no ability to push back on that.

You importantly have no ability to look at the efficacy of the lab.

Now, on one hand, you could say, well, I mean, you had seven reports, that's a lot.

But in my view, this changes the landscape of the situation.

And this goes from an issue of you have one employee who had a lot of issues

and they were taken care of to an issue that you have apparently wasn't taken care of really very well

because he's continuing to make very, very serious mistakes.

And he's working in the New Hampshire State Police Crime Laboratory.

And does this raise an issue where it's systemic, where it is the efficacy of the lab that's at issue?

Is it odd for someone to have 12 corrective action reports?

Is it odd for a serologist in this lab to engage in this type of misfeasance?

If it's not odd and it happens all the time, well, that's an issue.

If it is odd, how odd is it?

And is this lab truly doing its job by letting this person work in the laboratory?

Well, didn't Mr. Bob's the expert have the opportunity to testify about those very things that you're talking about?

But again, Your Honor, we're talking about this is thrust upon the defense during the trial

or a half, two-thirds of the way through the trial.

The defense does not have the opportunity to pause, reflect, investigate,

to get more discovery from the lab about their processes and procedures,

seek to potentially depose the head of the lab.

The state suggested that the defense could have asked questions of Katie Swank,

who was the DNA unit supervisor.

But again, you're stuck with her answers.

Well, we're asked to ask clad accredited.

We got her accreditation.

There's no reason that the defense should be stuck with those answers

and shouldn't have the opportunity to push back.

I would analogize this situation where you have a lawyer in your law firm

who's got 12 ADO complaints against that person in a period of time.

That reflects on the lawyer, but it could reflect on the law firm.

It could reflect on the lawyers in the firm.

And in this case, the serology played an important role,

but the DNA played, obviously, a critical role.

The state certainly doesn't argue harmless error here.

The DNA was extremely important.

And the New Hampshire State Police Laboratory was saying,

this is our DNA result.

This is our lab.

We do a really good job.

We're really very careful.

So one way to attack the results is to go after the DNA technician.

Another way to attack the results is to go after the serologist's work.

But another way to attack the results and to ask the jury to give less weight

to the result is to go after the lab.

And the ability of the defense to do that here was basically null.

You're right.

They could do the cross-examination that they did and say,

well, there's 12 reports.

That's really bad.

But that's all they could do.

Couldn't do anything else.

What should we make of the defendants?

Appears to be a shift in position seeking a mid-trial with prejudice,

a trial and now not.

Well, and so a couple of things about that, Your Honor.

First of all, the remedy that I'm pressing on appeal

was the discovery sanctioned remedy of excluding the DNA.

So I'm not firmly pressing on appeal the mistrial without prejudice remedy.

I will say, however, that this court has said that it does not require

defense counsel to ask for things that clearly are not going to be granted.

And based on this record, I think it's fair to say

that had the defense asked for a mistrial with prejudice,

the court would not have granted a mistrial with prejudice.

The trial court.

The trial court, and not this court.

This bullet court, this court had nothing to do with it at that point.

The trial court would not have granted a mistrial with prejudice

because the trial court found essentially no fault and no prejudice.

It would not have found.

And what deference do we owe to those findings of the trial court?

The trial court's there in the middle of the trial

and the best position to assess it.

So don't we owe considerable deference to that?

In terms of the standard, you absolutely, in the first instance,

you defer to the trial court's rulings unless they are clearly erroneous

demonstrated by the record.

I would submit to this court that based on the record

that the findings of no fault and no prejudice are clearly erroneous

and that this court would then be licensed to go further

and determine whether the remedy fashion was sufficient.

Just very quickly on the other issues,

how this court comes out on the DNA issue

depends on how you regard the threshold, the stochastic threshold.

If you regard it as just a guide post or a guideline,

then I agree with the state that it's fair for the analyst to just say,

well, it was above there, but I'm going to disregard it and do something else.

But it's not a guideline.

It was a threshold.

This was something that was developed through validation studies by the lab.

They did many, many runs of their machinery

to see how the machinery performs with reagents

and under circumstances in the lab.

They determined 500 RFUs to be their stochastic threshold.

They could have said it's 480.

They could have said it's 450.

They said it was 500.

And they said that if the peak is below 500 then this,

but in this case, they did all that.

It was above 500.

They said, well, it doesn't matter.

I still am going to find that I can include him.

I am going to effectively ignore the methodology

that I have developed here.

So if you regard the threshold as a scientific standard

that's been developed like a test,

like any sort of a test result,

then what the scientists did here

is the scientist disregarded the methodology,

which would take this case outside the general principle

that these issues are left for cross-examination or for weight

and put it into, and put it into Daubert

where the gatekeeper is supposed to exclude

the information from the jury.

So unless the court has any other questions

on either issue, I will rest at this point

and come back for a battle with you.

Thank you very much.

You have one minute remaining.

And Mr. Ghania.

Good morning, again, your honors.

May the court send Ghania for the State of New Hampshire.

I will pick up where that conversation

left off and start with the DNA expert testimony issue

and then address the mistrial issue.

I'm happy to take the court's questions

on either issue at any time.

Before getting into the expert testimony,

I think it's important to establish

the metrics and procedures used by the state lab.

When analyzing a piece of DNA,

an analyst places the DNA into a machine

that produces data output called electropherograms

that identify allelic base pairs

using a metric referred to as RFUs.

To ensure the reliability of the data output,

the state lab has what they would call

an analytical threshold for the data output

called an analytical threshold and a stochastic threshold.

The analytical threshold of 200 RFUs

is the point at which the analyst can be reasonably certain

that what they are seeing on the electropherogram

is genetic information and not what Katie Swango referred to

as background noise produced by the machine.

So, for example, if an allele is detected at 100 RFUs,

that's a nonreportable result

because the analyst cannot be sure

if they are looking at genetic information

being detected or background noise by the machine.

The stochastic threshold of 500 RFUs

is the point at which the analyst can be reasonably certain,

not scientifically sure, but reasonably certain

that both of the alleles in the base pair

have been detected and called.

In this case, the dispute between Katie Swango

and Dr. Stephen Swinton was over the FGA location,

and for this portion of the discussion,

I would direct your attention to page 70 of the defendant's addendum.

Stephen Swinton would have excluded the defendant

as a potential contributor

because at the FGA location,

we can see in the first column the alleles detected

in the entire mixture were 21, 22.2, and 23.2.

The alleles are attributable to the major contributor,

that is the victim in this case, 22.2 and 23.2.

We can see those are her known alleles.

The alleles are attributable to the minor contributor as a 21.

We can see in the defendant's column

he has a 21 and a 23.

The 21 is also placed in parentheses,

indicating in the key below that complete genetic information

may not be represented at this locus.

At the top of that column, we see an asterisk

indicating that additional minor contributor alleles

may be undetected.

Katie Swango explained that she put that in parentheses

and did not exclude the defendant for two reasons.

First, she explained that the 21 alleles

was detected at 504 RFUs.

She said scientifically that was low, low,

just above the stochastic threshold,

and she said that that may have gone

above the stochastic threshold

on the basis of what she referred to

as a baseline of 4 RFUs.

In reading the transcripts in context,

it is clear that what Katie Swango is referring to

is that background noise that can be produced by the machine.

To illustrate, she explained that if it were detected

at, say, 1,000 RFUs,

that would be so far beyond the stochastic threshold

that there's no doubt that the other alleles

would have been called even accounting

for background noise of the machine.

But 504 RFUs is so close to the line

that she didn't want to exclude on that basis

because of the second reason.

If you look at the defendant's alleles

all the way to the right column,

the defendant has every single allele

that appears in the minor contributor call.

To exclude the defendant on the basis

that the 23 allele wasn't called,

where the 21 was only called at 504 RFUs,

under circumstances where the defendant

has every single other allele

that the minor contributor has,

Katie Swango said that would be odd,

and I think that is certainly agreeable.

So her rationale for not excluding

was very reasonable.

And why the 21 in the very first column

with all of the alleles from the entire mixture

is not in parentheses,

but the 21 in the minor contributor is in parentheses,

whether it was the correct call for Katie Swango

to exclude or not,

that was all great fodder for cross examination.

But the disagreement between Swanton and Swango

is really on the conclusion

that was drawn on the basis of this data.

This court has been clear

that when there is a challenge

to the admission of expert testimony,

it must be based on the methodology

and the principles not on the conclusions

drawn from them.

It does not appear that the defendant

is challenging the stochastic threshold

as a methodology.

They are challenging the conclusions

that Katie Swango drew from that.

And Ms. Swango's conclusion was

that she could not exclude the defendant,

but she couldn't include him either.

Is that right?

That is correct, Your Honor, with a wrinkle there.

I don't think there are any DNA tests

that are produced where the result is

he's the person.

The results are always what is in this case.

As Katie Swango explained,

looking at this, she could say

the chance of picking

a random person

in the population

to have this DNA profile

is 1 in 390 million,

which doesn't necessarily mean

for sure that it's him,

but you can't exclude him.

He is a potential contributor.

And so the correct place to dispute this

was cross-examination.

It was not to exclude the testimony

of Katie Swango.

Looking next to the mistrial issue,

as Justice Bassett observed

we are on

a bit of shifting sands here.

The court will see at

page 507, 510, and 540

of the transcripts that the defendant

adamantly objected to any

motion, any mistrial

without prejudice.

The defendant wasn't looking for a new trial.

What the defendant was looking for

is exactly what this court has cautioned

that discovery sanctions are not for.

The remedies of

mistrial with prejudice

is strong and reserved

for unique circumstances

and excluding

any DNA evidence wholesale,

both of those remedies under these circumstances

would have served as procedural

devices to escape justice

rather than to cure any actual

prejudice to the defendant.

Below when the court

asked the defendant the first time

what the prejudice was,

defense counsel said

having a cross-examined command

without having adequate time

to review additional CARs.

In this circumstance,

then if nobody knew about any CARs

and then all of a sudden

in the middle of them there's 12.

There were 7 that defense already knew

about. Defense likely had a chapter

of cross-examination built in about CARs

as evidenced by the cross-exam

that was conducted.

This just provided more ammo.

So to cure the prejudice,

the court said, I will give you the night.

I will not make you cross-examine

right after this direct is done.

Correct. Review the CARs.

Make their notes.

The court offered to provide its report

early the next morning

to depose Kevin McMahon.

I did not see

and I'm not saying it's not in the record

but I did not see that Kevin McMahon

had already been deposed.

I know Katie Swango had been

but I did not see that McMahon had been.

Nevertheless, the court gave the opportunity

to depose him again.

Those

remedies

cured the prejudice

that defense counsel identified.

They gave adequate time to review the CARs

and build new pieces

into the cross-examination.

But then the prejudice began to grow

as defense counsel saw that they

weren't getting what they were asking for.

It became, well, maybe I would have investigated

more. Maybe I would have probed the state lab.

And then

as defense counsel

appointed out

they would have been stuck

with Katie Swango's answers but they

didn't ask Katie Swango a single question

on cross about the integrity

of the state lab and its DNA

procedures. And she certainly

would have been the most knowledgeable person

about that.

They were driven, it seems,

from the transcripts

by the tight schedule of their expert.

Their expert was

a patent attorney in New York.

He was a judge at the same time

and it seemed sometimes did

DNA expert testimony

and he had other professional commitments.

Given that

defense counsel did not want to take the time

to depose McMahon.

She said it would be fruitless and it would cause

Swinton to not be able to testify on time

but if she wasn't going to take that

time

it's belied by the record

that defense counsel was really looking for

an opportunity to launch a comprehensive

investigation into the state lab.

Should it matter

to us that

the defendant was

seeking a miss, we understand

now that the

defendant's position has shifted from

trial to appeal

there was mistrial with prejudice.

Here they're just

asking us to find that there

should have been a mistrial.

Does that matter? Should it matter

to us that

changes occurred?

Should matter, Your Honor.

I don't think there is anything on this record

where the court could find

an absolute manifest necessity such

a mistrial with prejudice

or without prejudice had to be granted.

I think the exercise of discretion

standard should apply

and I think the

defendant shouldn't be able to

shift to a new argument now.

That's an argument that the trial court did hear

the trial court after

the trial court did consider

to grant a mistrial without

prejudice, didn't it?

It did, Your Honor. So the issue was in front of the trial court

and why can't we decide it?

The trial court did not

decide it although it

suggests that it might be inclined to do that.

This court should

not decide it in that way

because the defendant explicitly

objected at that point.

That is not the remedy that he saw.

So that's not the remedy he saw

in the first instance. Appellate

courts are not to go seek remedies

in the first instance. They're to review

what happened below and determine

whether or not there was error.

There was no error on whether or not

a mistrial should have been granted.

The trial court certainly considered it, but it was not granted

not because the court erred

but because the defendant objected

he should have to live with that now.

He shouldn't be able to shift on appeal.

And if the court has no further questions

the state is content to rest on it brief.

Thank you, Your Honors.

Mr. Rothstein, do you wish to use

your minute?

Yes, Your Honor. Just in terms of

the mistrial

issue

the way that

I read the record

clearly is that the defense stated

that it did not want

a mistrial without

prejudice. And they're

not in the record. If you look at

the context of this case during the coronavirus

how hard it was to get a trial

this is retained counsel

how much money it had spent to go to trial

I think there are probably good

reasons for that.

The trial court

I do not believe did anything close

to offering

a mistrial without prejudice here.

The trial court

based on my reading of this record

if the defense had pressed for a mistrial without

prejudice the trial court would not

have granted that.

In this appeal

in terms of any talk of

shifting there is consistency between

the remedy one of the remedies sought below

and the remedy that I'm pressing on appeal

which was the exclusion of the DNA

results as a sanction to the state

the state has addressed that that is

not an appropriate remedy I've already

addressed why I think that is an appropriate remedy

of the record. Thank you very much counsel

okay submitted the court is now in

recess.
