This is case 2022-0268 David Loick v. Gloria Loick.

Good morning, Mr. Chief Justice, members of the court.

My name is John Galant from the full-off form of Galant and Irvin.

I'm representing the appellant David Loick in this appeal.

Ladies and gentlemen, we're arguing in this case that the Supreme Court aired as a matter of law

and dismissing our petitions in equity.

You said supreme. We air on our own.

Excuse me. It's a good start to my argument.

The Supreme Court aired as a matter of law and dismissing the petition to partition

and other equitable claims that were filed in the superior court on behalf of Mr. Loick

in this case for three specific reasons.

The first is that the line of cases in this area dealing with a divorce decree

and probate and family court decree under Miller v. Miller in the northern case

are clearly distinguishable to this case.

And I'll set to the fourth for the court why they're distinguishable

and why this result should be different.

Secondly, the law in this state is clear that a petition in equity,

this is not just merely a petition to partition that we found in this case.

We filed several equitable claims including a claim for euston occupancy

and a claim for industrial enrichment, all equitable in the superior court.

The cases say that the court needs to examine at the time of this hearing

the circumstances of the party and the material and substantial circumstances

that existed from the time of the divorce until the time of the petition

to determine whether the court can fashion an equitable relief

which is really what the petition is designed to do.

Thirdly, we're going to argue before the court this morning

that a different way to uphold this decision

is an unconscionable, illegal and impossible result

and I'll explain to the court why that is.

First, this case is clearly distinguishable for Miller.

Under Miller the facts are somewhat similar

in that in Miller there was an older divorce with older children

and in the decree in Miller the husband and wife agreed

that the wife and children would remain in the property

and when they agreed to sell it that they'd sell it

their owner to join tenants to the rights of survivorship.

There's no obligation to fund the power of the wife

to repair and maintain the property during your occupancy

and again it was an older marriage with older children.

We have in this particular case Mr. Leuch was 35 years old

at the time of the divorce in 2018.

He had three small children, six, nine, and 12

while the decree in this particular case

provided specifically that the wife and children

could reside in the residence.

The obligation upon the wife was to repair

and maintain the property during your occupancy.

In Miller the reason why the decision was what it was

is because the court looked and examined the decree

in its entirety to determine whether there was

anything regarding her occupancy that tied the children

to the house and the court found that there wasn't.

In this particular case there is substantial difference.

In this case there's uniform support order

which is signed and made part of the decree in this case.

The uniform support order provides specifically

that the husband is paying for the house

the mortgage and the taxes and the utilities

in lieu of child support.

He's paying the expenses of the house

for his child support obligations

which exceed those obligations at the time.

The difference in this case is two-fold.

Number one, yes, the intent of the parties here

was that the payments that he made on behalf of the husband

was child-to-child support regarding the children

residing in the house.

And two-fold, the wife had this obligation

to maintain and repair the property

which wasn't existing at the time in the Miller case.

Northern case also...

So your petition and equity

directly related to the pending divorce matter

and the parenting issues in the circuit court.

Our petition and equity was two-fold.

First of all, there were substantial and material changes

since the time of the divorce

in that the custody completely changed.

The wife had turned into an alcoholic

and had a boyfriend who was also an alcoholic.

The court determined that their influence on the children

was toxic and removed the physical custody

and the primary custody of the children

from the wife to the husband.

So the husband now has primary custody

and complete custody.

So why didn't you appeal the family division's decision

not to address your dad's decision?

We think the law in Miller, the law in Northern,

and the law in the family court is clear.

The property division in a family court case

becomes final in binding and is not modifiable

under any circumstances.

So it's your position that your client

was seeking to modify the property settlement?

No, my position is that we filed a petition

to sell the real estate in...

And again, I wasn't counsel in that probate court case.

Filed a petition to sell the real estate

in the probate court and the probate court said,

no, we cannot do it because the law is clear

in probate court. This decision is final.

Your relief is by filing a petition to partition

in the superior court and seeking equitable leave,

which is exactly what we did in this case.

Now, the case law under Miller and Northern

making clear that a petition to partition,

and in this particular case,

we also filed other equitable claims

which the court completely ignored,

is an equitable claim.

The court in the superior court is designed to look

at all the circumstances and should under Northern

look at any material at substantial circumstances

that happened since the time of the decree

until the time of the petition to see if the superior court

under its equitable powers should exercise jurisdiction

to form an equitable, fair relief for the circumstances

of the parties that are different from the time of the divorce.

I have two questions. One, would you address

the waiver argument?

Yes, we've conceded in our brief that

at the time of the divorce there's an argument

and the case law sets forth that there's a waiver

of the right to file a petition at the time

the divorce was entered into.

You submitted that in our brief as well.

I think the case law is clear that the law

and interpretation of the facts is that there's a temporary

waiver of the right to file a petition to partition.

However, the case law is also clear that when the

substantial and material circumstances

sends the divorce to the petition,

the appropriate relief is to seek an equitable claim

in the superior court for petition to partition.

And my second question is, have you thought of asking

for a jury trial in the superior court

in connection with your petition to partition?

I don't believe we requested it in our petition,

but surely we could, but our petition was dismissed.

Our decision not only the petition to partition

the property was dismissed under equity,

but we had a use of an occupancy petition

and we had an unjust enrichment claim

in the superior court because what we claimed

was that the wife not only doesn't have custody

of the children anymore, and my client

had to file bankruptcy in this case because

he's paying for the mortgage taxes

and insurance of this property.

He's maintaining and supporting these three minor kids

and the wife is living in the property rent-free

and basically takes the argument she can live

rent-free for the rest of her life,

which is clearly an inequitable result of this matter.

In this case, we also argued that the wife

hadn't repaired and maintained the property.

We filed a detailed inspection report

and in our petition we itemized all of the

issues that she had failed to maintain

and repair, the doors, the windows, the decks,

the heating system, the septic system,

the plumbing system.

That was reviewed at the superior

court's temporary hearing, correct?

The court?

There was a temporary finding that

no spoiling was happening.

Was there ever a final hearing?

No, we didn't have the opportunity.

The wife presented pictures at the hearing

on the motion to dismiss of a few

of the bedrooms where the bed's made

and the court said, well, it doesn't look like

there's a spoilation of the evidence.

Was that temporary hearing noticed

as a final hearing?

It was noticed as just a, it wasn't

a temporary hearing.

It was a hearing on the motion to dismiss.

The court made a decision and dismissed

the claims without an opportunity to discuss

the details of our arguments in that case.

While it made some findings.

Yes, exactly.

And we've submitted a detailed

inspection report at the time of that hearing

detailing all of the inequities

of the property and why the wife

had just failed to repair it,

as well as emails from my client saying,

you have to pump the septic system.

You have to fix the deck.

You have to repair the hole in the garage.

And she just ignored it.

And to this date, not repaired those items,

she's going to claim that there is no,

that she is maintaining and repairing it.

But none of the items in the inspection report

to my knowledge have been addressed

since then to the present.

The third argument in this case

and why this is an uncomfortable result

and actually couldn't be the law

of this state is what you're

doing in this matter, if the law

is that if you, in a divorce agreement,

if you allow one of the spouses to live

in a property that becomes a permanent

order that you can't modify.

Under Miller and under the cases,

if the result is this result,

then the draftsman,

every divorce agreement would be

200 or 300 pages long. Why?

You should have to provide for every

possible contingency that might happen

from the time of the divorce until

the children turn the age of majority

at 18 years old in order

to accomplish anything, in order to address

any concern that might come up.

I can name 10 off the top of my head,

wife could pass away, the husband

could die, husband could lose his income,

the children could become emancipated,

the children could move out of the house.

That would be solved by the

exercise of survivorship rights,

would it not?

Only the death, only the death.

But still, what happens to the

children who are residing in the property

and some guardian comes in and says,

well, we have the right to live there

and it doesn't say anything in there

that even if she dies,

that situation changes.

That's ridiculous.

I've drafted divorce agreements for some

33 years in the state in order for me

to address every possible

thing that could happen from the time

of the divorce to much years later on

would be impossible for me to address

one of those contingencies.

I'd have to address the income of the parties,

the obligation of the parties, the occupation

of the parties, the death of the parties.

It's not just about the property.

It counsels against these collaborative

solutions.

You'd have to cut the court at the time of divorce

so that each party is completely independent

and that could be contrary

to the interests of the parties.

Well, it could be, but it never happens.

In every divorce case, there's an

agreement that one party gets to

resign in a marital residence and there's

something that happens later on in every

agreement.

In this particular agreement, as in the other

years, an older marriage where the wife had

lived there with the children for many years

and they become emancipated several years

after the divorce. That's not the case here.

In this particular case, at the time that they

signed this divorce agreement, they anticipated

the wife to live there with primary custody

of the kids and then literally three years

later, the whole circumstance changed

where now the kids are no longer living

there. My client is paying child support

taxes through taxes and

mortgage and insurance upon the property

and he doesn't even get to live there

with the child support.

I think that's one of the most

important obligations. The only

remedy which we have is, number one,

seek a petition in the Superior Court to

petition the property, let the

court fashion its equitable relief

and deal with, number one, the fact that

she hasn't repaired and maintained, although

they're claiming that she has, we claim

she doesn't, the court doesn't have the

right to dismiss that without a factual

finding that there's an

issue. We submitted a detailed report

about any other

property settlement disagreement

that arises post-divorce from going

to Superior Court for equitable relief.

It depends on the circumstances

of each particular case, which is what

Northern and Miller say. Northern

Miller say, the only reason why Miller

was decided the way it was was because

there was nothing tying the children to

the property and it says specifically, we

want to formulate the 10th of the party

at the time of signing this agreement.

In Miller, that didn't happen. There

was nothing to do with the

property. In Miller, that

wasn't the case at all, where the husband

was paying for child support by means

of maintaining this property, as it

existed in this particular case.

Council wants you to ignore that fact,

which is a substantial factor in this

matter. My client was paying

for child support by means of the

mortgage taxes and insurance and she

had an obligation to maintain.

What's our relief if we, if she

doesn't maintain the property? Our

family court?

Again, the family court is

specifically found and I think

rightly, I think that Justice's

questions are correct, that the

property division aspect of this case is

non-monifiable in the probate court.

The probate court doesn't have jurisdiction.

The obligation to compel, I mean

the obligation to maintain would be

enforceable by the family court.

But the more appropriate relief in

terms of equity would be to go to

the Superior Court and have the

jurisdiction as to what's

happened based upon the substantial

material circumstances. We think a

family division has exclusive jurisdiction

over the divorce and parenting

matter. It's

peer court would lack jurisdiction

to hear a motion to compel.

No, it depends

on what it is. If it's relating to the

children, then yes, the probate court

has exclusive jurisdiction dealing with

issues involving the children.

Issues involving a

final property settlement, I'm not sure

that the probate court has exclusive jurisdiction over that issue.

I think the law is clear that the

probate court can't

not modify, it can't change

the order of a property division.

It becomes final in binding in all aspects.

We can file a motion for contempt

if it's not maintaining the property.

We can file a motion for contempt. Correct, your Honor.

Absolutely. That's the only remedy regarding the

maintenance and repair. It doesn't deal

with the issue of the children and him

maintaining the property for that time frame,

but it's not the case

and more akin to the northern case.

The northern case

contains a number of different languages

and indicative in the northern case that describes

what the superior court should do in these

circumstances. The court should look at what material

and substantial circumstances, if any,

existed from the time of the divorce until the time of the petition

to determine whether the superior court should

exercise equitable rights

in granting this relief. It's not the absolute

decision or language that existed in the Miller case.

So, and again,

my position is that otherwise

you'd make the draftsperson and the draft people

of these divorce agreements

have to provide for every contingency regarding

anything that happens in divorce, not just

the occupancy of the residence, and that just doesn't

happen. In a divorce agreement,

you're lucky if you can get an agreement that one party occupies

the property for a period of time. Never mind

provide for eight different contingencies

or 20 different contingencies of what might

happen from a time of the divorce to the

present. In this particular case,

my client never contemplated that the wife would end

up in a situation she was in and custody of the children

would change from her to him, and he'd have

primary custody supporting three young children

outside the house. Now he's

paying for the house to be

maintained, and she's living there rent-free

for the rest of her life. It makes absolutely

no sense, and it's completely injustice to this

matter. Thank you.

I know I didn't

indicate this, but I should have reserved

some opportunity to rebut

in the event that that situation

happens. May it please the court.

I'm Pamela Corey. I'm a practitioner

from Salem, and I represent Gloria

Loy. This case

revolves around

a specific provision, paragraph

15, of the

party's divorce decree

in which

it is specifically

articulated that the

party shall continue to own the

property until such time

as they agree to

sell it as joint tenants with

rights of survivorship.

If the parties agree to sell the house,

they shall equally

divide any net proceeds from the sale of

the house. Gloria shall remain

in the home. David

shall be responsible for the mortgage,

taxes, and insurance.

However, Gloria shall be

responsible for maintenance and upkeep.

Sure, but right now

we're trying to decide

whether your

clients get a judge,

and where they get a judge. Which court?

Fair enough, Your Honor.

Back in November

I was not involved in the underlying divorce

or the post-divorce litigation. I became

involved in the fall of

November 21, I believe it was.

The issue

about the real estate and whether

there could be any modification

of the real estate to force the sale of the

home was

filed, as I understand it, in the

litigation in 2021 that resulted

in parenting.

The

court didn't fully take

it up, but it was further addressed

and I wrote a memorandum which I don't believe was

responded to, which specifically

articulates, what's the basis?

The court had

the exclusive jurisdiction under

490,

RSA 490 section 1

to have

exclusive jurisdiction over the division of the real

estate that was in that agreement. Which court?

The family court.

The family court.

Even Maldini which is cited in

multiple of my filings and also in my memorandum

it reinforced that the family

court is the court of exclusive

jurisdiction to address this type

of issue. The family

court...

Are you agreeing, is it your position

that the bill to

or the petition to partition the real

estate should go back to the family

court for resolution?

What's happened here?

I think there's a lot of distraction.

Is that...

Yes or no?

The family court has already decided this issue.

It was not appealed.

Mr. Leuch could have appealed.

Decided what issue?

I'm sorry sir.

The family court already decided what issue?

We filed a motion to dismiss.

The motion to dismiss the request

to modify the real estate provision

was granted in December of 2021

to the family court.

There was a request.

What about the...

Getting to Justice Hicks's question

the availability of

the equitable remedy

of partitioning.

Has the family division ever ruled on that?

It's...

On the equity partition

I believe they have you on it

because Miller was cited

in my memorandum

to dismiss the case.

There's a lot of distraction

and I take a lot of objection

with the factual

portrayals and trying to confuse the court.

Let's go back for a minute

to what's been discussed here.

There's a discussion about the fact

that at the time that this agreement

was entered into there's a certain USO.

There's a certain USO

and that USO provides for a certain level of support.

There's some other arrangements.

That USO under the standing order

of paragraph three in the USO

says that within three years

or under any other circumstances

that may be modified.

The parenting plan itself

talks about

the schedule for the children

based on as the children get older

their preferences etc.

That could be modified.

So the family court could modify

and relieve

Mr. Loick from his obligation

to pay for the mortgage and taxes?

No, not in this particular case, Your Honor

Life was that not the

basis of the child support

award in the USO?

Because what's interesting here, Your Honor

is when the court had this

subsequent trial where there was a modification

of the parenting schedule

a new USO was

entered at that time.

In that USO

Ms. Loick now pays child

support to Mr. Loick.

So if the court

at that time

that that was somehow tied in

it could have been

addressed at that point

in time. It was not.

So I think and I raised this at the family

court in my motion to dismiss

and I renewed these

arguments at the superior court

and just so the court has a little bit of context

the

hearing in February of 2022

in the superior court on the partition

action

was originally scheduled as a temporary hearing

and Your Honors have the transcript.

You saw that the court

despite my motion to dismiss

gave a significant amount of time

to discuss a variety of issues

including this

2019 inspection report

that was, you know, brought in

the day of the hearing

three years later to try to say that this

But it was still a temporary hearing

offers of proof and at the end of it

the case was dismissed.

Yes, but as you'll find Your Honor

even in the court's order

dismissing the partition

the trial judge

talked about

that found my client who he inquired of

found her testimony

about the state of the property

fairly convincing. Those are his words in the order

but that was not a full hearing

so I understood

Your Honor but I think that the court always

gives due respect to the court

and there's an oversimplification

about what was actually provided

that this showed a clean room

it was not.

Let me ask you can you clarify your position

on assuming

for the moment that your client hasn't met

her obligations to maintain the property

I know you have a different view on that

but assuming that so

what is the husband's

remedy and where

what remedy, what court should he be in

what's your position on that? He can go to the family court

I mean if we're going to give anecdotal

you know

discussions about what can happen with divorce

agreements and family courts I'm in there quite a bit

I can tell you there's a lot of things

in this particular case there's nothing that

prevented Mr. Leuch and it doesn't

appear that he took any action

to seek any specific

performance in terms of

the divorce agreement of non-compliance

with maintaining the property

or things of that nature. The court has

the jurisdiction to say you're not in

compliance with the disorder you need to do

X and X or we can have this

that hasn't been done. But let me

seek the remedy of partition in the family

division.

You honor Miller

is on point in this case

this case these parties hold how do they

hold this title? How do they hold this

title? By joint tenants

partition actions as the

cases say typically envision

a situation where

oftentimes they're tenants in common

or whatnot but even still

in Miller the case is very

similar to this case. In that case

the husband was frustrated because

she continued to live in the property she didn't

want to sell the property and the children

were out of the house. How is that different

here? Because

at this point in time the mother

doesn't particularly have

routine residential

responsibility of the children it's

similar. I think we're

more interested in the state of

title to this property.

Think it through if you're telling

this court that this property

is encumbered by that provision

whereby your client

has to agree to a sale in perpetuity

doesn't that create a

potential inequity that ought to be

relieved somewhere

under the laws of the state of New Hampshire?

You honor again I think Miller

addresses that. I think Miller and it might

have been Tiskovich that they were referring to

in that particular opinion but they talked

about. So you're saying that

there was the right to partition

was waived in perpetuity?

In that particular case

in either the dictar of the language as I

recall it they were talking about

the fact that when you hold it as joint

tenethip it's not in perpetuity because

God forbid something happens to one of the

owners the other person gets full

succession of the property.

So it's not in perpetuity

and that was basically

I'm sorry I should have

I misspoke I should have been asked

whether this condition

is supposed to exist for their

life expectancy for each of the

party's life expectancy

and where should

the any inequity in that

be addressed?

Again your honor I guess

if they want to go to the family court and try to

reopen vacate certain portions

and things of that I want to you know

perhaps that's a way to do it.

So again the impact of this case would be

all marital residences

get sold upon divorce

because you can't have any

longstanding

collaborative

property settlement involving the marital

residents because it can never

be

revisited under any circumstances

so might as well just sell the thing

at the divorce and then we all move on.

I appreciate what your

honor is suggesting but I don't

agree with that.

This agreement could have said

a number of things it could have said

when the children graduate from high school

the house will be sold

if Gloria should remarry

the house shall be sold

if you know Mr

is doing X, Y and Z

the house shall be sold.

And then you can't as council said

you can't think of everything so some

unforeseen

event happens it's not in the language

and we're right back here so where

is as Justice Hicks inquired

where is the proper

venue if you will

for a remedy.

It has to be the family court and again

your honor in this particular case even though

there is no ultimate

total waiver there could be

a remedy based on the facts of

the particular situation

in the family court.

That's what I was saying also your honor

what I think is not

Is that a partition?

Is that a partition?

Option?

Division of marital property under the umbrella

of the jurisdiction of the marital court and again

your honor we

hanging a lot of this on Mr.

Lloyd could never have foreseen that the

children wouldn't live in the home

I don't think that's reasonable.

With that aside let's say something does

happen that's unforeseeable

is there a partition

option in the circuit court?

Well again your honor.

Measure it against the fact that property

settlements are non-modifiable.

Again your honor I think if you go

and look at what is modifiable

in a property settlement you have the fraud

duress

undue influence maybe mutual mistake

maybe wasn't

there are times when things were not

contemplated say in a divorce agreement

that the court does have to pass or

an asset was inadvertently excluded

from the attention.

Three of us have asked the same question

is it yes or no

is it is the remedy of

partition available

to the husband

in the circuit court?

No

Because

no because

the waivers that he's talking about

don't apply to this case.

Short of partition a reassignment

of the

financial responsibility

might not be a modification

of the property settlement.

She might have to pay the mortgage and the taxes

and the upkeep

is that possible?

In this particular case

I would say

the family court I suppose could address it

but I believe it's non-modifiable

it is part of this particular provision

however inactually drafted

it's not unambiguous.

The marital judge

specifically said that

in the December 2021 order

you know we have a deal maybe Mr.

Lloyd it doesn't now suit his needs

he agreed to it

that's something that's very critical here

he agreed to these terms

he agreed to these terms

that was found over and over again in the family court

and also by

that's another interesting thing

because in the Miller case

the

ex-husband in that case was trying to say

oh he didn't have a lawyer and all these things

and maybe he should get some additional consideration

he didn't know what it was going to mean

and that

because of here I believe the parties were both prosa

they entered into this agreement

they agreed to it

he raised these issues at the family court

the family court recognized that this is non-modifiable

property settlement

and again if you want to go to the letter of

agreements and the distinctions

Mr. Lloyd was on constructive notice

frankly under the original

2018 USO

that that USO could be modified under the standing orders

as well as the parenting plan

and the USO in fact was modified

with full awareness that Mr. Lloyd was trying to

seek

the sale of this real estate

and it was modified

and there was no adjustment made to this particular

issue.

Do we have that order?

I believe

I believe it's in the

the appendix that Mr.

Gallant submitted your honor.

Thank you. 2019 you said.

No the order was

December of 2021

oh no the

order for the USO I believe that was

August of 2021 and that is with

Mr. Gallant's documents because he

included the

trial court documents and again that was something just

procedurally I thought was improper

because a number of the documents that appeared

in this case and I appreciate their record from

the family court they really were not presented

in the superior court and I did

take issue with that and I had noted that

your honor procedurally I found that to be

peculiar and I do just for the record

I want to object to certain factual statements

that were made here that were prejudicial to my

client and I don't believe the court

should consider them.

Thank you very much council cases submitted

court will stand and recess.

Please rise.
