This is case 2022-0578, John Doe et al. versus New Hampshire, Attorney General et al.

Good afternoon. With the indulgence of counsel, on behalf of the court, I'd like to note a moment of history.

This is the last time that the five of us will be sitting up here together.

Justice Hicks will be retiring in November, and in order to facilitate a timely wrap-up of his work,

he will no longer be participating in oral argument after today, with the exception of two cases next week,

for which there are disqualifications. I'm disqualified on the next case, so this is the last time we're all together.

Justice Hicks, you bring a distinctive bent to oral argument, like in so much of your work.

And on behalf of myself, I want to say what an honor it's been to be able to sit with you for the last two-plus years,

and to have you as my wingman here. Justice Bassett.

Thank you, Chief. I, too, will not be sitting on the cases next week on which Justice Hicks will be presiding,

so this is my parting shot.

It's hard to believe that Justice Hicks is actually turning 70. I know that it's hard to believe.

But under the Constitution, as it's been since 1784, he must retire at age 70.

That's a great loss to this court and a loss to the state.

Justice Hicks, I want to thank you for your many decades of service as a judge and 17 years on this court.

I've had the privilege of sitting with you for the past 11 years, and I've learned so much from you.

Thank you for being here. Thank you for your service to the state.

And also, I just want to thank you as a great colleague and friend,

and I'm consoled by the fact that our friendship will continue for many decades. Thank you.

My word. My word.

Mark the moment, he's speechless.

That won't last long, sorry.

No, no, it never does, but it's been my pleasure and privileged to sit with the four of you,

and particularly having you, Chief, next to me as your wingman, as you said, has been an exquisite honor.

I can't believe the quality of my good fortune over the last 70 years, actually.

But it's been an honor, privilege, and I really don't have any good words to say except thank you.

Thank you all behind the bench, and thank you all in the gallery for some very fine moments.

Thank you, Justice Hicks. So with that, let's proceed with our argument.

Did you get what Justice Bassett said in writing?

Yes, we've recorded.

Good afternoon, members of the court, and I just want to pass along my congratulations as well, too.

It's been an honor being here in front of you a couple times before.

It was a pleasure.

Thank you. So congratulations on that.

If it pleases the court, my name is Mark Odewin, and I have the distinct honor of representing the appellants in this matter,

who are retired police officers that are seeking to have their names removed from the EES list.

As you know, the lawyer list, or EES list as it is now known, is an evidentiary tool that was designed to aid prosecutors to fulfill their obligations to defendants.

However, it does not relieve a prosecutor from doing his or her due diligence to look further beyond that if they were to check the list and not find a name on the list.

They should still be doing their due diligence beyond that.

And what I mean by that is they should also be looking to the police department that these officers come from to be able to check and see if there's anything in their personal file that may be exculpatory.

And they can do that under RSA 10513B, and if they do find something that's questionable, they can bring it before the court and ask for an in-camera review of that.

But what the EES has done, especially since it's now becoming public, it has set or launched one set of constitutional rights against another.

And that's the constitutional rights of the defendant under cases such as Brady v. Maryland and State v. Lorry against the property rights interests of the police officer under State v. Reel or Cantor versus the city of Rochester.

And this application of the new statute and whether the application has been applied reasonably by the lower courts is what is really at issue here today.

And what I talk about that was this statute was passed with the idea of having two things that they were going to address.

The first was that they were going to make the EES public. That was the first reason for the statute.

The second reason for the statute was to provide due process for officers to have an opportunity to be removed from that list.

And right now, it is virtually impossible to be removed from the list due to the expansive nature of the word, potentially.

Can I ask a question? With respect to the troopers here, there's no dispute that they were disciplined, that they accepted their discipline, is there?

No, there was not.

Did they admit that they actually lied in the underlying investigation or an acknowledgement of that effect?

So in the internal investigation, so what they were actually accused of was artificially inflating their statistics for what was called a weekly duty report.

In a weekly duty report, they were required to put how many cars they stopped, how many hours they did in the criminal investigation, things of that nature.

And what happened as a result of that was that they counted certain stops that the division didn't feel should have been counted as stops.

Such as if one trooper had already had a car pulled over and another trooper pulled up on that car and acted as a backup officer to that car.

In this particular case, the troopers used that backup stop to consider as a stop.

That's very helpful, but I think what Justice Donovan really wants to know is what is the nature of the record?

Were they asked did you lie and did they say yes?

Or were they asked did you misrepresent and did they say yes?

What are they on the hook for in the record in the event they were ever called as witnesses, for example?

Yes.

I believed what they admitted to was that they were wrong, that they shouldn't have used those for statistical purposes.

But I don't believe that they said they lied.

They misunderstood the policy? Or they were mistaken about what a stop considered?

Well, I think what they, again, what they thought was that they may have been skirting the system, but the actual policy, and again, I don't have the policy in front of us

because discovery wasn't fully met at this case at the lower level.

But from my recollection, having been a trooper in the past, it doesn't define specifically what a stop is in their policy.

It does. It does.

Oh, I don't have the policy in front of me.

Okay. And the troopers cooperated with the investigation and did not lie during the representation?

They weren't accused of any lying or misrepresentation during the actual internal investigation, which I think brings up a good point.

And I think the EES actually, memorandum actually does a good job of spelling this out, which is that they say it's a deliberate lie told during a court proceeding, administrative hearing,

in a police report or in an internal investigation. So some official proceeding, so to speak.

Because I think it does take into account, and I think you have to take into account in these particular cases, the human nature that we all have.

And if you were to Google psychological studies and lying, a whole plethora of articles are going to come up on that.

And one article that I had read had said something specifically about human beings lie every day about as many times as they go to the refrigerator for food.

Granted, they're usually not for anything significant, but they do.

And one of the last lines that I found interesting in that particular article, too, was it said,

society itself would probably collapse under too much honesty.

So I think what's important here is, do these police officers, do these troopers know when it is important to tell the truth?

And in this particular case, I think it is, because the minute they were called in and they did an internal investigation, they did.

They told the truth as to what happened.

And it's not just in this particular case, but there's other cases, too, that—

Well, and theoretically, had they not reported accurately all the activities of their day, that might have been, on the flip side, a challenge to the authenticity of their record, right?

It could be, depending on—and again, I think what the definition of a stop, and I don't have the policy in front of me, is, you know, it could be up to interpretation.

What is it about your complaint that should have allowed it to survive a motion to dismiss?

Well, I think here, I think the biggest issue is the term potentially exculpatory.

And I think what everybody gets caught up on is, what does the term potentially mean?

And if you look at Black Law's Dictionary, it defines potentially as existing impossibility, not an act.

Naturally, and I think this is important, probably expected to come into existence at some time, but not existing now.

So I think when you look at that, there needs to be some standard, especially when you're trying to balance these rights between the police officer and the defendant, moving forward, as to what potentially is.

And it should be that these cases are—it's going to be more probable than not that these cases are going to be exculpatory in most of the cases that come forward.

Otherwise, you're going to have a lot of police officers on this list, and it's going to be—I know of a variety of them, at least our clients—where it's already been deemed—it's been reviewed several times by courts, and they repeatedly say, yeah, it's not exculpatory in that case.

Is the situation here, the determination by the trial court about potentially exculpatory, what sort of deference do we owe the trial court?

Is that just a matter of law for us to determine?

Can we look at the same pleadings and make a determination that, in our view, it's not potentially exculpatory?

Well, I think when we look at this, I think the argument that the AG's office is going to bring forward is that the Merrimack District Court is not a court of equity, right?

But I think the court itself can still—it's still a court, it's still an impartial judge that's reviewing this—looks at that and reviews the circumstances of the case and determines it was not exculpatory, which is what happened in this case.

The incident happened in 2000. This was reviewed in 2003 by the Merrimack District Court. Judge Michaels was the one that determined that it was not exculpatory in that particular case.

And at which point, the Hillsborough County Attorney's Office decided to take them off the list.

I think what Justice Bassett is asking, is this a question that we can decide on our own? Do we need to send it back to the Superior Court?

I think—obviously, I think, as a Supreme Court, you could do it on your own. I think what's more important here is providing a standard and a guidance for the lower courts as to what potentially exculpatory means, so that when they are reviewing this case, they have something clear that they can follow moving forward.

And isn't that defined by the duties owed to defendants under Brady?

Well, I think it is, but I think when you're looking also here at—what we have is a list, a list of a bunch of police officers. I think it's up to 200 and something police officers right now.

How many of those are retired? Do you know how many of those are retired?

A good number of them I was looking over at the other day, and the ones that I recognized are either no longer in law enforcement or retired. I even found one that was dead.

So the issue is, how long is this going to affect these individuals?

But does Brady have an expiration date?

Well, again, we're looking at the human nature thing. That's why it's hard to argue from this side of things, because there's not a lot of case law out there for this, because New Hampshire's kind of on the edge of this.

Other states are looking to us as to what they're doing, because I know that other states have been discussing issues as to whether or not they should have an exculpatory evidence-type schedule,

or do what the federal government does, which is the Brady-Galio letters that they put in the personnel files.

But that being said, a lot of these officers, like the three here, are retired and are no longer in law enforcement.

So the likelihood of them ever being called forward again for a witness is slim to none.

And the only purpose that their names being on this list do anymore is basically to publicly shame them.

Now, like I said, the RSA 105-13-B, if something were to come out down the road on these officers, the prosecutor can still have access to the file.

So if they were to be identified as witnesses in a criminal trial, that the Brady obligation would still exist, independent of whether they're on the EES list or not?

Correct.

And the prosecutors would still have access to that disclosable information pursuant to Brady, correct?

Correct.

Under a New Hampshire statute, I believe currently they have to keep police personnel files for 20 years after you resign or retire.

But if it's exculpatory under Brady, then it should be on the list.

It's potentially exculpatory.

And if we agree that Brady defines that...

Again, I agree, but I think potential needs to be...

It can't be such a hypothetical or fanciful situation where if the stars align just right, this might be exculpatory in some future case somewhere out there.

It just isn't fair to these officers to do that to them.

Otherwise, almost...

So if you're right, why wouldn't it be more prudent as an appellate court for us to allow a record to develop in the trial court?

In perhaps these are cases, but that would be all the more important to allow a record to develop, to allow us to make a reasonable decision on what the standard should be.

I guess I'm missing where you're going with it.

Well, should we remand that, if you're right, for the development of a record?

I think it should be remanded for the development of a record.

I think this hasn't been teased out at all.

What I think, though, is important is that, you know, to define or set a standard, this court should set a standard as to what potentially exculpatory is to also assist with that.

But yes, the record was never really fully developed underneath.

And the personnel record was never available to the trial court.

Is that right?

I believe we had part of it, but not all of it.

It's not in our record, I don't think.

Yeah.

And what should we do with the fact that you've alluded to it that in 2003 the district division in Merrimack said that this was not

information that needed to be disclosed, and then in 2003 there was also a letter from the Hillsborough County Attorney.

I take it none of those documents exist, but so what should we do with that?

So even the court document doesn't exist, because we checked with the Merrimack District Court, and they said because it was well over 20 years,

the documents just aren't, the record's just not there.

So that's one of the issues that we dealt with here.

However, the prosecutor himself is still around, and specifically remembers bringing it before the Merrimack District Court,

and specifically remember that it was Judge Michaels that reviewed it.

I guess my trouble with that is we're dealing with this statute, 105.13 D, which has this express standard.

So whatever happened then is then.

We're dealing with this statute with this standard.

And I'm not understanding what Judge Michaels may or may not have done, how that bears on our determination.

Well, I still think it goes to show some weight that the information is probably or potentially not exculpatory.

It's just another, you know, if you add that, again, with the sheer passage of time, I think if you add that.

Because, you know, as they say, time heals everything.

Could you answer my question about Brady, though?

I mean, you make the argument about 608 and 609.

How does that override a prosecutor's obligation under Brady?

And I'm not saying it does. I don't say that it does.

I'm just saying at some point, you know, we have to look at this in a common sense approach and say, you know,

there's going to be a line somewhere where, you know, it's not exculpatory or this is potentially exculpatory.

Otherwise, you can look at almost any misconduct if you leave this the way it is and say it's potentially exculpatory.

And let me give you an example.

So there is a policy for state police that says that I have to wear my hat every time I'm outside of my cruiser, right?

So if my supervisor catches me without my hat on several times outside of my cruiser, decides to write me up for that for a violation of the policy,

well, then, by extension, you could say, well, that's potentially exculpatory because you're not a rule follower.

You don't follow the rules. So what other rules haven't you followed?

So it kind of leads to an absurd result.

On the other hand, if you had to fill out a survey and you said that you always wore your hat outside the cruiser, even though you didn't,

that would be dishonesty, right? And dishonesty is potentially exculpatory, isn't it?

Well, again, I think you have to look at it, too, from a human perspective there as well, like we've talked before.

What's the context in which that was spoken of?

You know, it's one thing that, you know, my wife may say to me, hey, how do I look in this dress?

And I go, ooh. I go, hey, honey, you look great.

How long you've been married?

20-something years.

20 years, so I always say she looks great.

You might want to take that example out of it in a future case.

Well, I'm just saying it goes to show the absurdity of, you know, we as human beings will always sometimes fudge the truth when asked certain questions.

But I think it's the context of where those questions are asked and how it's asked that's important.

I mean, if I'm not sitting on a stand on the court, that's important.

If I'm just filling out a survey that has nothing to do with nothing, eh, maybe it's not all that important to it.

So on that point, how do you distinguish the conduct here with the conduct underlying in Gantard, which is, you know, a case that we do have out there.

And the state makes the point that if anything, the allegations against your clients are more severe than what was at issue in Gantard.

Yeah, I mean, I think what we're looking at here is, you know, I think that the, again, the time that has passed, I think the fact that the circuit court has reviewed it.

I think the fact that they were completely honest during the internal investigation.

I think the fact that they didn't make up numbers.

They may have artificially inflated them, but they did actually, they were the backup officers on these calls.

They did conduct these rolling stops.

It's just, they were statistics that the state police didn't like.

So I think you take a look at all of that, and the fact that these three are retired, and Longson's been retired.

And they had careers ever since.

So these weren't officers that were then terminated and let go.

They continued on throughout their careers.

And this has never affected them through their whole career.

It's only after they've been retired now that this has come up.

And this list, just to clarify, you started the argument.

This list is not the extent of Brady Protection.

No, it is not.

This is just a tool.

This is just a tool.

Yes.

Thank you very much.

Thank you.

Emily Gehring.

Good morning, Herb.

Good afternoon.

May it please the court?

I'm Emily Gehring, representing the New Hampshire Department of Safety.

The petitioners have put forth a number of arguments where they're asking this court to adopt standards,

and they're talking about law enforcement trends and reputational harms.

And I think that that's really muddying and confusing what the actual issue was that was before the Superior Court.

Ms. Goring, can you put the microphone down a little bit?

Thank you.

Certainly.

If you can't hear me, let me know.

And the issue that was before the Superior Court was that under RSA 105-13-D, there were sort of two narrow inquiries the court was looking at.

Was petitioners' conduct potentially exculpatory, and did they receive adequate due process in arriving at that termination?

In their petition, the petitioners chose to plead that they undertook this course of action where they knowingly made up numbers.

They put them on official records in the scope of their law enforcement duties.

Those were reviewed by supervisors.

Those were used by the department.

And they intentionally inflated these numbers to look like they were compliance department policies that they weren't, in fact, complying with.

Beyond that, the petitioners also included in their petition that they underwent an internal investigation,

they fully cooperated, and they admitted the conduct that had occurred.

The petitioners put everything into their petition that was required to answer those two questions.

They set out a course of conduct that was potentially exculpatory, and they established that they had adequate process before that determination was made.

And as such, there was no further relief that could be granted under 105-13-D.

It was appropriate for them to stay on the list, and it was proper to dismiss this case.

When would a de novo hearing ever be appropriate, a de novo hearing before the Superior Court under this statutory scheme?

So I'm just speculating because I don't think one would have been necessary here.

But perhaps there's some case where the record is so incomplete, the recitation in the petition is so incomplete,

but the court really isn't in a position to determine if that conduct is made.

But what we have here is admission of knowingly providing false information to make it look like officers did one thing that they were not, in fact, doing.

Well, actually reporting what they were doing accurately, but it didn't fit into the box.

It didn't meet department policies, and that's why there was an internal investigation, and that's why they were dissatisfied.

Shouldn't someone weigh that conduct against the fundamental right to preserve one's reputation in the state of New Hampshire?

Shouldn't someone balance that?

The issue of the reputational harm and the right in one's reputation, that really speaks to the due process question here.

That doesn't speak to whether or not this conduct itself is potentially exculpatory.

Why would it be limited to some sort of procedural due process question? Is that what you're suggesting?

I mean, that's where the balancing of the reputational harm comes in.

If there's adequate process in making this determination, but what petitioner is asking you to adopt is—

Who performed that analysis for these gentlemen?

Excuse me?

Who performed that analysis for these gentlemen?

So in this case, they went through the internal investigation.

They've admitted in their petition that this conduct did occur.

I don't see how any further process would change that.

Where they've admitted the conduct, we all agree with the conduct—

Well, the next step in any constitutional analysis could be to balance that against the privacy interests

or the reputational interests of the gentlemen involved.

So as stated in my brief, further process and a further hearing is not going to change the outcome of what everyone has admitted to.

We all understand the conduct.

So the question is, is that potentially—

I don't think—I think you and I should just agree to disagree.

Go right ahead.

Certainly.

So in this case—

But again, we're talking about the list, not the Brady interest of the defendant.

So we're talking about a tool, an artificial list, that now has public exposure.

Doesn't that raise the stakes, if you will?

I don't think that it does raise the stakes.

And I think the reality is that in keeping this list, we are controlled by RSA 105.13-D.

It says that if the list is kept, it shall include all former and current law enforcement officers that have potentially exculpatory—

Potentially exculpatory?

Doesn't that require a substantive analysis, not on a motion to dismiss?

Yes.

In this case, I don't think there is a more substantive analysis that needed to be performed.

The petitioners chose how they pled this case.

They included the facts of their conduct.

Perhaps in another case, there would be room for a more substantive or—

So you're saying that because the troopers admitted that they lied, that they lied to their employer, that they violated state police policy, that's enough?

That that's something that would be admissible in court on cross-examination, should these troopers ever become witnesses?

So the admissibility inquiry is different than the disclosure requirement.

And so in this case, I have no idea if it would be admissible in a particular case or not.

I'm not going to turn on the facts of that case, but the disclosure requirement is much, much lower.

And to be an effective tool, the EES needs to include by statute anyone with potentially exculpatory conduct.

Potential is a pretty low threshold.

The statute didn't say anybody with absolutely exculpatory conduct or undoubtedly exculpatory conduct.

And that's a choice the legislature made.

The legislature used the word potential.

In this case, we know that there was a set of conduct that has the potential to be exculpatory in certain types of cases,

such that now that we know they have potentially exculpatory conduct in their personnel information, it shall be on the list.

There's no more discretion but to put them on the list.

Well, I have a petition here in front of me, and I think I read it differently than you do.

I don't think anybody admitted that they lied.

What they said is they recorded activity on activity logs and had a different interpretation than the department did.

And to me that seems very different, and I don't understand why it wouldn't be appropriate to have testimony, for example,

at a superior court hearing with the officers saying whatever they want to say about this,

and also having the whole personnel record in front of everybody so it can be discussed.

So I'd like to address that in two parts.

The first is to clarify, I know, with your line of questioning to Attorney Woodward,

the line isn't whether or not they lied.

And the state is saying that these troopers are liars.

But what they are saying is that they put information in an official record that they had a basis to know was not true,

and they had a basis to know that it was...

Well, I don't read it the same way that you do that they knew that they put information that wasn't true.

I think what they're saying is they had a different interpretation,

and they put down information that the department thought was incorrectly categorized.

So perhaps we do disagree.

I mean, the state's reading on that, and the Superior Court's reading on that,

is that this was a course of conduct where they know they were putting information that purported to show they were conducting stops,

but they were not, in fact, conducting stops.

And so, again, the threshold isn't whether or not they knowingly lied,

and that's what's potentially exculpatory or not.

As Justice McDonald said in the Gantert case, there's this much lower threshold that's carved out,

that if an officer puts information on official record with a basis to know that it is true,

that's enough to get you on the list.

Certainly...

Shouldn't someone judge the effect of the passage of time?

Wasn't this 20 years ago?

This conduct was 20 years ago.

These particular officers were continuing to do law enforcement activities well past that date.

I believe the last of these three troopers retired in 2020 from law enforcement activity.

And so, despite the fact that the conduct might have occurred 20 years ago,

it speaks to the petitioner's general credibility, their recitation of events, their reliability.

That's exactly the kind of information that could be beneficial to a criminal defendant

or a criminal defense attorney enacting their case.

So, the passage of time, maybe that speaks again to the admissibility at some point,

and maybe that speaks to how valuable that impeachment evidence actually is if it were used at trial.

But again, that's not the threshold for whether or not the information needs to be disclosed.

The disclosure threshold is much, much lower.

How do we know how they even got on the EES list when they received correspondence in 2003

saying that their name had been removed from the Lori list?

How do they get on the list present day?

Yeah.

I mean, isn't that an important part of any analysis of what's going on here?

The last they knew, they were off the list.

I don't think that changes.

If their personal information includes potentially exculpatory information,

I think how they got on the list now isn't relevant.

But I also want to point out that—

But isn't that relevant to their ability to challenge being replaced on the list,

but they had no notice that they went back on the list?

Well, they're challenging being placed on the list right now.

Obviously, they received notice.

They were aware of their rights under 105.

And they are now challenging whether or not they should be on the list.

So this, you know, whether or not they went on the list in 2014 and came off and came back on.

Certainly, they were notified in the process of 105, which is how the statute was set up to acknowledge the fact that there's been sort of a lifespan that has changed with this EES.

People have been placed on in different ways. There were different processes throughout history.

Right now, there is a standardized process to which the petitioners have abandoned themselves.

Are the contours of the internal investigation relevant to analyzing due process, particularly given concern over reputation?

I mean, it seems to me that's where reputation is served if there's notice and opportunity to be heard and a fair internal investigation.

And don't we need some visibility on that?

So the petitioners have alleged in their petition that they participated in the internal investigation.

They accepted their discipline without appeal.

But what I think is really important to note here is that limited discovery did happen in this case.

After the state's motion to dismiss was filed, the entire investigatory file was turned over to the petitioner's then attorney.

That was before the hearing on the motion to dismiss, and it was before the order was issued.

At no time did the petitioners come back and amend their complaint to say, you know, we didn't have a process, we were under duress, that we didn't actually participate.

They got to dictate the narrative of what they put in their petition, and they allege the facts that established potentially exculpatory conduct

and that they participated in the IA, which is adequate due process.

So going forward, police officers should participate willingly.

I don't know that I'm saying that. Are you talking about an internal investigation?

Yeah.

We expect officers to have candor and be truthful.

I don't think that we would want to incentivize any trooper or any officer to not participate in an investigation.

But with that said, I'm sure there are a number of investigations out there in which the investigation plays out and they find out that the conduct is not sustained.

I mean, that's the Duchenne case, right? There was an allegation that these officers had done wrong, put them on the list.

And when they challenged it, it was clear that they didn't have the process.

They went back for process. It was determined that those findings weren't sustained.

They did not have potentially exculpatory activities on their personnel information, and they came off the list.

So again, here, I mean, the standard on motion to dismiss is whether or not those facts would permit recovery under the statute.

Here, clearly the state believes that this is potentially exculpatory evidence, and the arguments that the petitioner are making really don't tip the scales here.

The age of it doesn't mean that it couldn't be useful to a criminal defendant that couldn't help in mounting a case.

The idea that it's not egregious conduct, I mean, that's not the standard either.

And this idea that there's a prior judicial determination out of a district court where we have no facts surrounding that, no idea really what that district court determination was about.

Wouldn't though district court, let's say there are several district court determinations because an officer is testifying in multiple cases, and there's a string of five decisions saying this is not exculpatory in this case, would that be relevant to a hearing on removal from the list?

No, I don't think it is.

No, I don't think it is.

Because whether or not conduct is going to be potentially exculpatory turns out the facts of a particular case.

So what might have absolutely no benefit in one criminal case might be the make or break item that speaks to conviction or acquittal in another case.

That's why this threshold is so low of potentially exculpatory, and this is why all of our cases, our U.S. Supreme cases, say that prosecutors need to err on the side of disclosure.

They need broad disclosure.

But nothing prevents them from disclosing here, even if they come off the EES list.

So the obligation is always going to be there, whether the EES is kept or not.

But the reality is that the statute that we have now says that it shall be a list of all current and former.

So now that DOJ has opted into keeping this list, they don't have the discretion of saying some people with a potential exculpatory will go on and some won't because the prosecutor still has to go look for the information.

For this to be an effective tool, it needs to cast the widest net that needs to be the central point of information to start prosecutors and a tool to help them.

Is there anything in the record that sheds light on whether after 2014, when they were on or about 2014, when they were put back on the list, it was disclosed for any of the troopers and became an issue in any trial?

It's not included in the petition, so I'm unsure if it was disclosed in any other trial.

But again, as I said, these troopers, at least one of them up until 2020, was still performing law enforcement activities, which means that there is the ability to be called into court.

They are interacting with people. There are, you know, there are potential criminal defendants out there who would want to know.

Well, what is the importance either to us or to the trial court, the fact that there was a letter from the Hillsborough County attorney saying they were off the lorry list?

I don't think it is. Again, as I said a minute ago, there's been sort of a long and turning history with the exculpatory evidence schedule.

We are looking at this in today's lens, whatever determination the Hillsborough County attorney made,

we have no idea what facts they were basing that on. We have no idea what analysis. We don't know what sort of guidance that they were looking at in arriving at that determination.

But today, looking at the facts as pled in, you know, comparing those to the standard for potentially exculpatory, that places them on the list.

Right now, the county attorney has no authority to remove somebody from the list.

No, my belief is that this is exclusively with the Department of Justice.

Because I understand it, though, the list is still available even if it weren't made public to prosecutors. Is that right?

I'm sorry, can you ask that again?

The information is still available to any prosecutor if he or she wishes to use it, whether the name is on the list or not, correct?

So the statute says that the list shall be made public. So because of the fact that it is made, the fact that the list is compiled at all, it must be a public one.

What's the state's interest in making these names public?

Complying with the statute. And the reality is that this statute was, I mean, it's a new statute that was arrived at to balance many competing interests, but the public has an interest in the transparency of law enforcement.

DOJ is the chief law enforcement officer for the state, who has an interest in the SWIFT administration of getting these Brady obligations and helping support the various county prosecutors.

Thank you very much, attorney hearing. Thank you, counsel.

Case submitted, reports and resources.

Please rise.
