This is case 2022-0142, Juliana Lonergan at all versus town of Sam

Burton. Good morning. May it please the court. My name is Patricia Pianciacco and

I'm here on behalf of Julie and David Lonergan. Could you adjust your mic a

little bit? Is that better? Yes. Should I start over? Okay. Again I'm here on

behalf of Julie and David Lonergan who own the property at 181 Johnson Road in

Sanbornton, New Hampshire. A exhibit is in the certified record. Should the court

need to refer to it at page three, my client's property is shown in blue and

the subject property that was issued, the special exception by the town of

Sanbornton is shown in yellow. As the court will also see, my client's property

directly abuts the subject property. Both properties are located in the general

agricultural district where farms and residential uses generally are permitted.

On February 2nd of 2021, the ZBA granted a special exception to the

intervener, Ed Edmonds, to operate a gravel pit on the yellow property after

only two public hearings. My clients feel as do I that granting this special

exception directly undermines the purpose of zoning generally of segregating

uses to protect public health safety and welfare. My understanding is that by

issuing that special exception, the application at which appears at page four

and it's described as a special exception, they are currently operating without

a 155E permit required under the statute. Let me ask you, it seems to me there's

some substantial preservation issues in this case. The argument by the town and

the interveners points out that, for example, the motion for re-hearing before

the ZBA didn't raise a lot of the issues that you're now presenting to this court.

What's your response to that, particularly on the 155E issue?

We did not raise the 155E issue. What we did raise is the evidence satisfying

the special exception criteria and we maintain it was a special exception approval.

So should we limit our analysis to that issue, whether there was sufficient evidence to support

the special exception? I believe that opposing council has a different view of that.

He seems to, the position that's been represented to me is this was one stop shopping.

You come in under this single application and you get a special exception and a permit

to operate the gravel pit, but I will defer to him. Where is the authority that says there's

two separate processes and why does that make any sense at all?

Well, under the zoning ordinance is where the zoning board of adjustment is appointed the

regulator under section 18B3 of the ordinance. The ordinance governs zoning but appoints the

ZBA the regulator and sets forth a variety of criteria that appears to be a compilation of

the statute in other matters listed. But if they take the criteria or

mirror or incorporate those that are on with 155E, why would you have two parallel processes

examining the same criteria? Well, first of all, we understand it. A zoning

application to the zoning board of adjustment for a special exception as the application was styled

is to allow a use permitted in the zoning district under special conditions when

the criteria of the ordinance is satisfied by sufficient evidence in the record.

Under zoning, we don't see the zoning ordinance in this area, in this particular town,

is incorporating by reference the opportunity to get a gravel pit at this operator permit

that's required under 155E3 is included.

Justice Bassett's point, where in the record did you make this argument?

We're not making that argument. Our argument primarily is that the application submitted

was for a special exception. The evidence does not satisfy the public health safety and

welfare provisions of the special exception criteria. And that it should be reversed.

Those are all factual determination? Yes. Thank you.

So we can disregard any argument with respect to 155E.

As far as us raising it, yes, Your Honor. Under 67433 Roman IV, a special exception

is only issued when it's in harmony with the general purpose as an intent of the zoning

ordinance and the special criteria set out in the ordinance to be satisfied.

This was confirmed in Tid v. Alton, Barrington East Cluster 1, and Jensen, Ink v. City of Dover,

all the citations to which are in our brief, which stand for the proposition that each prong

of the special exception criteria in the ordinance must be satisfied by sufficient evidence.

The record shows, when you examine it closely, inconsistent and conflicting expert reports

as to whether the subject property is in the Aquifer Conservation District, an important element

in this particular case, because it does appear in the Aquifer District generally to the extent that

you can really tell it's a scale that is as great as it is on the map that was on file with the

town. At least it's a question as to whether or not the Aquifer District does apply.

The other evidence relied upon was hearsay reports by the applicant's consultant

representing that you don't experience fugitive dust from gravel pits unless they're

100 acres or more. That's in the record. And there was also promises made by the ZBA,

two members of the public and the abutters, noise studies as well as traffic studies

for the 18-wheel dump trucks that barrel up and down Johnson Road would be provided,

that during the second hearing they reneged on. Although they were requested from the prior

failed application and it was expressly represented on more than one occasion by the ZBA members,

those studies would be done before a permit would be issued. They were never done, they were never

submitted. We now have 64 18-wheel dump trucks making round trips up and down Johnson Road

by residential properties. Only to the south though. Only to the south. Yes, Your Honor. But

they can increase that by 20%, simply by giving the town notice. No approval required.

There was no meaningful discussion whatsoever about fugitive dust by the ZBA.

It is a no contaminant. I understand the property at issue

is an existing pit. So the topography is there's a low area and then it's

toward the edges of the property. It gains elevation and then your client's property is

again in a lower elevation. I'm not certain, Your Honor, about the elevation specifically.

And there was one other piece of hearsay evidence introduced by the consultant to the ZBA

that it had been used in the past as a pit. But there was no evidence whatsoever ever

submitted to the zoning board to confirm that fact. Did the rules of evidence apply to ZBA meetings?

No, they do not, Your Honor. But generally upon review, if you are going to rely upon evidence,

you try to document it with more than somebody's recollection of past activities. Again, no

meaningful discussion of the fugitive dust, which is listed as an air contaminant under

RSA 125C2 Roman II. So the applicant's measures to mitigate that factor, they don't matter?

The applicant agreed after the ZBA requested to park a water truck on the site.

The problem with parking a water truck on the site and making it a condition that they

water down when they see it, is fugitive dust, as I referred to in the EPA reports,

is not visible to the naked eye. Is there a requirement, I think there is,

for a buffer, a vegetative buffer around the edge of the property?

Yes, there is, Your Honor. Does that contribute to the control of fugitive dust?

Yes, it would. And there was a butter testimony in the record reporting to the zoning board

during the same meeting when they requested a site walk by the ZBA that the berm wasn't there

and the trees had been removed. That were required to be established by the site plan

condition? Yes. So is that an enforcement action or is that a reason why the plan should not

have been approved? I would say the latter, Your Honor, simply because this was made during

the public hearing before the board voted to approve. But when the abutter, my client,

and the abutter directly to the south brought this to the board's attention

and asked that they do a site walk, they were ignored. There was also conflicting facts

in the record as to the duration of this particular operation. Some say, some areas,

it says, three years, others, it says, up to seven. The oversight by the town in the event of

an issue coming up was once again delegated to the regulator, the same, the zoning board,

that issued the permit. Without all this additional evidence they had represented

to the public would be provided. And then to close the deal, they refused to allow the planning

board to exercise its jurisdiction to determine whether or not this property is located in

the aquifer district, where under article 12b of the ordinance, that authority is expressly

delegated to the planning board. And it was the planning board, therefore, who should have examined

the expert reports regarding whether or not there was an aquifer under this property.

Well, just because the planning board has the ability to look at aquifer issues,

why does that divest the ZBA of jurisdiction or authority to deal with aquifer-related issues

when doing an application like this? Well, I would say, first of all, it's the

language of the ordinance. Article 12b, aquifer district, where gravel pits are expressly

not listed as a permitted use, is delegated specifically to the planning board. How does

the ZBA have authority to say, no, they cannot review these reports and make that determination?

Planning boards determine limits of overlay districts all the time.

It looks like the chairman of the planning board sent an email. Mr. Sandborn, why didn't

he just exercise jurisdiction if their jurisdiction existed with the planning board?

Because the ZBA had already approved the application. By the time the planning board

sent that email to the town, I think it was the zoning director. And of course,

the politics of all this becomes an issue in a small town. I can't speak for the planning director,

but I do know there was concern by him as well as many others about this.

You reserved two minutes. Thank you.

Argument is divided between the town, Attorney Bennett, and the intervener, Attorney Snook.

Yes. Good morning. I'm Steve Bennett. I represent the town of San Morton, the appellee.

I would like to bring to the attention of the court an issue that wasn't briefed by

either party. And I take the blame for that. In reviewing yesterday, I noticed that

the appeal was not done pursuant to RSA 155 E colon nine, which is the statute which controls the

appeals for applications for gravel pits. And that's established, I think, in K and B

rock crushing versus Auburn. In that case, this court established that

when you appeal an excavation application decision, it has to go pursuant to that statute.

You're suggesting that presents a jurisdictional defect here?

I do. I believe that the trial court lacks subject matter jurisdiction. The only difference

Even when it's issued pursuant to a local ordinance which supplants the application of 155 E?

I believe so. Okay. And again, the requirement under

155 E nine is that you file the motion for reconsideration 10 days within 10 days of the

decision. It does get confusing in that statute because immediately after that, what they say

is follow the traditional path for appeals for zoning boards of adjustment, which is

677 four through 15. And the only difference is there's a 30 day for the

motion for reconsideration under the ZBA procedures, as opposed to 10 days. So in fact,

as you look at the statement of the case prepared by the appellants,

she filed the motion was filed or the decision was made on February 23rd, I believe, and the

motion for recon for rehearing was filed 30 days later on March 22nd, I believe was the date it was

filed. So and it's my understanding case law is that this issue can be raised at any time, even

on appeal. So we're raising it at this point. And so you have no objection if we gave opposing

counsel time to brief this issue. None, your honor. I frankly, I discovered it when I was

reviewing yesterday. I contacted her this morning as early as I could to advise her that I would

be raising this issue. So it's your position. We don't have subject manager's fiction to hear

this appeal. Correct. If I could move on, there are, as the court noted, there were several

other instances of a lack of preservation of issues to the issues presented or argued

in the appeal. Whether this was a 155e permit or not, and whether or not an excavation is

permitted in the act for conservation district, we're not raised before the ZBA when this

was brought. Those are two issues that were new. And they weren't in the motion for

re-hearing. They were not, your honor. And in fact, the argument that this is not a 155e

permit was raised on page 41 of their brief. It was not part of the mandatory notice of

appeal. And it wasn't even in the questions presented in the brief. Again, and that

was an issue throughout this appeal was that the questions changed. There was one issue and

that is whether the planning board or the ZBA could delineate the boundaries of the act

for conservation district. That was consistently raised throughout. But that was the only

issue that was consistently raised. On the, for example, on the issue of noise, which

the argument now is that there wasn't enough conditions imposed on the gravel pit to address

noise. The only request in the motion for re-hearing was another noise study. That was

the only request. I don't think it's a fair to expand that to incorporate just a general

statement or a general issue that there were not enough issues or not enough conditions

to cover the issue of noise. Again, another issue raised, if I have one second, is this

that you're required to note in the, in the brief where these issues were raised. That

was not done in this, in this brief. There's no citations, references to where the issues

were preserved at the trial court. Thank you.

Thank you, Your Honor. When it comes to the evidence before the ZBA and what was reviewed.

You need to introduce yourself for the record.

I apologize. My name is attorney Chris Snook and I represent the intervener R.D. Edmonds.

The evidence before the ZBA and what was reviewed by the trial court when they had

the certified record before them. The only issue on appeal is whether a reasonable person

would have reached the same decision as the trial court based off of the evidence as

presented in the certified record. And I believe there was enough evidence in the

certified record and as stated by the trial court as findings of fact prove that every

element that needed to be met for the special exemption was met or a reasonable person

would reach that same conclusion. The trial court found that there were processes made in

an effort to reduce noise. That there were criteria in the operation of this gravel

pit that will protect the ground water. That the operation of the gravel pit would be

set on between certain hours to reduce the nuisance on people who live in the

local community. That the trucks entering and leaving the site would only

travel one direction on the road. That there would be an asphalt skirt attached to the

road to protect its shoulder. And that my client would pay for a bond in the event

that any damage was done to Johnson Road and the town needs to repair it.

Additionally there are criteria imposed on the gravel pit to mitigate fugitive

dust including a water truck crushed stone to wipe some of the dirt off the truck

tires as they leave the pit. The information that fugitive dust is

only a problem in large-scale crushing and material processing operations. Was

that presented to the board was in it some kind of expert report or was it an

anecdote or a magazine article? It was a response to a question posed by the

ZBA to the representative for my client before the ZBA was that they had

asked you know there's concerns about fugitive dust and he said only in

large-scale operations where there's a lot where there's going to be

crushing and lots of material being removed and specifically in this one

there is no crushing involved. There's going to be no crushing on site and

they won't even stockpile any of the gravel that's removed. This is just

digging and trucking out. So loading the trucks and trucking out. Correct. And

your client's representative based his opinion of the scale of operation

that would create a fugitive dust issue on what? His experience and

expertise in the industry. Further to address the issue of the Aquifer

Conservation District which has been present at each stage of this

litigation is that the ZBA itself has the ability and the authority to

issue a special exception into any area in the town. And as part of the

elements that we met by an applicant involves making sure there's

no damage to a known Aquifer. There were criteria of place. How many

quality known Aquifer of any low, medium or high yield, right? Correct

your honor. So in it to satisfy that requirement the ZBA requires

that there's no digging to occur within five feet of the water table

and there's three test wells that remain on the property. And the

ZBA as the part of their statutory duties are allowed to investigate

the site to make sure there's compliance with the RCA. And they did. So

correct me. It's a little confusing. But the designation of this

Aquifer as a low yield Aquifer doesn't change the designation of

the Aquifer Conservation District, does it?

Well, it does because the Aquifer Conservation District applies only

to medium and high. Correct. That's how it's written in the zoning

ordinance. And the town Aquifer map already has this property listed

in the shade of blue. That is the low yield Aquifer zone. And the

third party hired by the ZBA to investigate this issue reached

the same conclusion that this is a low yield Aquifer.

But in any event, the Aquifer has to be protected regardless of

the yield.

Correct your honor.

Understanding that correctly. Yes. So this idea that the

border shifted doesn't really have a consequence in this

application.

Correct your honor. Thank you. Further the say the appellant in

this case has argued that, you know, and almost all gravel pits

require an alteration of training permit as a condition before

operations can begin. And as part of acquiring that permit is

that that the gravel pit and the owner needs to demonstrate

that there are precautions being taken to prevent a bait

control fugitive dust emissions carried beyond the boundary of

the property. My client has obtained an alteration of train

permit. And when changes were made to the operational plan to

comply with the ZBA's requirements, they sent the

changes, the new plan to the state of New Hampshire and in a

letter dated February 22 2021, they found that the gravel pit is

still in general compliance with the original alteration of

train permit issued the year before. And because it was brought

up in the brief, the various environmental regulations were

guarding fugitive dust. The first precaution suggested by the

New Hampshire Department, you know, of environmental protection

is that the use of water or hydrophilic material on

operations or surfaces or both, which is what my client is

doing with the water truck. If there is dust, it was sprayed

down the area to wet the dirt down. So there isn't dust being

carried into the air. And despite arguments to the contrary, we

haven't seen any, there hasn't been any evidence submitted that

shows why a water truck is insufficient at mitigating dust

for a pit of this size operating at the level it's

operating at.

At this time, does the intervener take any position on the

jurisdictional issue that was raised by the town at the

outset of the argument?

I learned about the jurisdictional issue about five

minutes after Attorney Bennett did, and I will defer to his

position, which is that there is no jurisdiction for the

trial court or here on appeal because the 10 day motion for

hearing window was missed.

And is there a case that you can that I realize you're not the

one who came up with this argument this morning? Is there

any case that you can direct our attention to that will shed

light on this? Or is it just a matter of statutory

interpretation?

I believe Attorney Bennett has a case. I don't know its

name, admittedly.

Is it K&B rock crushing?

In conclusion, I believe there is enough information in front of

the ZBA and the trial court in their review of the plan, all

the evidence submitted to show that a reasonable person would

find that the criteria for a special exception was reached

in this matter.

Thank you very much.

Will you have my time?

I'll be brief. I think I have to be. As to the

jurisdictional issues, I would say that opposing Council's

failure to bring this to the trial court's attention, he

waived his right to object. So you disagree that you can raise

subject matter jurisdiction at any time? I disagree. I would

say that it would have been more appropriate for Council to

bring that up to the trial court and say she should have

come here within 10 days. Further supporting that position

the case on when I haven't looked at it very closely, but the

case to which Council refers is planning board decision.

Planning board decisions are different in that there is no

mandatory motion for rehearing. In this particular case, we

have a ZBA decision where motion for rehearing must be

filed before you can approach the court.

Lastly, this application was styled as a special exception

application under the zoning ordinance. And under the zoning

ordinance, there is a 30 day period after which you file your

motion for rehearing and then another 30 to appeal, assuming

your motion is denied. So I would say for all those reasons,

it's too late to bring that issue up.

Just a couple of points. There was a discussion about the

Aquifa Conservation District. It was clear at the time and was

brought up during the proceedings and by Kalex, there was who

had done a prior report as well as for the prior applicant

before Edmonds and also with our motion for rehearing that we

were in a historic drought at the time these test warrings

were done for Edmonds. And if you look closely at those expert

reports, you'll see there's some wordsmithing. Well, it's could

be a low yielding, but it's definitely not high. We don't

know about the middle. And because there was uncertainty

about the middle in the middle counting under the ACD,

that was definitely supported by Kalex recommending

monitoring over time. And that was the missing piece.

I guess I can't say any more. Thank you.

Subject matter jurisdiction has been raised as a general

matter. It's a threshold issue that goes to the court's

authority. Court will consider the argument that's been raised

by attorney Bennett and a further briefing is is

warranted in the court's determination will issue an

order. Other than that, we'll invite the next case to
