This is case 2020-010-728, state of New Hampshire versus Kieran Pierce.

Good morning, Attorney Sisti. I understand you've reserved two minutes.

I have, thank you. And may it please the court, my name is Mark Sisti, and I do represent Kieran Pierce in the matter of state versus Pierce.

If I could just for a second congratulate Justice Countway. We'd go back some years.

The problem in this case is that on November 7th, 2022, there was a problem because there was a denial of a view.

A view that is evidence is defined by our Supreme Court, our case law, and on that day, a proof favorable was denied to the defendant.

The scene of a crime was not viewed by a jury. Now, interestingly enough, that's a Belknap County case.

In fact, we were trying a case in Stratford County at the same time, an aggravated felonious sexual assault.

The alpha and the omega of that case was the size and dimensions of the seasonal cottage outside of Rochester, New Hampshire was such that if the alleged victim's story was that which she's claimed, it would have been impossible or improbable.

Because of the sight lines, the design of the interior of that cottage, and the fact that other individuals were present during the claim of the...

Who had control of that cottage? I'm sorry?

Who had control of that cottage in Stratford?

In Stratford County?

Yeah.

It was the aunt of the alleged victim who was also related to the defendant in the case. It was a situation, a family situation where quite frankly, it tore them apart.

So it was very different here, right? Because we have new people that are owning the trailer.

Absolutely.

If the state doesn't have the ability to just go in there and kick them out and bring in a view, how is the court to rectify that?

Actually, the state has that ability. I've been doing this sort of work for 45 years, Your Honor.

We've shut down roadways Route 28, Route 101. We've shut down the New Hampshire Mall for a view.

We've gone to the state of Maine for views where a body was found in the middle of the woods.

Quite frankly, I have to say I've never been denied a view in a criminal case in the state of New Hampshire, ever.

In this case, the view would have been relevant to two of the indictments that were dismissed.

Actually, it would have been relevant, really, for the entire context and understanding for the jury.

That's my problem because the two on which your client was convicted took place in a room, walled off from the rest of the place.

So why is the view of the entire trailer relevant?

It's relevant because of the ability to hear the ability for that individual to have gone quickly to one room or another

to report such inappropriate touching if one actually took place.

The fact that individuals were close to that particular room, the fact that they observed nothing out of the ordinary

shortly in time afterwards, that there was absolutely nothing that would have raised any suspicion or concern on the part of any individual.

And that evidence, that testimony came in without the view for context.

Well, the testimony comes in, but that's interesting. Views, I think, are extremely important.

And I think that the Supreme Court's actually stated that.

Evidence. In the state of New Hampshire, we're a little bit different than other states.

It's not just placed out there for the context of testimony.

It's actually evidence wherein a jury can acquit on their observations that they make at the scene.

This is much different than other states.

I mean, other states like Wisconsin have statutes where they say it's not evidence.

In this state, it is evidence. In fact, the standard instructions that are given to the jury are pay particular attention to the testimony,

the exhibits that are presented before you in the view.

So what's the consequence of that? Does that turn it into a right to have a view?

It is, in essence, the same right that one would have to present an exculpatory witness or a relevant witness.

But under our standard, we review it for a sustainable exercise of discretion.

No, actually, if you want to take it on a discretionary type of analysis, which this is not.

But if you want to take it as an abuse of discretion, it is that, too.

The order in this case, quite frankly, has nothing to do with a fair trial.

The inconvenience to individuals living in a single-wide trailer, quite frankly, do not trump Part 1 Article 15 of the New Hampshire Constitution.

So it's a constitutional issue. We should review it to know of it.

It's absolutely a constitutional issue.

Under Part 1 Article 15, this is a material favorable fact that Pierce was denied presenting to a jury.

But does it matter? Should it matter to our analysis the other information that came in about the dimensions and the nature of that space?

There was testimony about it, and there was certainly an opportunity to put in a lot more testimony about it.

Let's cut right to the chase. There were no diagrams put in. There were no photos put in.

There were no measurements put in.

And quite frankly, some of the statutes do speak to that in other states where an abuse of discretion has a list that one could look at.

And it has to do with, was there a substitution? Was there a photograph? Was there a laid-out chart?

Didn't the grandfather testify?

That's hardly, hardly sufficient.

That's like me going out last night when I was closing my barn down at 10.30 at night, looking up into the southern sky and seeing a meteor, which was absolutely gorgeous.

What's the connection? I'm sorry.

The connection is that I saw it, and I can describe it, but you can't experience it like I did.

If you were standing out there, you would have known what I saw, all right?

And there's no way in the world I could ever describe that to you.

So should a defendant be entitled to a view anytime he or she requests it?

I would say there has to be something fairly substantial to have that denied.

It was clearly relevant. It's a crime scene.

I mean, I don't even think that's even under discussion. It's a crime scene where an allegation of aggravated flony sexual assault took place.

It is available. The motion was denied two weeks before the jury started.

Any of these concerns could have been taken care of.

A phone call from the sheriff's department.

A representative from the court.

A representative from the prosecution.

And so should we consider the other measures that the defense counsel might have taken in this case?

I don't think it's up to the defense counsel at all.

The defense counsel asked for the view, like we always do.

Sometimes it's inconvenient.

We've had views that are terribly inconvenient to people in their homes that have changed ownership of homes.

Renters have changed from duplexes where bodies were found.

We've gone to these places. Are they inconvenient?

I think every view is inconvenient.

If there's a new property owner, wouldn't that individual have a privacy right?

How would you physically overcome that? You couldn't have a search warrant.

How would you get into a property with an objecting new landowner?

There was not an objecting new land. First of all, there wasn't one.

And that opportunity wasn't veiled.

And that could have been something that could have been addressed.

Or it may have become totally irrelevant.

The property owner may have said, sure, come on in.

There was an intervener case, and these are not reported.

But there was an intervener case in 1983 where there was an arson in an apartment building in Manchester, New Hampshire.

The owner of that property wanted that property to be demolished so he could build a new apartment building.

They intervened because we wanted a view.

None other than Justice Souter said, no, you're not going to demolish the place.

It's relevant.

To Justice Coway's question, the state suggests that Part 1 Article 2B may be implicated here, the relatively new right to privacy.

What is your position on that?

I think that it's absolutely not.

I think that when we're talking about the right of an individual to have a fair trial versus the so-called new privacy right, I don't think there's even a comparison.

I think that Part 1 Article...

So it does apply, but it's overcome by the constitutional rights that defend it in this case?

Correct, and it wasn't implicated.

What I'm saying is that that's something that could have been implicated, and we could be discussing that right now, but that's off the table.

That wasn't brought to the attention of the individuals in that trailer.

So we agree with you, but what's next?

Does the defendant have the right then to have the property remodeled to its original condition so that it's the same view that existed at the time of the crime?

We've all been to views where the incident took place in the winter and we're viewing in the summer, and we bring it to the attention of the jurors at the scene that there will be some alteration there.

Keep in mind that structurally it may be intact, it may be the same, but certain conditions may have been altered, and those are explained.

I quite frankly doubt whether or not the interior of a single wide 60-foot trailer would be substantially altered in any way, shape, or form.

For us to be here and speculating is not going to overcome the denial of that particular view.

Do you want to address this efficiency argument?

Actually, if I could address the mistrial argument.

Mistrial.

Thank you.

The mistrial situation, I think, is pretty clear and convincing that there was error, and it's unfortunate because it seems as though the prosecutor and the judge either misheard something or misinterpreted something.

What exactly did the detective say?

He actually said, specifically, and it had to do with both children, that they were touched inappropriately and plural.

Children.

Children.

And the situation in this case was that prior to the prosecutor pursuing that line of questioning, the prosecutor was trying to become cautious and worried about that particular jointer taking place.

Because there was severance in that case.

And actually the prosecutor brought it to the attention of the court that there was severance, and it would be inappropriate for the detective to comment on both of the individuals being inappropriately touched.

We know that the inappropriate touching had to do with sexual contact.

We know that because there's no other reason to introduce that note.

So the problem is the word inappropriate.

If he had just said, the children were complaining about being touched.

And the inappropriate, well it's not only that, we know it, we know, and it was, if they didn't get the message during that testimony, they certainly got the message from the prosecutor during closing when that's exactly what he alluded to.

Alluded to that note having to do with sexual contact.

The only reason he says anything about the note is because he actually had it.

It's a physical thing.

He turned it over to the police.

It's not something that you make up anymore.

She saw that it said that the defendant touched Lulu's privates or Molina's privates.

All right?

That's the context of that note.

The inappropriateness had to do with a sexual assault and it had to do with the plural of children.

Now, once that's established, and there's no other way to look at it, and there's no other reason why the prosecutor was being so careful not to allow that note to go before the jury and not to have the plurality, not to have children, both children, you know, mentioned.

It's because there was a severance.

I mean, that's the bottom line.

Thank you very much.

Thank you, Attorney Susti.

Good morning, and May it please the court, Adriana McCullough for the state of New Hampshire.

In relation to the view, what this court is doing on a Pella review is looking at the trial court's decision to not allow a view of this trailer under an unsustainable exercise of discretion.

That's all this court needs to do.

Let's look at the information that the trial court knew when the defendant moved for the view, when the state objected to that, when the trial court initially denied that motion.

And then again, the information the trial court had at jury selection when the defendant either renewed his motion or was asking the court to reconsider its denial.

That's all this court is doing.

And there's ample information in the record for this court to determine that the trial court sustainably exercised its discretion.

Was there an inquiry to the property owners as to whether or not they'd object to a view?

There was no information about the property owners.

No one knew who owned the trailer.

Frankly, nobody even knew if the trailer was the exact same trailer as it was in 2016.

This family, the victim and her family had moved out in 2017.

According to the record, nobody had gone to even see the outside of the trailer to confirm it was the same.

At one point, the state claimed there was a photograph of the outside of the trailer, but then that photograph was never produced for the trial court.

It was never mentioned by the defense.

It was never entered as an exhibit.

So it's very possible that that trailer was not even the same structure.

When was the request for a view made?

October, either 13th or 14th of 2022.

And jury selection was October 31st of 2022.

And so the state filed its objection the very next day.

The trial court denied the motion for review on October 25th.

And then at jury selection after the jury had been selected, defense re-asked the court to review its motion.

It seemed to me like the court was exercising much discretion.

It was just saying it's owned by a third party, so we're not going to do that.

That was the initial order. That is correct.

However, at jury selection, when the court re-reviewed its order, it did say that it was denying the defendant's motion for review.

One, because the current owners had a privacy interest in that residence.

And two, the court did not want to admit misleading evidence to the jury.

Because neither party could say to the court what the inside of the trailer looked like.

The victim had no idea what the inside of the trailer looked like.

And so therefore it may not have even been helpful to the jury to see the inside of the bedroom where these assaults occurred.

And to your question, Justice Hans Marconi, actually all four charges were alleged to have happened in her bedroom.

None in the living room.

None in the living room.

There was an incident in the living room that was uncharged.

It was, I think, what we would now refer to as grooming.

But when the defendant first arrived, the victim and her brother were in the living room,

and she described that he was touching us, like picking us up and hugging us,

but not any sort of sexual assault occurred in that living room according to the victim.

So it sounds like the trial court didn't even know if there were current owners residing in the trailer.

Correct.

So how do we know there was a privacy interest at stake?

Well, there is a privacy interest in someone's home.

The issue, I guess, to speak to Attorney Sissy's argument is we don't know if those home owners would have asserted that right.

But they do have a right in the privacy of their home.

And that right is now in the Constitution at the same level, frankly, as a defendant's right to...

And yet we also in the trial court also had no evidence as to whether the view would be misleading or not.

That is true.

So however, we do know from the testimony that, which I know the court did not have at the time it made its decision,

but we do know that these assaults occurred in the victim's bedroom and that what she described her bedroom at trial.

And there was no indication that the bedroom location or the bedroom compared to where the grandparent's bedroom was

was really the crux of the defendant's defense in this case.

Isn't that the point?

I mean, at the time the court made her second ruling, there was no basis to conclude either there was a privacy interest

or that the evidence would necessarily be misleading.

And even if it was misleading, I mean, there could be testimony to correct any misleading impression.

Isn't that right?

There could be testimony about the trailer itself and where each room was located and what each room looked like.

And that did occur at trial.

You're correct.

In that there was no picture of the inside of that trailer from 2022 so that the trial court could see that.

However, that in itself is what's misleading.

They won't know what the inside looks like until they get there and show the jury.

So what should the standard be for granting or denying a view?

It should be unsustainable exercise of discretion.

A view is evidence.

This court has held that.

There's a statute, RSA 519-21, I believe, says that it's evidence.

Evidence is admissible under an unsustainable exercise of discretion.

And like every other piece of evidence, there's a rule 401 and 403 analysis.

And part of the rule 403 analysis deals with is the evidence misleading.

Is there other evidence that can be admitted?

If it's arguably exculpatory, does the standard shift?

No, the standard does not shift.

Evidence is admissible if it's relevant and then if it's probative value outweighs its prejudicial intent.

But if it's exculpable, it needs to be provided to the defense.

That's true, but we don't know in this case that that view is exculpatory.

Nobody knows what the inside looks like.

In part that's because the state didn't document the home.

They didn't take any photographs.

So aren't we like persuading the state or suggesting to the state,

don't document these places where crimes are committed because...

Your Honor, that's not what you're signaling in this case.

This was a delayed disclosure AFSA.

The victim reported this assault to her counselor in 2019.

The family had left that trailer in 2017.

There was no way to document what her bedroom looked like in 2019

when the assault happened in 2016 and they had already left.

However, if this court feels that it was an unsustainable exercise of discretion to not allow this view,

that error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.

There was overwhelming and strong evidence of the defendant's guilt in this case.

The victim offered testimony about the elements of the two AFSAs

that the defendant was convicted of, the AFSA for touching her vagina

and the attempted AFSA for performing a substantial step towards committing AFSA.

That testimony about those elements went unchallenged on cross-examination.

The cross-examination questions, which was really only about 20 pages of the transcript

focused on whether the victim told her brother first what happened to her,

whether the defendant did to her or whether she told her grandparents first

and whether the second assault happened on a Sunday or a Monday

when these assaults really happened in a three-day period anyway.

That was the crux of the cross-examination.

The elements of these offenses went unchallenged.

Additionally...

Do you have the same argument with respect to the mistrial statement?

The same argument.

In terms of if there was error and the court's deciding not to rule a mistrial.

Is that subject to a harmless error analysis?

A decision to grant a mistrial is an unsustainable exercise of discretion.

I don't...

I can't off the top of my head think of any case where this court has used a harmless error analysis

in reviewing a mistrial decision.

However, under an unsustainable exercise of discretion,

this court does give great deference to the decision the trial court made

based on the evidence that came in.

So while it may not be using a harmless error argument in that context,

this court is considering all of the evidence that came in at trial.

So the record reveals that the trial court misheard the testimony that flatly got it wrong.

Then why shouldn't we reverse and grant the mistrial?

I don't think the transcript reflects that the trial court heard it wrong or got it wrong.

I think what the transcript reflects is that the transcript, unlike a human ear

where there's people talking over each other, picked up the word inappropriately,

touched the children inappropriately.

What the prosecutor says and what the trial court agrees with is that

when he heard the detective essentially say children,

he began to speak in hopes that nobody would hear whatever the sergeant was going to say next.

So are we supposed to then just assume that the jury did not hear the word inappropriate or children?

You don't have to assume that the jury didn't hear that.

However, it's possible that some of the jurors did not hear the word inappropriately.

But even if they heard the whole phrase, touch the children inappropriately...

I think we have to assume that, don't we, if that's what the record says?

That is what the record says.

However, the trial court says that what she heard was touched the children.

She says that multiple times in their discussion about a mistrial.

And so if she heard that, it is possible that one juror or all the jurors heard that.

But even if the jury or this court finds that what the sergeant said was touched the children inappropriately,

under this court's case law in Kerwin and Lebranche and the cases that follow,

that is an ambiguous reference to the defendant's conduct.

It's not an unambiguous reference to his criminal conduct that would warrant a mistrial

as this court has held in Kerwin and the other cases.

In Kerwin, in Lebranche, in Ayah, and in Woodbury,

which are four cases about referencing a defendant's criminal conduct,

a witness or multiple witness referenced a specific crime that the defendant committed

in Lebranche, one of the investigators referenced that he had interviewed the defendant about two AFSAs

and had arrested the defendant for two AFSAs even though he was only on trial for one AFSA.

In Kerwin, the victim testified that some girl told her that the defendant raped another girl,

which was not what he was on trial for.

He was on trial for a misdemeanor sexual assault against that victim.

In Ayah, the state referenced in its opening and one of the witnesses referenced an uncharged fire

that the defendant may have committed an hour prior to the charged fire,

which would be an arson, which is what he was on trial for.

So do you agree that inappropriately touching a child is a crime?

It depends. The follow-up question to that would be,

what do you mean by inappropriate and what do you mean by touching?

There was plenty of testimony in this case that he did touch the children inappropriately

and those were touches that went uncharged.

Both children complained to the grandfather who testified a trial that he hugged them,

he squeezed them, he was overly touchy,

so much so that the grandfather talked to the defendant on day two

about all the complaints he had received from both children

up to that point about him being overly hands in touch.

So you're arguing that the jury could have perceived that the defendant hugging these children

as being an inappropriate touch, an inappropriate touch?

Yes.

Because it didn't consent to it?

Yes, I think that's one interpretation.

It could also be that the grandfather had already testified that he had talked to both the children,

that they had told him that they didn't feel comfortable with the way that the defendant was touching them

and the victim testified that the way he touched us made us feel uncomfortable

when she was referring to the living room which was uncharged conduct.

She used the word us multiple times.

So an ambiguous must be a reference to a crime?

I'm sorry, I just couldn't hear you.

So an ambiguous must be a reference to a crime?

Under the rule that this court adopted in Kerwin, that is true.

For a mistrial to be necessary, there has to be an unambiguous reference to the defendant's criminal conduct.

There are other reasons or other ways for a mistrial to be necessary,

but under Kerwin and its progeny, that is the rule.

And there's nothing else about this statement, really, that would be a mistrial.

It is inadmissible evidence, the state admitted that at trial,

but there was other evidence of the same nature that had been admitted already in the case.

The grandfather had also already testified that the victim's note said that the defendant touched her privates.

So the jury already had that information.

They already had information from the victim and the grandfather that he had touched the children

in a way that they did not like, that he was overly huggy, overly handsy,

and when the grandfather confronted the defendant about that, he said,

oh, I was just being affectionate.

He did not deny touching the children in that way.

And so the jury could have heard the sergeant's testimony

and taken that to be her interpretation of the children being uncomfortable

with all of the hugging, touching, and handsiness of the defendant.

Would a curative instruction have changed the analysis?

No.

The trial court, the defendant initially requested the mistrial.

When the mistrial was denied, he did ask for a curative instruction.

And the trial court denied that curative instruction,

in part because she had not heard the word inappropriate

and she did not want to draw more attention to that testimony

by providing a curative instruction.

And that decision, like the decision to grant a mistrial,

is also reviewable for an unsustainable exercise of discretion.

However, the decision to give that instruction

is not what the defendant has appealed.

He's appealed the trial court's decision on the mistrial.

It is another option before granting a mistrial

to provide a curative instruction.

But the trial court could also have just moved on,

which is what it did in this case.

If there are no further questions about this,

I would like to speak briefly to the sufficiency argument.

There was sufficient evidence in this case

that the defendant purposely took a substantial step

toward the commission of AFSA

when he pulled the victim's pants down

and tried to put his mouth on her vagina.

When the jury heard that testimony,

they had also heard testimony from the victim

about the first sexual assault,

which was performed in a substantially similar way.

The defendant had, in both instances,

had entered the victim's bedroom while she was playing video games.

He sat down on her big green chair

that was in the middle of her bedroom.

He then forced her onto his lap by picking her up.

He then held her in what she described

as a baby-changing position

where her back was on his forearm or on his leg.

And she was looking up at the ceiling.

And her legs were sort of dangling in the air

hanging by her sides over his leg.

The defendant then removed her pants

and touched her all over.

Then he touched her legs.

In the first instance, he touched her vagina

over her underwear.

And then later on, the victim said,

when she was explaining that,

she said he sort of put his hand halfway in

my underwear and tried to touch my vagina.

But she did unequivocally say

that he touched her vagina that first instance.

Then she was able to kick, push away, run away,

tell her brother and tell her grandparents

who her grandparents did not believe her

at that time that this had happened.

Mr. Sisti says that this is a circumstantial

evidence case in regard to the sufficiency claim.

Is that right?

It is both a direct and circumstantial

evidence case, this whole case.

I see my red light is on.

May I finish?

So this court has held that circumstantial

evidence is necessary to prove a defendant's intent.

However, what's on appeal is the act.

And there was direct evidence that his,

the act that he was performing

was to attempt to perform cunnilingus on her

based on the fact that this second assault

was exactly the same as the first assault

except for this attempt to go further

and that the only reason it stopped was that

she kicked and pushed and was able to escape.

It did not stop because he stopped

and that's what the jury could use to infer

that there was sufficient evidence.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Attorney Sisti.

Thank you.

Certainly this is not a harmless error case.

The reason I say that is

because almost two years before this case was tried,

a motion to sever was granted

and the motion to sever laid out quite clearly

that utilizing some evidence of both individuals

being abused would severely and significantly

prejudice the case of either one

when tried separately.

And that's also noted by the prosecutor

when the prosecutor was quite frankly

trying to avoid the situation

that we're talking about right now

in one aspect.

But let's go to the note for one second.

It's unambiguous that that inappropriate touching

had to do with sex

and the reason we say that

is because on page Transcript 188

lines three through eight

in a closing argument.

It's addressed by none other than the prosecutor.

Quote, that note, why did she do that?

Why would that 10-year-old tell her grandfather

that he touched her privates?

She did that because that's exactly what happened.

She was trying to convince her grandfather

that that man over there

sexually assaulted her

and that is what her child brain told her to do.

There's no question what that note

in the context of that note was

and what inappropriate meant.

And there's no question

that that note referenced both individuals,

not just one.

And we know that again

because the prosecutor, if he didn't run it hard

and fast on page 188

of the transcript, ran it again

on page 194.

How much stock are you going to put into that story?

The only reason he says anything about the note

is because he actually had it.

It was a physical thing.

He turned it over to the police.

It's not something that you can make up anymore.

I mean, you heard it.

You heard it from Sergeant Cunningham.

She saw the note.

She saw that it said that the defendant

touched Lulu's privates

or Melena's privates.

There's no question.

Is there a reference there to two children?

Well, the note and the testimony has to...

So I use this quote as a reference to two children.

Yeah, that's the note.

Thank you very much, Attorney Sisti.

Case is submitted.

Court invites Council and Petition of Ambulance
