This is case 2020-0372, state of New Hampshire versus Vincent Cooper.

Morning.

Tony Rosty.

Thank you, Your Honor. May I please the Court?

My name is David Rothstein. I represent Vincent Cooper.

I've reserved one minute in rebuttal.

The issue raised in this appeal is whether the trial court properly admitted certain texts after the defendant's direct testimony.

Text relating to specific misconduct that had been excluded before trial and that were unfairly prejudicial.

I would like to stress three points here this morning.

First, the texts convey noncumulative and unfairly prejudicial evidence.

Second, there was no legitimate basis to warrant their admission after the direct testimony of the defendant.

And third, there would not have been a basis to admit these texts before trial if admission was raised when there was an opportunity to do so.

First, regarding the prejudicial impact of these text messages, these texts were peculiar and specific because they conveyed to the jury that the defendant had a belief in obedience and control as the guiding principle of this relationship.

A belief that is, I would submit, outside the mainstream of the jury's experience.

A belief that is beyond the purview of the general type of abuse evidence that was admitted.

And that was transformative in its impact in this case.

It created a situation where...

I don't understand whether it's admissible or not, but I don't understand why it's not perfectly consistent with the activity charged, the actus ray charged in this case.

Why the texts are not?

They are not perfectly consistent.

Sure.

Well, a couple of points on that, Your Honor, and that gets into the opening the door argument that we primarily make in the brief.

So I would direct the court's attention of it.

It was an honor to be directed there to a jury selection transcript where there was an evidentiary hearing that lasted about 40 pages of transcript.

It's pages 164 to 210 of the jury selection volume.

In that proceeding, very important proceeding, the parties discussed the parameters of the evidence that was going to be admissible at trial.

And this was a little complicated here because there were some charges that were severed that had to deal with telephone calls and texts.

And there was also a number of allegations about abuse in the relationship.

The trial court ruled before trial that general evidence of prior abuse and threats but not specific acts, not specific calls, not specific texts would be admissible unless those texts conveyed an apology or an admission for having committed to charged conduct.

The trial court specifically said you can allow her to convey.

He abused me.

He threatened my life.

He threatened my family.

I'm afraid of him, but not specific acts.

The trial court said at age 210 of that transcript, in response to defense questions about what are the parameters?

How do we open the door?

Court says you open the door if you get into her credibility with respect to whether prior abuse occurred.

So that is the pre-trial ruling.

Now at trial, the defendant testifies.

The defendant had filed a notice of self-defense and the court obviously knows what self-defense means.

Self-defense means I did employ a degree of physical force.

I was doing so in order to protect myself against the use of force against me.

So that was all out on the table.

Everyone knew that self-defense was going to be relied upon.

At trial, the state says the testimony opened the door.

We can now admit these specific tests to show the motive was dominion and control.

And the court says defense, you open the door because you placed her credibility at issue in asserting self-defense.

Not you placed her credibility at issue in attacking her claim of prior abuse.

But you placed her credibility at issue in asserting self-defense.

That's at pages 296, pages 298, 305.

The court says you open the door by making it look like he was not the first aggressor,

that he was just acting in self-defense.

Well, that certainly would challenge, would be a credibility challenge on the surface.

Well.

Go ahead.

Right.

It is a challenge to her credibility with regard to her account of the physical acts.

It is not a challenge.

The court said before trial, you'll open the door to other evidence if you get into her credibility regarding whether prior abuse had occurred.

Okay.

There is no allegation that I'm aware of that the defendant's direct testimony got into the prior abuse at all.

The defendant didn't say anything indirect like, I've never touched her before.

I've never abused her before.

The defendant stuck to the incident.

So we agree with you, Tony Rosting.

And why isn't it harmless?

I mean, the text messages are inconsequential in a relationship to the allegations here that your client choked

and tried to suffocate the defendant and threatened to kill her on multiple occasions.

Right.

So why isn't it harmless?

It's not harmless.

In terms of the impact, Your Honor, and the prejudicial impact,

the last thing I was going to say about this being beyond the purview of the evidence that was admitted of other acts and transformative.

And I cited the case of State v. Davidson in the brief.

The court recalls that Davidson case was a case where the prejudicial evidence was very similar to this type of evidence.

The case was a domestic violence case.

It was a case where, as I recall, there was some evidence of prior abuse admitted.

The case was reversed because evidence came in about the character of the relationship,

the atmosphere of dominion and control and obedience and oppression in the relationship.

That type of evidence was very different than the generalized abuse evidence that was permitted in this case.

And I would submit, and the other thing, Your Honor, we're talking about the defendant's testimony,

which obviously, as the court knows, everyone is paying very careful attention to the defendant's testimony.

He's the defendant and he's testifying.

This is one of the very last things that the jury hears.

The State went through four of these text messages.

And the State park into the evidence in the closing.

The other thing that's prejudicial about these texts I would submit gets to my third point about their lack of specific relevance.

I think in response, partially in part to both of your questions,

I think there's a really strong argument that the text would have been admissible if, for example,

this incident happened on a Wednesday, the incident that he was on trial for.

And later that day or on Thursday, he typed her a text and said,

I told you, I just showed you what happened if you didn't obey me.

I just showed you what happens if you don't let me control you or something like that.

In other words, if the text that the State used were somehow tied to,

in a specific relevant sense to the incident, I didn't know it would be a much stronger argument for the State,

but there is no allegation of that here.

These texts were just plucked from any number of texts that these two sent back and forth to one another,

and they were taken by the State and imported to try to make the point that you're making.

A propensity point.

Well, a propensity point and an artificial relevance point.

And also, again, I want to talk a little bit about the Open Door Doctrine.

The Open Door Doctrine, as the Court knows, it's an equitable doctrine.

It is not a doctrine that is supposed to inject prejudice.

It's a doctrine that's supposed to cure unfair prejudice and a misleading advantage.

And it's generally a situation, if you read the Court's case, it's not exclusively,

but generally it's a situation where something happens at trial

and the party claiming the door is open is surprised.

It's like, wait a second, he just testified that he's never committed an act of abuse.

I wasn't intending to do this, but now I have to.

He's opened the door.

Here, there was nothing.

The defense laid all the cards on the table.

The defense said we're relying on self-defense.

You State may not agree with that.

You can certainly pull out the defendant.

There's a lot larger than the alleged victim here.

Has felony convictions what they did, which they did.

You can point out other things about this, but we're laying everything out there.

The State had the opportunity to say,

look, I understand the Court's ruling about prior tax.

I understand the Court's saying that none of the specific texts are admissible,

but the defense has argued self-defense here,

and we think the real motive here was one of dominion and control,

and we would like to put that out there.

There was plenty of opportunity for the State to do that.

The State never did it,

and I would submit that these texts would not have been legitimately admissible

as either raised gestate because they were not part of the incident

or under 404b had the State done that pre-trial.

Why weren't they indicative of motive then under 404b?

They were not legitimately indicative of motive

because they did not under...

Basically, when we're talking about...

I'm still talking about an open-the-door principle,

but putting aside an open-the-door principle,

they were not legitimately probative of motive

because they were not specifically tied to this particular incident.

In other words, and again, I would say to the extent

that there's any sort of motive type of relevance,

because it's not closely enough tied to this incident,

it's more in the range of propensity.

So in other words, to the extent that there may be some relevance to motive,

it's outweighed by a propensity,

that this person has a propensity to dominate and control

and oppress a relationship,

and this was just one more example of what this person did.

They acted in conformity with their character

rather than it being a motive argument.

So I would say, in response to Justice Donovan's question,

I think in terms of what Justice Six was getting at,

I would say the 403 impact of this evidence is very strong.

I would rely in part on Davidson as precedent for that.

I would also say that we have a case where the defense was trying

to figure out the landscape of things here,

was trying to prepare the court.

I think properly before trial said,

look, these are the rules of this trial.

If you do this, you're going to open the door.

The defense tried to conform with the ruling,

and then all of a sudden the rules changed

and the prejudicial evidence was coming in

after the defendant had testified on direct

at a point where there was nothing the defense

could really do about it.

So for those reasons, we would submit that the trial court

did air, did unsustainably exercise this discretion

in allowing the state to use these texts,

and we would ask the court to reverse

subject to my minute of rebuttal

unless the court has any of the questions at this point

I will submit.

Thank you.

Attorney McCullough.

Thank you, Your Honors.

Good morning.

I'm Attorney McCullough for the State of New Hampshire.

I want to start first by addressing the harmless error

argument.

This was harmless error.

There was overwhelming evidence of this defendant's

guilt at trial.

You're not conceding it's error.

I am not conceding it's error.

I'm not conceding that it was not preserved properly,

but I would like to start with harmless error

since I know Justice Donovan asked about that

fairly quickly in my opponent's oral argument.

There was overwhelming evidence of this defendant's

guilt.

This victim testified that she had a history,

there was a history of mental, physical,

and emotional abuse throughout the year or so

length of this relationship.

And I say that year or so length is important

because they were married within a week or

about 10 days of meeting each other.

And then within about a month or less of that

the victim became pregnant with twins.

And so that essentially from her perspective

tied her to this defendant.

She needed this defendant to financially provide

for her and the twins.

Not only because she was going to have twin babies,

but also because her pregnancy was very difficult

and she could not work towards the end of her pregnancy

because she was wheelchair bound.

So with all of that in mind,

this victim also testified that during the assault,

right before it occurred,

she noticed that the defendant had a look in his eyes

that he had had before when he had assaulted her.

And that is why she started recording this assault

because she knew yet again of an assault would occur.

And so she began recording.

He knocks the phone out of her hand.

He also slaps her in the face before he strangles her.

And then when the video is no longer pointing at him,

this defendant sets up perfectly his self-defense claim

by saying on that video,

ow, ow, you're hitting me, you're hitting me.

And I say sets up perfectly

because he was not hitting the victim.

But the defendant knew that it would be the victim's word

against his word at trial

because the video was no longer recording him.

And the victim testified she had not hit him

multiple times she said that during the trial

that she had not hit him when he said that.

And in fact, he said at trial

that when he said on the video, ow, ow, you're hitting me,

she had not hit him. She had just raised her hand.

He did testify that prior to the strangulation,

after saying ow, ow, stop hitting me,

she did hit, slap, kick him and scratch him.

And that is why he then, in his words,

picked her up and slammed her onto the bed

and then mushed her face into the bed

and then used some amount of force

to push her face into the bed.

But, of course, not enough to strangle her,

again in his words, but did apply some force to her face.

And so all of this testimony about this assault,

this defendant's alleged self-defense claim

and the victim denying that

and testifying truthfully and honestly

and directly about what occurred that day

shows that there is overwhelming evidence

of his guilt at trial.

She testified that she could not breathe

and when the prosecutor asked her,

did that feel like, how did you know you couldn't breathe?

She said, I was trying to breathe and I could not breathe.

She also testified multiple times

like she felt like she was going to die.

And she also heard her neck crack,

which the defendant also heard,

which is why he stopped strangling her.

So we had to be using enough pressure,

not only to strangle her,

but to crack something in her neck

so severely that the victim thought she was paralyzed,

which is why she begged him not to leave,

because she did not want her twins alone

without her being able to move.

How do you distinguish this case from Davidson?

Can you?

Your Honor, to be honest,

I'm not super familiar with the Davidson case,

but I would say here

that in addition to there being overwhelming evidence,

these text messages are inconsequential

based on this court's standard in reset

to the case here.

And that's because they,

while they are important to show

the nature of the relationship

and sort of the ground rules of the relationship,

and I would argue that they

are in fact tied to this incident

because the messages do lay

the groundwork for what this relationship looked like.

Regardless of when they were sent,

the victim knew based on these text messages

that respect and obedience were a part

of this relationship, and she owed that

to the defendant.

And so when she denied that respect and obedience

by interrupting his phone call

to ask for help with the children,

on some level she was risking setting herself up

for an assault of some kind,

since that was sort of how their relationship

had played out before.

But even without the messages they were,

go ahead.

It just seems a little out of balance

if she can testify

that she knew an assault was coming

based on what their relationship

had been.

These text messages come in

outlining what the relationship

looks like, and yet

the defendant can't

talk about that without

so-called opening the door.

So how

does his self-defense

get into that

forbidden territory so that these

text messages come in?

There are a few responses that the state has

to that, Your Honor. So the first is

that initially, without considering

the opening of the door doctrine,

the state argues after the defendants

direct that these text messages

were permissible to motive.

And that's because he had testified

in his self-defense theory

that the motive for this assault

was not because he had emotionally,

physically, or mentally abused her before.

He didn't speak to that at all in his direct,

but that the motive for this assault

this time was that she had

struck him in some way.

And the state said,

the state wanted to admit these messages

to rebut that motive

and explained that the motive was not

being respectful and obedient

in this moment. And I know

that there was a pretrial hearing where

the court laid the ground rules, but as we know

from trial, nothing is predictable.

And so while these ground rules may have been laid

and the state knew about the self-defense

claim, the state did not know

specifically what the defendant was going to

claim in his testimony.

So I read this testimony

as alleging that the argument

began because

the victim was concerned about

him talking to other women

for four hours without helping the family.

So how does that open up the door to these

text messages? I don't understand that.

So that opens up the door again, if that's

his motive, is that this argument started

because the victim started it by complaining

about him talking to other women.

These messages show again

from the state's perspective, the motive

was not anything the victim did in terms

of arguing with him or slapping him

or hitting him. The motive was

she interrupted his phone call.

He was disrespectful. That's not obedient.

Now he needs to assault her.

And it was up to the jury's interpretation

what they believed started the fight,

essentially, that led to this strangulation.

And they may not have believed that the

victim

talked to him about his

being unfaithful. They may have

believed that and they may have disbelieved

the self-defense piece and that's why they convicted him.

There was no limitation, instruction

given to the jury about this evidence?

Not that I recall from the transcript,

but I would say

to get back to your question attorney

or Justice Hans Marconi,

apologize.

I was an attorney.

I am an attorney. It's good.

You are. Under the

opening the door doctrine, which again

the state does not concede, was not preserved,

but if this court believes it was

and believes these were admitted under that doctrine,

the defendant did open the door in this case

because during his cross examination

when the state asked him

you texted pretty regularly with the victim

about respect and obedience, he said

no.

And I know cross examination questions are supposed to be

structured as yes or no answers,

but he didn't say, well, we texted

about it a few times or two or three

times, not regularly though.

He just said no, and that

right there opened the door.

But then he explained that

you have two or three, that's not

regular. He did later

during his cross examination, but at that moment

his answer was just no.

And the trial court had made very clear

throughout the trial when they had

taken breaks when the defendant was still in the room

when the state had talked about the text messages

before his testimony that

or before his cross examination that

if the defendant denies the content

of these messages, I will allow

the state to read the messages into the record

or even admit them as an exhibit.

So that's separate from the opening the door

theory. You're saying they came in for

a direct counter on

his credibility? Yes, that is the state's

position. And then that analysis would just

be a 401-403

were they more appropriate than prejudicial

and what were they relevant

for? And the state's argument is that they are

relevant to rebut this motive of self

defense and that they are not overly

prejudicial because they do not cause some sort

of emotional response from the

jury, especially given all the other evidence

of the strangulation in this case and the relationship.

Because in addition to the

physical, mental and emotional abuse,

there was also testimony that the defendant

had threatened the victim, her

family and her unborn children

and then the children when they had been born. We don't know

any specifics about the threats

but that was part of the testimony

and trial. And in

terms of my preservation argument just to speak

to that briefly,

I would encourage this court to read

very closely the trial transcript pages

I think it's 275 to

305. That's where

that's the arguments that occur after the

defendant's direct but before his cross-examination

and the first 15 pages or so

are about the messages and

no one mentions opening the door.

The state does not mention opening the door.

The defendant does not object

to the messages for opening the door.

The trial court does not bring up opening the door.

Everybody talks about the messages

in terms of their proof

of motive. The defendant objects to

them saying their specific acts of abuse

but the trial court allows them to come

in not as specific acts of abuse

but because they rebut the defendant's self-defense

motive.

Then after that the state asks

will the state be allowed on cross-examination

to admit other specific

instances of abuse separate from the text

messages? And I think what the state was

referring to was

and I don't know what these are but other

specific acts that the victim may have provided

during meetings with the state

preparing for trial or through her interview

with the police about other

specific instances of abuse throughout

the relationship. And the trial court

pretty much shut that down

and said I said no before

we are not getting into specific instances of abuse

that door has not been opened

the door to specific acts of

violence has not been opened

and that's the first time anyone talks about

opening the door after the defendant's direct

examination. And then the police

go back and forth about that

and then sort of the trial court gets confused

and I had been I was also a little bit confused

because then it does seem that the defense

is arguing again about the text messages

and making other arguments not

necessarily about opening the door

just other arguments against them being admissible

and the trial court says I think around

296 or 297

to be honest I've watched you

but I've already ruled that the messages can come

in to rebut the self-defense

evidence and to rebut that motive

of self-defense. And then

again reiterates he is not allowing

any specific instances of

abuse into the trial.

And so while that record may be a little bit confusing

because the parties were talking about multiple

pieces of evidence they wanted

to admit, the state would

suggest that that does not make this opening

the door argument preserved. And that even

if it is, when the defendant denies

these text messages or denies the contents

of them being about respect and obedience

that does open the door

and allow the state to do what it did

which is ask the defendant did you

send this text message yes or no

and the state did that for about four pages

of the 70 page cross examination

and moved along to another

avenue of cross examination

and the state did mention it in its closing

briefly in one or two lines

in its closing and then again moved on

that was not the state's main point

in its closing and that was not the

state's main point of the case. It certainly

helped lay the groundwork for what this

relationship looked like but it was not

what the state hinged its entire argument

on in its closing and it was not

the theory of this assault.

I assume my yellow line is on

if there are no further questions I will

rest on my briefs.

Thank you.

Two quick points in rebuttal.

First of all the court can obviously

take its own meaning of the transcript

in terms of the

opening the door argument. I would submit

there's nothing confusing about

discussion of what would open the door

before trial. There's nothing confusing

about the trial court using the phrase

open the door twice

before these messages came in.

Second of all regarding the sort of

second tier opening the door argument

if the door wasn't open by the direct

testimony it was when the defendant

said I didn't send a message

about obedience. The

court had already allowed the state

full license to use these messages and

if he had said sure yeah I sent

messages about obedience it's hard to believe

the state was not going to get

into the content of those messages

and beat that point

home with him.

So for those reasons and

hearkening back to my

prejudice argument before

I would unless the court has any further questions

submit on the review.

Thank you very much counsel the case submitted

courts and reasons.
