This is case number 2020-0244, state of New Hampshire, first David Voight.

May it please the court, Christopher Johnson on behalf of David Voight. I reserve one minute for rebuttal.

The issue in this appeal is a claim of error in the admission of police testimony about the content of video clips.

My plan this afternoon is to begin first with a few points about the procedural origins of this issue

before turning second to the merits of the court's ruling and then third to harmless error.

I don't have to take the court's questions at any point.

So beginning with the procedural origins, the issue arose out of a series of mistakes by state actors.

We had first the police failure initially or later to get the whole video when faced merely with an easily surmountable technical obstacle.

And then we had the prosecutor's failure not once but twice to respond to a motion in lemony

followed by which the prosecution did not file a motion to reconsider.

And then at trial we had the wrong witness. We did not have the police officer who saw the whole video.

So with that background we turned to the court's rulings and I think it's important to describe precisely the basis.

Begin with the motion in lemony ruling. It was sustainable at a minimum on default grounds.

And the court never reconsidered that ruling. It never changed its mind about the default.

It never allowed the clips in.

Also the court did not rely on a kind of a gotcha argument or take a really narrow view of the motion in lemony's prayer for relief.

Instead what the court did was it perceived a meaningful difference between the clips and detective Smith's testimony about the clips.

And that meaningful difference was articulated by the court in terms of the opportunity to cross-examine Smith.

So that was the error. The clips were either admissible or they weren't.

And there was no meaningful difference between Smith's testimony about the clips and the clips themselves.

You could pull a highly credible person off the street, show them the video and have them testify about it and they will be believed.

And there's no way to cross-examine Smith about the contents of a video that neither Smith nor defense counsel had seen.

So that was the problem.

So no cross-examination about the fact that these clips were not the complete video.

The jury knew that. So there was cross-examination of that.

But what couldn't effectively be accomplished in cross-examination was an exploration of what was on those clips.

Because of course Smith hadn't seen them and nor had counsel.

On the missing clips.

On the missing clips. That's right. I'm sorry.

How is testimony about the clips not hearsay?

How is the testimony not hearsay?

Yes.

So this wasn't the articulated objection to it.

The court didn't allow Smith to testify about anything she heard on the clips.

So she just recited, you know, sort of described in words the images that she saw on the clips.

And so I don't think there was a statement in that sense.

It wasn't as if Smith had told Smith about the clips.

It wasn't an argument that the video represents a statement of what happened.

Right.

It's not as if Officer Kuharian told Smith what the clips showed and she testified.

Smith did watch them.

Did you have a report from the initial detective that saw the entire video describing the video?

So the records, I think, a little sparse on that.

But what, you know, it does seem that Officer Kuharian did a report because we know what happened between Officer Kuharian and LL.

Namely that LL showed her the whole 12 minutes.

They sort of made an effort to capture it.

They failed and that Kuharian had watched it.

But it's not, there's no, to my recollection, there's no clear evidence in the record that Kuharian in detail described the missing content.

Or the non-clips part of the video.

So even if Kuharian was available, you still didn't have an ability to determine whether his observations were accurate, whether they were complete?

Right, that's right.

That's right.

That's right.

Because while Kuharian had seen the clips, Defense Counsel hadn't.

Or, I'm sorry, the rest of the video, Defense Counsel hadn't.

And to be clear, of course...

I have a note here, I might not have gotten that right.

But the court wrote something like, or said something like, well, why isn't this just like someone describing something they see, somebody crossing the street?

Right.

Why isn't that the right way to think about it?

No, I mean, I think that's not really the part of the court's rationale that I'm taking issue with.

Because I get, you know, that sort of equivalence between seeing something and seeing something on a video.

But the problem was that she couldn't be cross-examined, or Smith couldn't be cross-examined about the rest of the video, because Smith hadn't seen it.

So it's really a completeness issue?

Yes, it's, well, even more I would say it's a fair opportunity to cross-examine.

Because what you ended up with, and this I guess gets to harmless error, Smith's testimony mattered.

In that first it correlated with the verdicts.

He was acquitted of the part where there wasn't a video and convicted only of the part as to which there was.

And the jury, we know the jury asked for clarification when they got a jury instruction about this.

So we know it's been mattered to the jury.

And that being the case, the state can't prove beyond a reasonable doubt, as is required in harmless error, that Smith's testimony didn't matter.

The jury instruction, I think, doesn't fix this, and it really rather just sort of replicates the problem.

Because the jury was told, you can use Smith's testimony about the clips.

You can also, in effect, speculate about what might have been on the missing video.

But to let the jury speculate about the unseen videos, contents, it does not put the defense in the same place.

It would have been in if Smith's testimony had been out, too.

In that scenario, the jury wouldn't have heard any evidence about what's...

Or they wouldn't have heard evidence from an unimpeachable witness about what's on the clips.

You can see that, I mean, LL was allowed to testify about what was on the clips.

But the defense had formidable angles of cross-examination about her credibility, which didn't have with respect to detectives.

Sort of like the situation that the state had a 12-minute video from a body cam,

and involved a defendant with admissions in the last two minutes.

But the first 10 minutes were never provided to the defense,

and so the state wants to put that first 10 minutes in through the detective for whatever reason,

because the video wasn't provided. That plainly would be an error.

Right. And I think maybe to translate it into terms, one might ask,

well, what could the rest of the video show that would matter?

Well, what if it could show, for example, that this is really more of a mutual combat scenario,

which would be a violation level offense rather than the misdemeanors he was convicted of?

Because that's the kind of thing that might appear in the context

that doesn't appear in the clips that LL selected and emailed.

And what explanation did the state provide for not being able to copy that video

and simply provide it to the defense?

So what Kuharian said, or what is reported that Officer Kuharian said,

was that they tried to email it and the file was too big.

And again, I think this is a very easily surmountable problem.

I mean, in many cases where the officer with their own phone can just videotape onto their own phone

what the screen of the cell phone shows.

And so there would be plenty of ways to capture the rest.

But the officer just gave up, I guess, at that point.

And so the defense attorney had the impression,

because this would have been so easily surmountable,

I think that the video was no longer available.

And then late at trial, it sort of seems that it might not be true.

Do you think that LL violated the wiretap statute by recording the defendant?

She may have, but the way they managed that possibility was,

I think by agreement of the parties, was to cut out any audio on the theory.

But doesn't the wiretap statute itself prohibit use of an illegally obtained video

such as this or oral communication from being used at trial?

I think it does, but I think the...

And I didn't relook at this because the parties agreed,

but I think that the understanding that they arrived at

was that the wiretap covers only words and audio.

And so one can sort of surreptitiously videotape people

without violating the wiretap statute.

So unless the court has other questions,

we'd ask Mr. Voight's convictions to be reversed.

Thank you. You still have one minute.

Thank you.

Mr. Gagnier.

Good afternoon, your honor.

May it please the court?

Thank you for the state of New Hampshire.

Your honor, the trial court in this case did not air when it clarified

an interlocutory evidentiary ruling issued prior to trial

excluding three video clips from evidence.

And I welcome the court's questions at any time,

but I would like to begin this argument by addressing the defendant's reliance

in his brief on state versus de Montserrace

because I think the distinctions between this case and de Montserrace

nicely illustrate why the court did air in that case

and did not air in this case.

In de Montserrace, the defendant was charged with negligent driving.

The state wanted to introduce evidence that the defendant had consumed

one glass of wine before she began driving.

The defense wanted to keep out any mention of alcohol consumption.

The defendant's wish was denied.

I don't believe the defendant filed a motion,

but the defendant was denied from not being excluding all mention of alcohol consumption.

However, the state represented during the hearing that the state had no evidence

and intended to elicit no testimony indicating that the defendant was impaired.

And so the trial court allowed the state to introduce the evidence

of the one glass of wine but was unequivocally clear

that there would be no evidence of impairment.

The court stated that as far as the jury was concerned, the defendant was sober.

Nevertheless, in closing, the state impliedly argued that the defendant was impaired.

The state argued that despite telling an officer that she had had one glass of wine

prior to driving, the officer smelled a heavy odor of alcohol

coming off of her hours later.

And from that line of argument, it can be inferred that the defendant was lying

about one glass, she actually had multiple glasses,

and from there it can be inferred that she was impaired.

And this court held that that was an improper line of closing argument

only because the trial court had specifically prohibited introduction

of any such evidence or any such argument as to impairment.

And this court further held that in that unique set of circumstances

where everybody was on the same page that no evidence of impairment would come in,

the defendant was entitled to rely on the court's interlocutory order.

That's not the case that we have here.

Why not?

Because in this case, the defendant filed a specific motion.

In his motion, he requested the exclusion of three video clips,

not three video clips and any evidence derived from the video clips,

not three video clips and any testimony related to the video clips,

three video clips.

The state did not file an objection for reasons that we don't know.

It could be that the state found its own troubles with the video clips

and wanted to get that evidence in through testimony

rather than trying to get those video clips in.

But whatever the reason, the court granted the motion

seemingly on procedural grounds in a margin order stating only after review

and the state having filed no objection,

either back in July when the motion was filed

or by the new deadline set by the court of November 5, 2021,

the motion is granted.

The court's order does not propose to grant relief more expansive than what is requested.

Mr. Ghani, let's assume it's a video of a two-hour interrogation

and the state doesn't produce the video to the defense.

Defense files a motion to exclude the video regarding the interrogation.

It's granted because the state doesn't object.

Can the state then put on the detective to describe the interrogation

and what the result was?

Why wouldn't that violate that same order?

Your Honor, I think if there anything exculpatory in any sort of video like that,

it would be a Brady violation.

We're talking about an interrogation with an admission at the end, a confession.

If the state doesn't provide the video and the defense gets the video excluded,

I don't think any court would interpret that as being

permitting the state to put the detective on the stand to testify about what happened.

Do you?

Your Honor, I would suggest that from the transcripts of this case,

this trial court did interpret its order in the way that you're saying the court would not.

That is certainly a different circumstance.

Did it really, though? Is it really?

Because the clips weren't provided to the defense.

The clips weren't provided?

They were. I'm sorry. It's right that they were.

But to Justice Donovan's point,

if the police officer testifies as to the two-hour interrogation,

not having taken in the interrogation but watching a video of the interrogation,

how would that comport with an order that says you can't show the video?

If I understand your question.

Thank you. It's a better question.

And I hope I understand it, Your Honor.

And I just want to make clear we are getting into hypotheticals that I'm trying to pull apart on the spot here.

I want to be clear that in that hypothetical, we have a two-hour interrogation.

We only want to introduce the parts of the admissions with two minutes.

The detective's going to testify to the two-hour video.

That's not what we have here.

Detective Smith did not watch the whole 12-minute video.

She didn't testify to all of it.

She testified only to the clips the defense counsel had seen.

So bringing it back narrowly to this case, if the clips aren't in,

how can someone describe what the clips show?

And how is cross-examination going to somehow probe their view of what they saw?

I don't see the distinction.

Well, Your Honor, the defense did not object to the victim's testimony

who testified to exactly what was on the clips in the same way Detective Smith.

If she wasn't testifying to the clips, she was testifying to what happened.

If I may, Your Honor, she was testifying to a line of questioning that did you show the clips?

And then she responds yes, and what did those clips show?

So she was testifying to the clips.

And Detective Smith testified to only the same thing.

Cross-examination could be done vis-a-vis those clips.

Counsel could have taken a number of different strategies

because none of the clips were played.

Maybe try to plant some doubt by probing what was the video quality like.

Was it grainy? Are you sure?

Defense counsel can't question them about what's missing.

Is that a problem?

About what's missing, Your Honor?

What happened between these three clips?

They can't answer that question, and the witness can't answer it.

Yes, Your Honor. The state was never in possession of that evidence.

Nobody that was at trial had seen it.

Honestly, did one of your officers watch the entire thing?

Watched it, Your Honor, yes, but the state was never in possession of that evidence.

Well, you have a witness who witnessed the entire thing.

It's pretty close. I mean, it's almost similar to Officer Smith's testimony, isn't it?

I don't think so, Your Honor, because I don't think it could be argued that a Brady violation occurred here,

because the state was never in...

Well, we don't know. Maybe there was.

I don't think there's anything in the record to suggest that the state was ever actually in possession of this evidence.

Wasn't there a reference that LL actually still had the video on her phone in the way that she answered a question while she was testifying?

That is correct, Justice.

And LL and the police officers decided which selected bits, which clips they were going to provide, right?

So it was the selective sort of review of the film.

It is my understanding that Officer Kohari, and after viewing the entire video,

asked the victim to send the portions of the video that depicted physical altercation.

So I don't think I would say it was as broad as you pick what you think's relevant, send me that.

I think you watched the 12-minute clip, however much physical altercation Officer Kohari and saw, and asked for that.

Isn't this really just bad police work? You can say it.

Your Honor, this could have been done better by the police.

I'm not going to stand here and dispute that, but I don't think it fell below.

I don't think that fact that the investigation could have done better

meant that the trial court aired here when it clarified its earlier interlocutory order.

Further to the cross-examination piece.

Defense Council could cross-examine adequately on the clips that were testified to.

Of course, they could not cross-examine at all about what was missing.

But that missing evidence instruction, which under State V. Laurent the defendant likely was not entitled to,

was given twice, once after Smith testified and again in the final charge.

And the jury was told in that instruction that they could draw inferences favorable to the defendant,

giving the missing balance of that video.

And in closing, Defense Council could have hammered on that.

Could have hammered on Justice Donovan's point that this is shoddy police work.

Where is that video? We should think that that video shows,

I believe Justice Hans Marconi mentioned with Attorney Johnson what it could have showed,

or Attorney Johnson mentioned that it could have showed something of a self-defense situation.

Maybe that could have been argued to plant that reasonable doubt in the jury's mind

and make them draw the most favorable inference they could based on that missing.

So you agreed, though, that the detective who first witnessed the entire video

observed a self-defense of defense there,

or an instance where LL was the aggressor.

And that's not disclosed. That'd be a Brady violation, wouldn't it?

Yeah. So, Your Honor, I don't think the law has reached that question yet,

but I think that could be. That is not before the score in this case.

It could be that due process in Brady reaches that far.

I have not read a case that put it there, but that might be the case.

And I would finally like to briefly touch on the harmless error point,

and I've covered a lot of it already.

This court, as is your all well aware, looks to the totality of the circumstances

to ask whether the verdict was affected by the error.

And in this case, the state presented very strong evidence of guilt

through the victim's testimony, the victim's testimony describing

what was on the video clips.

And there was a letter from the defendant apologizing to the victim.

Now, Mr. Johnson mentioned that the video correlates with the verdicts.

That's not the entire story.

This assault that was on video occurs on October 12th.

The letter apologizing to the victim, and it's not a straight up admission,

I'm sorry that I hit you on October 12th,

but the letter apologizing to the victim comes, I believe, on October 14th.

The next assault that is not on video occurs on October 15th.

So what the jury receives is something akin to an admission

to the October 12th conduct through a letter, but not the October 15th conduct.

Or some conduct.

Not specific.

The apology letter wasn't specific to what the apology was for.

That is correct, Your Honor.

You heard evidence of this on and off again violent relationship at any rate, right?

Sure, Your Honor, but from that letter, from that on and off again relationship,

and from all of the other evidence in the case,

the jury certainly could have drawn the inference that as this October 12th conduct,

she's telling the truth.

The October 15th conduct may have had other issues.

There was a discussion of strangulation, no marks on the neck,

and wouldn't that have been there?

And maybe that held some sway for the jury.

We just don't know, but I think that letter was probably quite powerful evidence for the jury.

Secondly, the evidence was cumulative.

As I've discussed, the victim testified to what was on that video clip.

The jury heard that, that she turned it over to the police in what it showed.

And then Detective Smith testified to the same thing, which the jury already knew,

and frankly, the jury would have just been left confused if they knew from the victim

that the police got this, they reviewed it, it was part of their investigation,

then Detective Smith comes up and says nothing about it.

And finally, the missing evidence instruction that was given twice.

That, we don't know what was on the balance of that video,

but I think it would be reasonable to deduce that the missing evidence instruction

might be even more favorable than what was on the balance of that video.

And for these reasons...

So was it kind of an initial error to let the victim testify specifically to the video clips,

not just relay what happened?

No, Your Honor, I do not think that was an error.

I don't think that there was any real substantive basis to keep the video clips themselves out.

I think that that was done on a procedural basis.

Right, but they're out, but they're out.

Right, but just because the video clips themselves are out for no substantive reason

does not mean that any evidence about that evidence, it can't come in.

Because again, there's no substantive reason for keeping it out.

This isn't an instance where maybe you suppress something pursuant to the Fourth Amendment

or the wiretap statute.

So the defendant should have filed his motion,

and when there was no response, amended it and said,

okay, and the video clips, just to be clear, it's not just procedural,

but the video clips are out and no reference can be made to them.

I absolutely would have done that, Your Honor.

In this profession, we are wordsmiths,

and we operate in an arena of linguistic specificity and precision,

and that's absolutely necessary, I think,

especially if there's no substantive basis really to keep these clips out.

If you want the whole kit in Kaboodle, I think you asked for the whole kit.

And the basis in the motion wasn't completeness, it was...

The basis in the motion was proofs favorable and completeness.

As the state explains in its brief, completeness is a doctrine of inclusion, not exclusion.

It's very unlikely that this was on that basis excluded.

The wiretap statute didn't come out, all proofs favorable got...

But why do you think that LL violated the wiretap statute?

I think I would need more facts, Justice Countway.

I think if she caught any piece of audio, then I think she probably did violate the wiretap statute.

And whether that would then cause this evidence to be excluded,

I think is a question that has not been reached yet.

I believe 570A6, it certainly excludes any oral communication.

If my memory serves me correctly...

It says any oral communication has been intercepted,

no part of the contents of such communication essentially is admissible.

Derived from...

Right, so then I think we'd be arguing about what does derived from mean.

Does derived mean that you use that oral communication to go find other evidence?

Or does that mean the physical conduct on the video is derived from the oral communication?

I don't think that question's been settled, and it's not before this court in this case.

I've got one question, which is, do I understand correctly that LL's testimony about the content of the video came in without objection?

You do. That is correct, Justice Fassett. Yes.

Thank you.

Thank you very much, Mr. Johnson.

I want to address that question about LL's testimony about the clips.

To begin with, I don't think it's unreasonable for the defense lawyer to have written the motion in Lemony the way he did

and think that it covered not just the clips, but also testimony about them.

With respect to LL's testimony, she gave that testimony about the content of the clips

after there had already been this ruling that Detective Smith's testimony about the content of the clips was going to come in anyway.

And so there wasn't particularly a reason to sort of renew the objection as to LL also.

The basis would have been the same, and the defense had lost that with respect to Detective Smith.

And secondly, and maybe more fundamentally, the defense is simply not as worried about LL's credibility

or the likelihood she'd be believed that her testimony about the content of the assaults themselves would be somehow bolstered

by her also testifying about what the clips showed when there was no other evidence of what they had showed.

Right, because without the clips, the jury could decide itself serving or whatever.

Precisely.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Thank you counsel.

Case submitted.

The court is now in recess.
