This case, 2022-0320, State of New Hampshire versus Catherine D. Pate.

Thank you, Ms. Woodcock.

Whenever you are ready, please begin.

I understand from a note here that you have reserved two minutes.

Yes, thank you, Your Honor.

Elizabeth Woodcock to the State of New Hampshire.

I wanted to make one thing clearer to the court that I thought I could have made clearer in my brief.

And then I wanted to address one disagreement that I have with Mr.

Rothstein's representation in his brief, and then I'll take questions.

The thing that I wanted to make clearer is that as I was rereading this,

the procedure in this case is a little bit complicated.

And so what happened was that the trial court decided the motion to suppress on one basis and grant it.

And I think I could have made it clearer in my brief that when they had the second hearing where they heard only oral argument,

it was addressing the remaining claims that the defense had raised in its motion to suppress.

And I think I could have made that clearer because there was no evidence taken.

At the second hearing, because what they were doing just a minute,

they were addressing the remaining arguments that the defense had raised as a basis for suppression.

And I think I could have made that clearer because it was clearly made.

Let me further complicate things.

Are you, do you acknowledge or do you disagree that there was a sufficient factual predicate upon which the issues could be decided in the second hearing?

I think that the answer to that is no.

And the reason that I say that is I think that the defense did not bear its burden of showing that the police officer had violated any constitutional claim.

And I think that that has to be the starting point in this particular case.

Getting to the second question, Mr. Rostain said that the argument that we raised in our brief about the alternative reasons for arrest were not preserved.

I think that would be true if you only looked at the state's response to the defendant's motion to suppress.

But at the hearing on page 16 and 17, Chief LePage starts talking about the alternate reasons that the police officer would have had to arrest the defendant.

And therefore, I think that that claim is preserved.

Now getting back to the actual issues in the pan, the first foremost issue really is the issue of who bears the burden of showing that the blood drop is lawful.

And I think that until the defense raises some kind of question that the police officer acted unconstitutionally, unlawfully.

The burden is on the defense.

Well, let's look at what he did.

What did he do?

She was handcuffed to the gurney and he accompanied her every step of the way.

What else did he do?

That's what he did.

He, he, he, well, that doesn't mean.

Didn't he ask to have the blood samples set aside?

He did after the, after the hospital had made a determination that it was somehow medically advised to draw the line.

I think that if the defense is going to say that that violates a constitutional right, they have to show that somehow the police officer was engaged in the determination to draw the blood.

And in fact, when the defendant filed is her motion to suppress, she acknowledged this.

If you look at her motion to suppress in a footnote, she cites a case and she talks about agency relationship and how the defense has to show agency relationship.

She never showed that.

The police officer didn't know why the blood was being drawn.

Do we even reach that result if we find that the arrest was unlawful?

I think that if you find the arrest is unlawful, I think then you would have to look at a different analysis and that would involve an application of intervening circumstances.

And I don't think that that has been adequately briefed in the trial court.

But getting back to the premise of the question, the arrest was not unlawful.

If you look at what the police officer saw when he arrived on the scene, the defendant was collapsed behind the wheel of the car.

The car was running, or at least the electricity was engaged because the windshield wipers were going on and it wasn't raining.

And he tried to arouse her.

She didn't respond.

The response was as he tried to communicate with her was why, why, why?

He noticed that she had, her eyes were glassy and he suspected that something was,

that she was not competent to be driving her, that she was impaired.

So that's the probable cause to believe that she's committing a violation level offense of negligent driving?

At least negligent driving, Your Honor.

Is it enough to have probable cause for a violation as opposed to a crime?

I think that he had probable cause that she was operating while impaired.

I think that there was sufficient evidence given at the hearing.

But he also had her resistance to him in trying to get her to cooperate.

She was using-

This isn't necessarily a de novo review though, is it?

Didn't the trial judge already find that he, make a credibility finding that he really didn't believe the officer and he did not have probable cause?

I think that the court did not make a credibility intermission with respect to the officer.

What the court determined was that the officer had to eliminate any other innocent explanation.

And that simply is not the law.

That's what the trial court said, that there were other innocent explanations.

And therefore, the arrest was unlawful.

And that's not a basis that this court has ever recognized, that you have to eliminate every single other possibility before you execute an arrest.

So his arrest is lawful.

Then getting back to your point, Justice Sates, yes, she was taken to the hospital.

And she was under arrest and so she was handcuffed to the gurney.

And the police officer did sit and wait in the hospital to decide what to do with her.

Because once she was released from the hospital, he was going to take her to a bail commissioner and have the bail commissioners at bail.

He wasn't just going to go, having placed her under arrest, just walk away.

She was his prisoner at that point.

And he had an obligation to see the case through to the end.

So you said earlier, well, if we find the arrest was unlawful,

then we don't really get to the second issue, or the trial court didn't get to the second issue.

I think that if you were to find that the arrest was unlawful, and I'm sorry,

this was not argued, this was not part of the argument below.

And I'm operating a little bit off my memory.

But I think that then a court would have to determine whether there were intervening circumstances.

Whether getting the blood drawn and then seeking a search warrant somehow

changed the legality or legality of-

So you're suggesting that we need to amend that issue back to the trial court?

No, I'm suggesting that you don't have to reach that issue at all,

because the arrest was lawful.

And then we turn to what the defense had to show that there was some kind of constitutional violation.

And the defense never showed constitutional violation.

Now, Mr. Rossman says that there's nothing unfair about requiring the state

to kind of address that up front, but there is something unfair about it.

And the unfairness of that is that the information about the blood drawn is in the possession of the defendant.

It's not in the possession of the state.

The defendant can sign a release.

The defendant can get the medical records.

The defendant could have called the people from the emergency room,

and they could have explained why they had taken the blood drawn.

The only evidence in the record is the officer's testimony that he didn't ask for it.

He was just watching, and then once it was drawn, he said,

if you can put that aside, I'll go get a warrant.

That's the state of the testimony, right?

That's right.

And it should be the defendant's obligation to show somehow that those hospital personnel

were acting at some point, at the direction or with the cooperation or something of the police officer.

And that simply is not the record.

Can that be implied from the fact that she's handcuffed to a gurney?

The cop doesn't really have to say anything.

He's standing there, and it's like, OK, we know what's going on.

He's not telling the hospital personnel what to do.

They're treating a person who has arrived in the emergency room who was found essentially comatose behind the wheel of a car.

What do we do with the fact that we don't have in the record before us either the warrant or the affidavit?

I don't think that you need either the warrant or the affidavit, because the court didn't decide the case on that basis.

The court decided the case on the ground that the state had not met a burden that is not imposed on it.

The court decided that because the state couldn't explain why the medical personnel had taken blood,

that therefore the evidence had to be suppressed.

And that's not the rule.

The rule is initially that the defense should have to show some that the hospital personnel

acted in some way that implicated state action.

And you don't have that here.

So the warrant itself is not part of the trial court.

Well, the trial court didn't have the warrant or the affidavit item.

I don't know the answer to that, just none of them.

I assume that the warrant and the affidavit were part of the court's file.

If you had applied for it, I would think that would be part of it.

But it wasn't part of the court's consideration.

What the court was saying, first of all, is you have to eliminate any kind of innocent explanation

before you execute an arrest, which is not the law.

And then secondly, you didn't explain, you, the state, didn't explain why the medical personnel did what they did.

And the answer that the state gave was that is not what we have to show.

We have to show that we lawfully obtained this and absent any state action behind the hospital's decision to draw the blood.

The state had met its burden.

I just want to clarify your position.

If we find that the arrest was unlawful, from your perspective, can we go ahead and decide the second issue

on the basis of the record and the arguments in front of us or not?

I'm not sure how to answer that, because it's fascinating.

And where I keep getting hung up on this is that several years ago I argued a case, Scott Hillierd.

And what happened in that case was that the arrest was unlawful and then he gave consent to a blood draw.

And as I recall, there is law that talks about intervening circumstances, changing the court's analysis.

So the fruit of the poisonous tree analysis and intervening factors maybe?

Right, and I'm not certain.

I would be really not quite a wild guess, but it would be a guess.

I'm not certain if an unlawful arrest and then the blood draw and then seeking the warrant would be qualified

as one of those intervening circumstances that would change the scope of things.

And the trial court was never presented with that as an argument.

I see my red light is on.

I will yield to Mr. Rothstein.

Thank you.

Thank you, Mr. Rothstein.

Please, the court.

My name is David Rothstein.

I represent Katharine Pate.

The trial court granted Ms. Pate's motion to suppress on grounds that the arrest decision was not supported by a probable cause and that the blood draw was unlawful.

The court should affirm the trial court's ruling on each ground in response to a couple of questions.

It is the defendant's view that if the arrest was not supported by probable cause, that the court does not have to reach the second issue A.

And B, regarding any sort of intervening circumstances, inevitable discovery, other arguments, those arguments were not made well and they are not preserved.

So it's by view that if the court finds in favor of Ms. Pate on the first issue that the case is done, it does not have to look at the blood draw issue.

So there was no argument that the warrant purged the taint caused by the unlawful arrest?

I did not see such an argument.

I did not see an argument that the warrant was ever submitted to the court.

I did not see an argument on behalf of the state that even if we lose the first issue, there was a warrant.

And that somehow clears any taint due to an attenuation argument, inevitable discovery or an intervening circumstances argument.

Under this court's, I actually don't understand this to be an argument that the state even made this brief, frankly.

But I'll say right here that if this court gleaned that to be an argument that was made in the state's brief, it was not preserved.

Either so the trial court could address it or so that I could address it in this page.

Why isn't the trial court's determination that there wasn't a probable cause for the arrest error?

It's not error for a few reasons.

First of all, and I believe it was you, Justice Hicks, that raised this.

There is a standard of review here.

There is a situation where we don't have a trial court that had a suppression hearing, it had a live witness, it had an officer.

And, you know, there's credibility determinations like the trial court finds in its ruling.

I find the officer was incredible.

That's pretty rare.

But here, what you have as a situation with the trial court is listening to the officer's testimony, is doing so as it's said in the motion to reconsider under the totality of the circumstances

and applying this court's legal standard, legal standard that is very, very heavily factually driven.

And finding that under these circumstances, this was a medical call at its inception, undisputed, that in this court, or remember from the first appeal in this case,

it was a community caretaking action that was being undertaken when the officer opened the driver's side door.

And then really seconds pass before the officer makes his determination to arrest Ms. Pate.

And in that period of time, he obviously had no report of any erratic operation of this vehicle.

There's no order of alcohol.

He understood what Ms. Pate was saying.

He doesn't see any contraband.

He doesn't ask her any questions about her condition.

That's what he said, but she's unconscious.

She's slumped over the center console.

The car is in gear and it's running.

Now, that's a dangerous situation.

Well, she's not unconscious.

To the contrary, she is responsive.

He understands what she is saying.

And what she's saying is, I want to be left alone.

And instead of making any further inquiry about trying to talk to her and say, listen, just what you said.

You're in a parking lot.

You don't appear to be in a condition to drive.

I need to ask you some questions about where you're coming from.

I need to find out if there's someone who can come and get the car.

I need to try to help you.

He says he wants to get her out of the car.

He wants to get her out of the car because at that moment when he tells her he wants to get her out of the car,

he is placing her under arrest.

And the trial court makes the point that it was the officer who made the decision to make the arrest at that time.

And the trial court said, look, you made the decision to make the arrest at that time.

I'm looking at the facts.

I'm looking at the circumstances and finding you did not have probable cause.

And I would submit we are talking about probable cause for the offense of operating while under impairment.

So in terms of reviewing the trial court's decision,

the issue is obviously not whether one of you sitting in the court would have made the same decision.

The issue is that this court in this position hearing the evidence,

making factual determinations and inferences make a decision that was consistent with this court's.

What about the state's claim that the judge used the wrong standard

by employing this process of elimination analysis in coming to a decision?

Right. I don't agree that that's what the trial court did.

And the trial court made it clear in its motion to reconsider.

It applied the standard in state versus newcomer, citing other cases.

Obviously, when you're looking at an officer's decision, you're looking at the totality of the circumstances.

Under the totality of the circumstances, yes, there were a number of other possibilities here.

But I read the record to mean that the court held a miniature trial on guilt or innocence here at the stage.

I read the record to mean that the officer testified he was cross-examined.

The officer made a decision to make an arrest at this point without making other reasonable investigative steps that were open to him.

And yes, of course, there are other possibilities.

But I don't read it to mean that the trial court applied a standard that was more akin to reasonable doubt

or ruling out rational conclusions than the probable cost standard that it set out.

Let me ask you, in regards to the blood draw, what evidence is there that state action was involved?

I don't see any.

There's actually a lot of evidence that state action was involved here.

First of all, it's the state, the police, that made the decision to change Ms. Payton to a gurney to have her taken to the hospital.

The police officer was consistently in her presence.

As Attorney Woodcock said, she was his prisoner, so he is there at all periods of time in custody.

He is guarding her.

Her movement is severely restricted.

So who decided to take her to the hospital?

Was it the EMTs or the police, or does it not matter?

Well, they both responded to the call, and it was a medical call at its inception.

So I don't think the record is clear on exactly who decided to take her to the hospital.

The record is clear.

She was taken to the hospital.

There was no testimony from an EMT or a medical personnel about her condition or why that decision was made.

Was the police officer present during the blood draw?

The police officer was aware that the blood was drawn.

Yes, he was present the entire time.

But there's no dispute that he didn't ask for it.

He didn't ask the medical providers to take the blood draw, right?

There's no evidence of that.

He testified that he did not ask to take the blood draw.

But when you look at this issue, first of all, it is the issue here.

It is the state's burden.

It is not the defendant's burden.

It is the state's burden to show that the blood was lawfully drawn.

There are strong indicia of state action here in terms of the officer's presence, the officer's interest.

On the other side...

But none of that gets to the blood draw.

Well, it does.

Sure he's interested.

But it does.

It does, Your Honor.

So in terms of looking at the blood draw, there's no question that blood was drawn here.

And there's also no question that regarding the state of the medical record that Ms. Pate never...

In terms of your blood being drawn, she never consented to any sort of medical treatment.

There's no evidence that she consented to a blood draw.

There's no evidence as in state versus BAS and F that there was any exception that would allow

the personnel to take blood without her consent.

The evidence is that blood was drawn and the police officer said to the medical people,

put that blood aside so I can take it.

And further...

Go ahead.

I'm sorry, I didn't mean to...

No, no, you get to finish first.

I just finished the sentence.

Actually, the officer's present the whole time the officer testified.

The officer could have testified as to what he saw in terms of medical treatment.

The officer could have testified.

I wanted to take her but the medical personnel had taken her blood

and they told me that I had to wait for the result of those blood tests

so that I could take her.

I had to wait until her medical treatment was over.

But what about Ms. Woodcock's point that the state is hamstrung

because you're making all these arguments about the medical record and all this.

The state doesn't have access to the medical record.

You do have access to the medical record.

And so it does seem unfair to put the burden on the state

as to why the blood was drawn when you are controlling and limiting access to the record.

Right.

Two things.

First of all, there was...

Actually, three things.

First of all, there was no...

There was...

The officer could have testified as to what he observed

in terms of the medical treatment.

He did not testify to that.

Second of all, regarding the state of the record,

the state at the second hearing could have submitted additional evidence.

The state agreed to proceed on the initial record.

So it could have tried to submit additional evidence.

Third of all, the state can get the defendants,

a defendants medical records for the defendant's objection if it wants

under the grand jury cases, state versus pain.

It can ask the court to find that there is probable cause

to believe that the medical records contain evidence of a crime,

that there is no other way for us to get those medical records,

that the medical records should be turned over to the court,

and that the court should review those records

and should turn them over to the state.

So there are ways to get the medical records.

This is an interesting case because these issues that we're talking about

did not arise in Bazanet.

They did not arise in Davis,

and they're not specifically addressed by the statute.

They're interesting issues,

but I do not concede that there is anything that shifts a burden

to the defense to somehow come forward with evidence about the medical records.

This is an emotion to suppress.

The state has the burden to demonstrate that the blood was lawfully drawn.

Now, again here, the court can draw rational conclusions.

The court does not have to accept the entirety of any witnesses' testimony.

The court can look at the record and say,

well, I understand the officer said he didn't ask for the blood to be drawn,

but he definitely wanted the blood.

He asked for it to be set aside.

He was there the whole time.

He didn't talk about any sort of medical treatment that this woman was getting,

how long she was at the hospital,

that the hospital said,

officer, you can't take her.

We're not done with our medical treatment.

We need to see what was in her blood.

Circumstantially, what we have here is a strong indication of state action,

strong intent on the part of the police to get that blood

for the purpose of seeing what was in that blood.

And we have very weak evidence of medical purpose, of any sort of consent.

Was she treated for anything?

What's this?

Was she treated for anything?

There's no evidence in the record that she was treated for anything.

The evidence was that she was taken by the officer,

as Ms. Woodcock said, either to the jail or the police station.

Was she ever informed of her ALS, right?

She was. She declined.

The officer went through her ALS rights and she declined to provide the blood.

So there was no evidence of consent to ALS.

There was no evidence of consent to medical treatment.

There was evidence that she was at the hospital or at the ER.

There's no evidence that they provided any medical treatment to her

or what that treatment was.

There are statements in the record, and now I can't call exactly

what they were in reference to that she refused a number of times

to cooperators that I'm not going to give you.

I don't want you to take blood.

Where did that evidence come from?

It would have to come.

The officer was the only witness who testified.

It would have to have come.

I would imagine from the cross-examination of the police officer.

I believe my recollection of the record on cross-examination

is that the officer agreed with just about every question

that Defense Counsel posed with regard to her absolute and resolute refusal

to consent to any sort of treatment.

And again, in terms of the record,

the officer here certainly could have offered testimony

about his experience at the hospital, what he had observed.

Not necessarily any sort of information he may have overheard,

but what he saw, they were tubes in her.

They took her blood pressure.

They told me that, you know, that I couldn't take her until they did this

or until they did that, until she was cleared.

There was none of that.

What we have in the record is she went to the hospital under police guard.

She was brought to the ER.

There was blood drawn.

No testimony about how many files of blood were drawn,

which may have been relevant, but there was blood drawn,

at least one file from the police.

The officer said, please put that aside.

So I can come back and get it.

And that was it.

And under that, based on that record,

the trial court was entitled to find that the state did not carry its burden

to prove that the evidence was legally seized.

And I would say then if the case is not over on the first issue,

then it's over on the second issue

and there's no need for a remand or a possible third appeal.

So do we have all the facts and all the legal argument

that we need to decide that second issue in your view?

I believe that you do.

I believe that you do.

I don't believe there's a need for a remand to decide the second issue.

Unless there are any other questions about the first or the second issue.

Thank you.

Thank you, Mr. Ross.

Ms. Woodcock.

Thank you, Your Honor.

I just wanted to point out because there were some questions

about credibility determinations.

There are no credibility determinations

in the order that is before the court today.

Expressly.

Expressly.

There is, however, a credibility statement in the November 26, 2019 order.

The court starts up its analysis of the facts

by saying the credible evidence

and then it goes on and it recounts the police officer's testimony

to the extent that that constitutes a credibility determination.

I would say that it went in favor of the police officer.

The second thing is that it is true that there is no evidence

that the defendant consented to the blood drawn.

But that's not a claim against the police officer.

If she's not happy with the way that the hospital treated her,

her remedy is to sue the hospital.

It's not to suppress the evidence that is lawfully taken

as a result of treatment that the hospital gave her.

You would have to allege a constitutional violation

before the state begins to have its burden.

It can't be on state from Leggetto.

And right now we have a situation in which,

although she was placed under arrest

and brought to the hospital,

there is no state action involving that.

Well, their position is, well, yeah, sure there was.

She was handcuffed to the gurney.

The police officer was standing there the whole time.

That's enough state action.

That is insufficient, Justice Bassett.

This court has never said that simply because someone

is under arrest that anything that happens

at that hospital is automatically state action.

Well, there wouldn't be anything.

It would be confined to the facts of this case.

And one could argue that the hospital was acting

in concert with the police officer

when they acceded to his request to set aside the sample.

One could argue, wouldn't you say?

No, I would not agree with that.

I think I just...

Well, you could always argue that.

I mean, the United States is a free country

and you can argue whatever you want.

But it wouldn't be a winning argument.

And the reason for that is that there is no state action

in the Challenge Act.

The Challenge Act is the blood drop.

There's also a challenge to the arrest

and that clearly is a constitutional argument

in its state action, right?

So from my perspective,

if we find that the arrest is unlawful,

we can't get to that next argument

about whether there was a purge of any illegal taint, correct?

Because that argument wasn't made below.

It wasn't raised by either side below

and the court was never asked to consider it.

I think that if you were to try to skip over that possible

exception, it would be unfair to both of the parties

because it's never agreed.

I see my red light is on.

We'll ask that the case be submitted.

Case shall be submitted.

Thank you, counsel.

Court's adjourned.

Please rise.
