This is case 2020-07-07, PPI Enterprise LLC versus Town of Wyndham.

Good morning, Attorney Cronin.

Good morning, Chief Justice. May I please the Court?

You reserved two minutes.

Yes, I've reserved two minutes. Thank you for asking.

My name is John Cronin. I'm with the firm of Cronin.

This is Anzolinsky, and it's my honor and privilege to argue this case before you today.

This case is no stranger to you, having been here before.

It relates to a piece of property in Wyndham, New Hampshire.

It's approximately 45.5 acres, and it sits in access by a public road known as Ledge Road.

Ledge Road is some significance in this case because blasting is one of the issues at play.

In the prior case, and in some of the trial court decisions,

the issue of remand to the planning board was raised,

and in fact, at one point, the ZBA remanded the case to the planning board

after it determined that the original basis for denial after seven hearings

over a period of months was incorrect.

The planning board initially, when they had the case, heard it.

The engineering team went through all of the process.

Review engineers hired by the town made all kinds of modifications

at the request of the town, and we're ready for a final vote.

Planning board struggled to find a basis in the regulations to deny the plan

and denied it on a general proposition under the zoning ordinance.

We appealed that under procedure to the ZBA as well as the court,

and the ZBA determined that basis for denial was improper.

The ZBA remanded it to the planning board for further consideration.

We raised an issue with that saying that the ZBA did not have power and authority

to remand, but it became moved based on the decision of the superior court.

Eventually the town planning board, they denied this application

based on the road grade of a site driveway.

There are regulations that we concede in town that call for various grades

of public streets and access streets, typically in a subdivision,

but it's our contention that those regulations don't regulate

the grade of a private driveway, which this would be.

You take that position now, but the town and its briefs

cite several instances where your client conceded that the 8% applied.

Not only does the town say it, the trial court says it.

Yes, so why aren't you bound by that?

Because it's not a concession that it applies.

Throughout the case, they're saying, Hobson's choice.

Look, we originally proposed the plan with an 8% grade,

which admittedly meets the regulations, but in order to do that,

it required blasting.

This elected board, a lot of people and folks came out to the hearings

because they had a prior developer that wasn't very good

and didn't do what they were supposed to do and did cause some concerns

relative to blasting, so they went through that particular process

and there was discussion only near the end about this road grade

and the engineer said, look, we can do it one of two ways.

We can do the 8% grade and make this fully compliant,

which is how we applied, but if you want us to,

we can limit the blasting and give you a 10% road grade.

When you look at what the quotes is, particularly in the trial court

in the brief, all that was saying is, hey, if you want to

compliant with 8%, we can do that.

We've said that throughout.

We said it on appeal.

We said it at the trial court.

You want 8%, we will do it.

And we conceded to comply with what they wanted was 8%,

not to comply with the regulations.

And even if we said it, this court has often said that

I've been wrong on the law.

And if you look at the regulations yourself and see it,

the town who drafted it knows the distinction between what a driveway

is and what a road is and what a street is.

And they make that distinction in their regulations as laid out

in their brief.

So can you clarify the application that was voted on by the

planning board was an application for 10% grade?

Is that right?

That's not correct.

Initially it was 8%.

Well, at the time it was voted on, had it been amended to be 10%?

Yes, at the request of the planning board to try and comply with

their concerns about blasting.

Wasn't there an interim plan at 8% that also had reduced the

blasting?

Like there was a first plan at 8%, there was an effort to

reduce blasting and still maintain the 8% and then the 10%.

Yes, Your Honor.

The way that it worked out, the fully compliant plan that

met the regulations went through the process.

There were concerns about blasting.

Blasting is pretty common in New Hampshire.

They do it a lot and they do it a lot in Wyndham and they have

blasting regulations that are not administered by the planning

board, done by the board of selection and the deputy chief.

So initially this applicant proposed 58,000 yards of removal.

Contrast that with the metacraft of the original developer,

150,000.

Initially the engineer said, look it, we can reduce that blasting

because I can hammer it.

More expensive, a little bit more noise that we can do it

without blasting.

So that reduced it down from 50 something to approximately

38,000 yards, a significant reduction.

So there was a plan before the planning board with less

blasting maintaining the 8%?

That's correct and that was for the pad at the front.

The third plan after there was more concern about it that said

look it, let's go to a 10% grade.

Now we talk about 8% and 10% and when you look at the

difference in grade, the 2% grade for a private drive,

it's not a lot.

When you look at that and if you drive around and if you

look there's a lot of folks around you that have drive

ways that are excessive 10% grade even though that

it's New Hampshire.

So at the end they got it down to 19,000.

And that was to limit the blasting to a remote section

of the site for the detention pond away from the houses

and a little bit of the drive going into the site.

So they did a remarkable job and the applicant said

I don't care how you want it, if you want to comply

at 8% we'll do it at 8% but we're going to have

38,000 yards we've got to blast.

And we're going to do it according to the regulations

and we're going to post all the security that you need

just like all these other people that have been

blasting in Wyndham prior to 2018 and since 2018.

We're going to follow it.

So the blasting permit would have been obtained from

the selectmen.

That's correct.

Not the planning board.

From the selectmen.

So why didn't your client proceed with the 8%

and then go to the board of selectmen to see

if you could get a blasting permit?

Well the selectmen sent their representative,

the fire chief who testified in the record

saying this can be done safely.

And that's not something you would get until you had

your site plan approval.

And then you have to follow the ordinance.

So that's not something that they would do.

But throughout this case, even after this remand

and after the trial court's decision,

the flag has always been waving we'll do it at 8%.

And the words that I think a lawyer that comes here

hates to see in the opinions is,

you know, the appeal's argument was flawed

or misplaced or their reasoning was not correct.

I think this court in the trial court's reasoning

that they could remand and would get a full

and fair opportunity to address whatever concerns we had

was clearly flawed or misplaced.

What happened on remand, it went back to the planning board

and contrary to Judge Atorri's statement in the record

where he says, we can go back to the planning board

and they can have a discussion about what the concerns are

and PPI will have a fair opportunity to address it.

PPI wasn't allowed to speak.

Going on remand, there was a prepared speech

that was written by one member

which listed a whole host of reasons,

noise and groundwater that were not the subject of concerns

over the seven meetings that took place on this

and not a concern of any of the consulting engineers

that the applicant was required to pay

and do an analysis.

So we said in one of these documents

that so sending us back to the lion's den

is a waste of time and money

and I will say my argument at that time was on point

because that's what's happened.

So in this case I'm asking you to do two things.

One, I would like you to reverse the decision of the planning board

and say PPI can go forward with their development

provided they maintain an 8% grade

and they follow the blasting ordinance

and post all the applicable security.

And because the world has changed in development since 2018

the feasibility of this project is very different today

than it was in 2018, 19 or 20.

Court can take notice that interest rates

have nearly tripled in the commercial spectrum.

Construction cost is through the roof.

But nevertheless that's our ask.

The second ask which I think is a more important

and pressing ask for us is the inverse condemnation.

If it wasn't right before

based on the last decision of the planning board

it's right now.

On your first point where would we have the authority

to impose 8% as the grades say

it should be approved at 8%?

What's the basis for us deciding 8% is right?

That's what the town has said all along.

In their minutes of their meeting

we want an 8% grade.

You have the fire chief who said even at 10%

this is workable.

The fire chief with the big trucks

he's got big things to turn around.

He was safe at 10%.

The only thing that they relied on was a little memo

from a police chief that's in the record

talks about a few things.

Make the grade at 8%.

The police chief never approved 10% right?

No, he never approved 10%.

He never did anything other than send that memo.

We never heard from him.

The engineer in the record says during the process

the give and take that the engineers do

he never saw that memo.

We'll leave that surfaced after the fact.

Do you agree that at some percent

a driveway can be so steep

as to preclude development

or to base a denial on?

At some point, yes, I think it can.

It's not 10% and it's certainly not 8%.

And the best evidence of that

is the car's property cited in the record

which is directly adjacent

on ledge road up the same slope

with big heavy industrial trucks.

And how is it that we're supposed

to substitute our judgment

for the planning board or the trial court

as to the appropriateness of 10%

or 12% or 14% or 8%?

Because I think you're the final stop

when it comes to the law in New Hampshire.

Planning board has a right to review

plans according to their regulations.

If their regulations are 8%,

maybe you don't dictate it's 8%,

but not to exceed 8%

or consistent with the regulations.

But I think you certainly have the authority

to say the decision was unreasonable

to deny this

based on an 8% grade.

For purposes of inverse condemnation,

the case is right,

the claim is right

because the planning board

has reached an endpoint?

Well, when you look at the other cases

that are cited in our brief,

clearly this record is complete

where somebody could review this

to determine whether the zoning,

whether on its face or as applied,

it results in a taking of property.

The evidence of that,

Chairman Carpenter,

after the denial kind of chuckled

and we raised that and said,

why don't we invite him to the next meeting

and make arrangements for him to donate his property

after seven months

and hundreds of thousands in cost?

So someone looking at this...

So it's right because it's futile going forward?

The rightness doctrine, right?

You have to have a full record to contemplate it.

And I think you probably should deviate from that.

People talk about land use

and properties and costs being so high.

The big part of it is the soft costs

and you have a growing number of people

that gravitate to these boards,

either by appointment or election,

on an anti-development platform.

And guess what? There's no consequence.

Whether they ignore the rules or apply them,

so what?

Well, can't they be voted out?

They can be, but when you have the majority

of the people that are already in town,

they're more than happy to put the moat

around their community so people can't develop.

What are the specific

regulations or zoning ordinance provisions

that you claim make this an unconstitutional taking?

I believe that the decisions of the planning board

and interpretation of their regulations

make this property undevelopable.

They don't want blasting and they won't let you blast

and they won't let you build to an 8% grade,

which is at their regulations.

So I know the town has said,

well, we haven't challenged anything.

No need to challenge it because we're willing to comply

and we've said that all along.

This is the decision-making of a board

that's taking what we believe is the regulations

and using them to result in a taking of property.

Mr. Cronin.

Oh, go ahead.

Is it a temporary or permanent taking?

It's both.

If there were to be a way to put that 8% plan

back before the board and get it approved,

then it's just the passage of time.

Perhaps.

And it's the feasibility, too.

So, and getting it back before the board,

the board knows that the 8% has been before them

a number of times and they're going to come up

with other reasons.

It's an effort in futility.

But I believe that if this case isn't right

or isn't proper for us to explore

an inverse condemnation case,

no case will be right for it.

Perhaps we'll take that theory off the dock

and say there's never going to be a case

in which that can happen.

Mr. Cronin, didn't the,

this is a 45-acre piece in Wyndham

piece of property that was bought for $500,000.

Didn't the purchase price of $500,000

isn't that dramatically reduced to reflect

the difficulty or perhaps the impossibility

of development?

I would assume that a lot of that acreage

is not being touched,

in particular around the perimeter near the houses.

So it's a small area that's being developed.

Like any site when you look at 45 acres,

if you have 40 acres of wetland,

the price is going to be respectful,

adjusted accordingly.

But I will say,

$500,000 is not a price for undevelopable land.

You're looking at $1,000 an acre

for undeveloped land that you can't develop.

So there was an expectation and storage use

is about the least intensive in terms of traffic.

No peak hour activity.

Maybe on the weekends you have some folks

and some box trucks.

But the reason that it was selected,

it was allowed by the regulations

and its traffic impacts were relatively small

compared to other potential uses.

Thank you very much.

Mr. Cronin, Attorney Campbell.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Good morning and may it please the Court.

My name is Attorney Bernard Campbell.

I'm here on behalf of the town of Wyndham.

I'm going to start first with the takings claim.

I mean, there are two issues in this case.

There's the upholding of the denial of a site plan

and then there's the takings claim.

In this case, I would respectfully submit

that the takings claim is not premature.

It's not existent.

Taking cases, this Court, beginning with borough and keen,

nearly all relate to a regulation

that is targeted to a specific parcel of land,

as it was in the case of the boroughs case,

where the city rezoned the area

after the application came in.

It was an arbitrary and unreasonable restriction

that was enacted.

Either they target a specific case

or in the case of, let's say, the Hill Grant

versus Kearsage Lighting District,

an area based on so many feet above elevation sea level.

Frankly, most of the takings cases

or alleged takings cases that have come before you

have related to DOT type issues

in terms of a highway layout

that targets a specific property.

The plaintiff in this case has failed to identify

any specific regulation at issue in this case

that constitutes an arbitrary or unreasonable restriction.

But there's also a basis for a takings claim

that a regulation which is perfectly proper

is applied in such a way

to deny the reasonable use of property.

Well, Your Honor, that would require this Court,

I think, to reverse two previous precedents

that you've previously submitted.

First of all, in the Smith versus Wolf Borough case

at 136, New Hampshire 337,

which did not end up getting cited in our brief,

but the other Wolf Borough case

is the Dumont versus Wolf Borough case

that is cited in our brief.

On two occasions, this Court has said,

an error by the planning board

in interpreting an otherwise correct

or reasonable restriction

does not result in a taking.

Well, there's a difference between an error

and a program of trying to find obstacles,

applying the ordinance in such a way

that even though the use is permitted

and it meets all the site plan regulations,

there's still going to be a basis for denial.

So there's a difference between making an error

and looking for an excuse.

Well, and I would submit, Your Honor,

there's a difference between assessing the planning board,

whether it's attorney's fees or costs or whatever,

and then tagging the municipality

with a takings bill to take some land.

In this case, the plaintiff has argued

that the planning board members

have some sort of bias

against the approval of this project.

First of all, when we go back

to the planning board's denial in this case,

that denial was entirely reasonable.

So that's really not on the table here in this case.

Which denial was reasonable?

The denial of the site plan

based on the excessive grade of the access point.

But they had a plan before them

that had 8% grade and reduced plastic.

But that never came to a final vote, Your Honor.

So we don't know what the planning board was going to do.

Because they directed it in a different direction.

Well, I think if you review the record,

I don't find any...

contrary to what I thought I heard,

I don't see anything in the record

where the planning board said,

change your grade to 10% and reduce the plastic.

I don't see that.

I don't think you'll find that.

I don't think the planning board ever suggested

that the grade go above 8%.

They knew it shouldn't go above 8%

because the police department and the police chief

who's responsible for the public safety

in the town of Wingham

had made it clear his belief

that it should not exceed 8%.

So if that 8% plan

with the 38,000...

with the 38,000 area

for blasting, right,

if that were submitted back before the planning board,

which the town has said

they can bring the plan back

and we'll look at it in good faith,

that meets all the requirements.

And then that plan should be approved

if it meets all the requirements.

And the planning board

determines that

the issue with the blasting, Your Honor,

and Attorney Cronin

made some reference to it.

There is a back history on this parcel.

It's not like we're blasting out of Virgin Land.

There is a large back history.

Someone did a bad job before.

And if you read the minutes

of some of the planning board meetings near the end,

specifically the last one having to do

when Placer came in,

the questions were,

will what you want to do at this site

aggravate or disturb

something that may still be hidden in the ground

or may affect something

that or trigger something related to

the past history?

So this is admittedly a very unique site

in terms of that issue.

And that was thoroughly vetted

by different experts, etc.

So I guess my thought

is given that there was no opportunity

to discuss this

when it was remanded before,

how do we know that

a remand now on that 8% plan

wouldn't suffer the same fate?

Well, first of all, I suppose it depends

on how you were your remand order.

And the second issue is just to be clear,

when you remanded the case previously,

you made it clear to the town

that the hearing process was over

and you wanted an expeditious

your order

specifically recognized

that the hearing process had ended,

the evidence was in,

and that we, the town planning board

should reach a final decision.

So it came back,

we had one meeting

where we redeliberated

in accordance with your remand,

we didn't allow any additional evidence

because the record was closed

and they voted on it

and they voted as they did

with regard to

denying the site plan

based on the grade.

And as was recognized by Justice Bassett,

there are at least four times

in the hearing transcript

where Attorney Cronin

on behalf of the client, plaintiff's council

essentially admitted

that the road grade

failed to meet

the regulation

and whether or not in retrospect

he can argue that that regulation

doesn't actually apply

to this case.

I think he's a stop to deny it

based on the representations,

not only in the certified record,

but in the planning board's job

to apply the regulation

as it is intended to be.

And I think they did

in this case, they said

that 10%, when that,

as you see in the certified record,

that change came very late in the process.

In fact, I'm not even sure

that the police department ever saw it

when it came back the last time.

The fire department did.

The fire department reexamined the question

and they said, well,

that's, and as I noted

in our arguments before,

that's the fire department,

their professionals, they drive that equipment.

This is a proposed self storage facility.

People are going to take their pickup trucks

and their box trucks

and their rented home depot trucks

and they're going to drive up this hill

and then they're going to come back down that hill

and we're not, these aren't professionals

who are driving

and so the police chief was clearly

within what I think is a reasonable assumption

that this grade should not be too great

because this is a self storage facility,

there's going to be traffic coming down there

with basically people

who are not skilled

in operating a piece of equipment

or potentially not skilled

in operating a piece of equipment

and we should maximize the public safety

and that is that the 8% grade

should be not exceeded

and that's clear, I think that was in the record

in the final

re-deliberation hearing

it was pointed out that this was brought up

at what's called a TRC, you know a TRC

Technical Review Committee

when the police chief was involved

and so that grade was established

and the maximum was established

and the applicant adhered

to it up until nearly

the very end

and then near the very end they said

well, they threw out this idea

let's increase the grade to 10

so that we can reduce the blast thing

and as I said, there's nothing in the record

that the planning board ever thought

that that was a good trade-off

and in fact, they denied it

based on the fact that it was a bad trade-off

and they would not go along with it

Judge Entore

in his ruling

looked at that and said

the planning board was right

that grade is excessive

that grade poses

a public safety hazard

and the plan was correctly denied

in the various motions for reconsideration

we said

if the applicant comes back

with an 8% grade, that issue

comes off the table

so now we're back to maybe that blasting argument

and then the question is going to be

whether the planning board

when faced with an acceptable grade

faced with whatever

has been developed

in Judge Entore's opinion

whatever has been developed in your remand

or if it is a remand

or I'm hoping for an affirmance

in fact

but you certainly may comment

I'm sure

on other issues

related to the applicant coming back

before the planning board

if that is the case

and all of that guidance will be taken into consideration

by the planning board

if in fact the applicant comes back

and asks for a re-evaluation

of his proposal

Judge Entore did indicate

that there are other options

the comment was

that they are a non-starter

maybe

if now this denial is upheld

maybe there will be

a little more serious conversation

about that potential

or otherwise continue to work

on the issue of

satisfying the

concerns about the blasting

and going ahead and blasting up

the 8% grade

can you just clarify for me

what the planning board were to get this back

and approve

proposal with an 8% grade

that involves some blasting

the PPI would still

have to go to the

selectmen for a blasting permit

I think that's actually been delegated

to the fire department to be honest

I think you see

in the last hearing before

the first denial

there's a deputy chief

deputy fire chief

actually the administrator of that permit process

but it's not a planning board decision

no it is not a plan

the permit itself

the requirements under that permit

the oversight of that permit

originate out of the fire department

the assistant chief

who administers that program

and I think the record is clear on that

how would it work

if we were to do what Mr. Cronin

asked and reverse and say

actually this

proposal should go ahead

what about the

butters and the other concerned

parties in town that

had no reason to appeal because

the application was

denied

what would happen to their

rights

this court

occasionally reverses

land use decisions

and the butters and anybody who's

interested in that application need to understand

that this court can reverse a decision

or affirm in this case

reverse our denial

and I think the butters

had their

the butters had their due process

opportunity to show up at the hearing

which they did the record is replete

with comments from the butters

if you in your wisdom

were to overturn the denial

finding that

the

10% was not

unreasonable and that the planning board's

decision on that case

now keep in mind, Judge Atore

in his opinion said

he didn't need to get to the blasting issue

because he was going to focus strictly on the

question of the road grade

and basically he never went to the

issue of the blasting to speak of

he

focused on the road grade

he cited the propositions

that this court has previously established

that says if any one of the basis

was accurate

then the plan should be

the denial should be affirmed

so the

trial court never really explored

the issue of the blasting

as a determining factor

but if this court should overturn

Judge Atore's ruling

I'm not sure the butters

have any other recourse

certainly they're not going to be happy but

there were three bases for the planning board decision

is that right

and the trial court only

addressed the 10% grade issue

there was an issue about the

compliance

with 502

relative to

safety

but I think as a practical matter

those got rolled up into basically

it's the road grade

or it's the blasting

it had to do with proposed blasting

and potential contamination of ground and surface water

that's why I said

you didn't address that

correct

it's sort of the road grade

and the blasting issue

the trial court went on the road grade issue

which I think is appropriate and should be upheld

because it was essentially conceded

to begin with

and so

if that is upheld

the applicant will have

the property owner will have the decision to make

to come back with

and resubmit their 8% grade

blasting is associated with that

and push that forward to a decision

and then if that decision is adverse

ostensibly they can appeal

again

the reasonableness of that decision

but going back

to the first point where I was

when the argument began

again those

wrongful decisions if they are in fact

wrongful decisions in this case

that was the correct decision

but if it in fact is a wrongful decision

of an otherwise

reasonable regulation

then this

court has previously circumcised that issue

to say that is on the

board that's making the error

that is not on the community to tag them

with a taking issue

if the regulation isn't

unreasonable we can't find

a basis to say that there was a taking

I'm submitted your honor

thank you attorney Campbell

attorney Cronin

what I would like to say is

one with respect to the remand order

we

don't have a preference

either do it 10% with 19,000

of blasting or do 8%

with 30 something

yards of blasting either way

if they want it to be 8%

we can do it 8% like a lot of other people

do in Wyndham

just want to read a passage it's from

page 48 of our appendix

this is a segment of

the previous order

on his remand

and making reference to our concerns

about going to the lion's den

drawing on the lengthy proceedings

that have already occurred

the board will presumably be in a position

to quickly and clearly identify

the remaining areas of concern

so that PPI

has a full and fair opportunity

to address same in the event that

PPI pursues this approach

that's the 8% approach

page 9 of the decision

that never happened

admittedly

they have their hearing

sure the public hearing is closed

no more evidence from the public

but the good faith and fear dealing

of the planning board don't even have an opportunity

to have the discussion that we're having today

and the other issues

in the post memo

you set up the straw man that we can never satisfy

can you guarantee that there'll be no impact

to the groundwater from blasting

that's the state of New Hampshire

no one can guarantee that

that's why the regulations have the safeguards

and the security in them

the guarantee there'll be no impact

to surrounding houses

we can't guarantee that

no one can

the board hired their own expert

and brought them in

and they didn't like what he had to say

so it's my belief that if we go back

it's going to be a whole host of other reasons

what do we do about the fact

that the legislation and juggitory addressed only

one

I think

any one of them could have supported a denial

they're all the same

and I think if you read his order in context

well the second and third are all about

blasting and potential

contamination of groundwater and surface water

and that's not what

you're here arguing about

and that's not a planning board concern

the board of selectmen adopted the

blasting ordinance

and we're already to enforce it

to the deputy fire chief Morgan

he's in the record testifying

that this can be done safely

under the ordinance

so in our view that's a non-issue

two issues were grade

and blasting

shallower your grade the more blasting

higher your grade the less blasting

we can do it either way

I thank you for your time and attention

thank you very much council

case submitted
