This is case 2022-0452, John Doe v. Hanover Police Department at all.

Good morning for the record. This is Hans Marconius disqualified on this case.

Attorney Badon, I understand you reserved two minutes.

Thank you. Good morning. If it pleases the court, my name is Mark Baldwin and I'm representing the appellant in this matter.

Another John Doe, not the same one as before.

And now this is another one of those EES cases that we'll be discussing.

And I'm afraid to say, probably, Attorney Kropsky might have stung a little bit of my thunder when he went before me.

Well, you can take your two minutes and sit down.

Well, my name's all 15 minutes, sir, but we'll see where it goes.

Because I am a retired law enforcement officer. I retired after 22 years of experience.

And for most of that time, I didn't even know what a lawyer list was, or an EES was.

It wasn't until after 2010 when I started to become a little more involved in the union that I started to learn what that was.

And so in this particular case that you have before you're here in the court today,

I'm going to talk a little bit about, and I'm going to be very brief because I think Attorney Kropsky touched on this quite a bit in the last case,

about the term potentially as stated in RSA 10513D.

As you know, as it was argued, potentially the D.J. seems to take a very broad interpretation of what that term means.

I don't think potential is that well. I don't think that that's what the legislature intended.

The intention of the legislation when 10513D came into effect, kind of a two-prong thing.

It was to give notice that you were on the list and to make sure you had some type of due process with the placement on the list.

And the second aspect of that obviously was the public aspect, making the list public.

And Attorney Kropsky gave you the definition of a law's dictionary of what potential is.

And he said they actually probably expected to come in and give some examples.

And it says example is that the future product of grain or trees already planted or the success of future installments or payments on economy.

So I would say that potential isn't as broad as the D.J. would explain or would claim.

I think it's a little more narrow to include what's reasonable and what's probably going to come into existence up here.

That is, if you adopt that approach, in any individual case, the constitutional obligation of a prosecutor may exceed ever potentially exculpatory means.

Is that your position?

Yes, and I think the statutes are set up, I think, in order to cover all aspects of what we've been talking about here.

If they think the world is down, you're looking at a balancing act right between the constitutional rights of the defendant versus the property rights of a good name in the police officer.

You're trying to make that balance.

And I think I would say that 105 does do a pretty good job in doing that when you take it as a whole.

That's Justice Dunn noted at the end of 105-13-D.

It says that this does not absolve a prosecutor from doing due diligence.

And what I mean by that, I'm going to take that stuff further and I'm going to bring in 105-13-D as in Boston, which takes those individual cases on.

So I am the prosecutor, yet to lay some potentially exculpatory outends.

But I still need to do my due diligence and check on my police witnesses to make sure that they have nothing else in their files.

If there is something that may be potentially that case, then I can point B and have the case.

So the statute of the whole does not stand for impeachment purposes.

Is there a consideration that the trial court should make?

And I think it is. And this is why the passage of time.

Yeah, but under 13-D, 2-E, the legislature indicates that an officer's name shall be permanently listed on the list.

So doesn't that undermine your argument if somebody is going to be listed permanently?

Without regard to times, is stillness any longer an issue?

I think it should be still.

And the reason I say that is because I think that the constitutional magnitude of a person's property interests.

Again, I would say 105-13-D says that the attorney general's office may voluntarily keep this list for as long as they want it.

They can discontinue it in the future.

And I know it also says a list of current and former police officers.

But I think, as the old adage says, at what point do you stop pulling a transgression against someone?

You know, in our criminal justice system, we look at things such as the passage of time people do their debt to society,

and then they are considered rehabilitated and move on.

Our system also counts so that once a person has done their debt to society and has been rehabilitated,

we take that stigma off them so that we can allow them to move.

That might agree with you, but isn't that an argument to be made to the legislature?

It may, but I still think, again, because it's an evidentiary issue and because of the property right being a constitutional magnitude,

I think this court could provide some direction to that.

With, you know, like I said, when you take a look at things such as the rules of evidence,

when they look at certain things under 608 and 609, specifically speaking to, you know,

they look at how near or remote it is to this particular case also,

and I know which I'm about sometimes criminal convictions with the 10-year rule.

But I think that also applies here.

The more time that you have, the less provident and materialist becomes

in the particulars that you have out of the address, either in the in-camera review

or when the witnesses on stand, subject to examination.

I mean, isn't that the way you deal with staleness?

Well, I think you can and I think the prosecutor can address all that because at the end of the day,

again, these are just evidentiary issues as to, you know, what are we given,

the weight of the evidence that's coming in, the fact finder, whether it's a jury or a judge.

But I think where the complication comes in here and all this, you know,

strife is about is the public aspect of this person's name being out in the public

as having either Attorney King had mentioned there are things that they'll list next to a name

depending on the nation's two police officers that retire or happen to leave the job and move on and

do something else. Simple Google of someone's name, you can get a plethora of information,

this pops up. There's a science said that if you get a second date, it's stupid to this

situation that needs to be here. There should be some balance and some thought before we put

somebody on that list, especially as it is a public list. So what's the importance here?

Doe's name was removed or the materials were removed in 2008 and then nothing,

nothing came up and then in 2021 he's placed on the list. So this was an interesting case in a

sense that his misconduct occurred in 2003. He took the hit. He did what he did wasn't wrong

and if he did that today, I would say what would be exculpatory today and he should be on the list

today. But I'm saying because you're over the list against this guy, he's not retired,

he's not a police officer anymore. So that's a good answer to your question. In 2003 he had the

misconduct. According to the CDF, he could have that stuff removed in 2008 after five years

had gone by. I provide he had no more misconduct, which he did. He petitioned the

town manager, the town manager removed that discipline from his file. Apparently he sealed

it into an envelope but stuck it in the town's vault in town hall. It could have been destroyed.

It just went into a file. It could have been destroyed as well. It was also my understanding

in 2003 and 2000 and go switch over to these chiefs. And that's why we're here today.

This has been a fact that nobody knew about. But you're not arguing there's a due process

violation in that. I'm not arguing there's a due process violation, no.

He did what he did. I'm just saying that the passage of time should be given some consideration.

But there's no due process claim about his placement again on the list without his knowledge,

right? Because he was notified in two seconds that he was going on the list.

By the chief? By the chief, yeah. And he even had hearing in front of the chief.

And the chief still recommended his name to go to the EES, to the attorney's office.

Can I just ask that I want to make sure I fully understand your position as stated on page

23 of your brief, the term potentially exculpatory, should be read narrowly to identify those

officers in which it is more probable or not that the information would be material to guilt

or innocence in a majority of cases. Is that the standard you're asking us to adopt?

So the standard I would actually adopt is pretty much that, you know,

the material should be material to guilt or innocence or for impeachment purposes.

And reasonably and probably expected to be admissible in a significant number of cases.

We have a lot of individuals in a lot of these cases you're having this week

that are on these from ages ago that the courts have regularly used and said,

yeah, no, this is exculpatory for this particular case.

So they're constantly being reviewed and constantly being told,

why are we keeping this person's name on the list?

10513B should be sufficient for those positions when a prosecutor goes to prosecute a case.

And not to mention too, you know, at some point these

you know, police officers retire and they move on.

And again, obtaining employment becomes difficult as well.

I know a lot of people that call me up and say they're concerned about their placement on the EES

and how that might affect future employment in the private sector as well.

So there is a significant property interest.

And again, I'm just asking that the court provides some guidance as to what gets you on

this list and also consider maybe the passage of time as well.

You know, it may become off the list.

So if we agree and we establish a standard, but what's your remedy?

Do we remand or do we make the decision to NOVO?

I think in this matter, if you make the decision, I think it depends on what you,

if you're going on 10 years, for example, is no longer presumably

you know, probative material and value for this.

I know you can just make a decision here from the bench.

If you do adopt a new standard, I think that that matter probably it should be remanded

back for the court to take that standard and then approach it from that point of view.

And with that, if there's no other questions.

Well, I'll ask about due process.

Do you think the due process assessment is what occurred?

We should be looking to what occurred in 2003 in this case,

or should we look at what happened when the issue came back up in 2021?

Due process argument in this particular case, but in some of the other cases.

I think due process is an issue because of your going on time.

And what you try to do is you try to hold them to today's standard.

And what I mean, if you have a decision in 2011,

I make a decision not to appeal my discipline.

I'm making that based on the information I have now,

not the information that may develop in the future.

So the information is, it's not that it becomes public,

that I might just, you know, choose not to file a new policy on this list.

I would have gone forward with that.

Thank you, Attorney Bono.

Thank you.

Attorney King.

Jessica King on behalf of the New Hampshire Department of Justice again.

I'm here with me is Attorney Matt Burroughs on behalf of the Town of Hanover.

He has graciously seated his time to me.

I will be arguing for 15 minutes to be required.

Again, we're looking at a straightforward question of law,

whether petition or forging his doctor's signature on a medical clearance form

in order to obtain an additional stipend is potentially

exculpatory within the meeting of RSA 10513D.

Such a fact never becomes stale.

It never becomes stale.

I think I agree with your honors that the statute, as Justice Dunnevin pointed out,

says permanently that is a legislative mandate that stale is not consideration.

Permanent.

That means the officer is there for life.

And yes, I agree with you, Justice McDonald.

This can be addressed via admissibility or rehab on the stand.

It still is not a factor when determining whether something is potentially exculpatory.

Potentially exculpatory is broad.

Necessarily has to be broad.

It encompasses more than exculpatory.

It is what is possibly exculpatory.

It's a very low standard.

It's a very broad standard because it's a pool that helps prosecutors

maintain and meet their constitutional obligations.

And I don't think there's a question that an officer forging a signature

is potentially exculpatory.

It goes to credibility and it goes to potentially impeachment evidence.

In your definition, though, how do we balance or account for the officer's property interest?

So the property interest, I would prefer that there's no balancing here.

Enveal what this court said is that the state can encroach on reputational interest.

That is a property interest, but as long as the state gives the officer a due process,

gives them an adequate procedural avenue,

then the state can't encroach on that property interest.

It's just like the state can encroach and deprive somebody of a liberty interest

as long as there's due process.

And so I would posit that there is no balancing test here.

It is whether there is due process, whether the procedure is correct.

And here there is no challenge to the procedure.

But there seems to me to be a problem.

I mean, staleness and due process and permanency on the list seem to be interrelated

in such a fashion that back in the day, you might not have fought so hard

because you didn't understand the consequences and you didn't know it would be permanent.

So it would seem that due process would require that now you get to, at a minimum,

this thing that happened 20 years ago, you have an opportunity to

adjudicate that issue when everybody understands the stakes.

Yes, Your Honor.

I agree that the due process piece can be maybe a little squishy.

It really comes down to fundamental fairness

and that can be kind of different standards depending on the facts before you.

But that's what the court can do.

10513D allows a court to assess whether due process was given back then.

It is given, the due process given now is whether the person is appropriate.

And so if the court finds that the due process piece is not adequate,

it was the person didn't have adequate.

No is that the person didn't know that they were fighting for to keep their name off the list.

The court can help fashion a remand order to go back and that's what the statute requires.

A remand back to the law enforcement agency to address that piece, address the due process piece.

In your view, the statute doesn't require the trial court to provide a de novo review

if due process has been afforded.

Correct. The trial court does not do de novo review.

They review whether the process is correct and if the process is not, it gets remanded back.

And they would make a legal determination if the conduct was potentially excultatory.

So what do we do with the language in section 3D2 of court issues in order

finding that the law enforcement agency and recommending that the officer be placed on the list.

Isn't that, doesn't that suggest it's a de novo review of circumstances that existed?

I think the court could probably take in some evidence of what had existed at the time.

I don't think they would do a de novo review of what the process was given

and redo the investigation, redo that process.

It could take in evidence to examine whether that process was done correctly.

And whether they got the name wrong or the two officers have been the officer on the list.

I think.

So you don't think that language authorizes a trial court to say,

yes, it occurred 20 years ago.

He apologized for it.

It's truthful.

Therefore, I don't think the trial court can make that determination.

You're saying under the statute.

I don't think so.

Court would have to look at, make a determination on whether the conduct was potentially exculpatory

and make a determination on that basis.

But that's the fact.

That's on that subparagraph one.

So what does subparagraph two mean?

Yeah.

And so again, I think subparagraph two would really go towards a mistake.

Did the agency make a mistake when they placed the person on the list, the officer on the list?

Did they get the name wrong?

Did they get the date of birth?

Did they get the conduct wrong?

This list was not maintaining long time.

Officers were placed on the list in kind of a haphazard manner.

And so this is a chance to reexamine whether that placement was an actual mistake.

Given the fact that he took advantage of the policy at the time that he could get the discipline

taken out of his personnel file after five years.

So maybe that's what the trial court should have looked at.

Whether that policy that the town had at that point in time removing the discipline from his

file, whether that warranted being identified on the list.

Yeah, the due process piece is not before the court today.

But it's sort of taken that sort of information making its assessment.

Whether the due process piece was met, whether the potentially expulptory piece was met.

I do want to get back to that piece though.

Because I think that it's close to the point that was made in the prior case

that the prosecutors have an independent duty to evaluate their own case.

This case shows the folly a conduct always be discoverable in a personnel file

from this officer's personnel file.

There's no way for a prosecutor after those five years to go into that officer's personnel file

to discover it nor could a defendant go into that personnel file and discover it.

The only way to discover it would be to, if it was disclosed by the police officer.

Is if it was disclosed by the police officer.

And it is not a developmental possibility that a police officer would not disclose that

because it's not in their personnel file.

Officer Doe in this case wants the court to say that potentially equals probably.

That's in the fight of Doe's own definition of expulptory.

That includes, there's a lovely phrase in Helen's brief, the capacity for becoming actual

to me that is possibly potentially capacity to be a KNB expulptory.

We have, I would suggest the standard that this can be defined as favorable evidence.

We have a plethora of case law to help a prosecutor know what the evidence is.

That's the duty to disclose what is favorable evidence.

And we have the case law in place to determine what favorable evidence is.

But that's the prosecutor's duty to disclose, which isn't necessarily what is on the EEF.

Is that fair to say?

Correct. But at the very least, that is what the prosecutor must disclose.

Now, could the EES be broader than that?

This court could make it broader than that.

But at the very least, it needs to include what the prosecutor needs to disclose to be an effective tool.

It can be an effective tool if it is a core of disclosable information that is maybe 50%

of what ultimately might prove material to a trial court.

That's still a useful tool.

It's not as useful as a tool that has a hundred percent.

We never wanted to get to a hundred percent.

But it is going to let this was implemented to lessen the burden on county prosecutors.

They have a high case law.

It helps them identify where they need to spend the extra time.

And they all have the duty to go and track down that information.

But this helps them in achieving those constitutional obligations.

What are the consequences of the officer's placement on the list in 2021,

given that significant period of time where this issue was not disclosed in any of his prosecutions?

Yeah, I think each prosecutor would have to analyze their own cases and make a determination

in each case whether that's going to have an impact on their cases.

The disclosure in 2021, though, is going to be governed by RSA 10513D.

And so to any extent, the officer needs process for that placement.

That process is currently happening right now.

They are getting process about their placement.

They're having a neutral fact finder look at the facts of the case and decide was that placement appropriate.

But to any extent, we have to go back to the criminal cases.

That's a discretionary, maybe not discretionary, it might be two people more.

But that is an obligation on the prosecutor to reexamine their cases,

determine if each case has a brady obligation.

Well, if the person is on the EES and it's automatic,

therefore there would have to be a disclosure in every case in which the

officer testified resulting in a conviction.

If the officer testified, I know I would want to disclose if I were a prosecutor.

But I think a prosecutor can take a disclosure and admissibility.

Admissibility is based on the case-by-case facts.

The excavatory nature is based on each case and each fact.

What is on the EES is something that is potentially excavatory.

And so I'm not saying that what is on the EES will be excavatory in each and every case.

A prosecutor will have to make that decision.

It's just like now if there's conduct in a police personnel file,

it's handed over to the court and the court can make the decision on whether there is a

disclosure obligation to the defendant.

It's not going to be disclosed to every single judge.

So here in this case with Officer Doe say his name remains on the EES list,

there's a case, and then it's still up to the trial court.

The trial court could easily say, whoa, this is 20 years old.

This is actually nothing that needs to be disclosed, right?

Correct, yeah, and that happens.

And you don't have a problem with that, but it's inappropriate to take that

more than 10 years into account in terms of whether somebody gets on the list.

Correct, correct.

I have no problem with the court saying that this is stale,

that this is not going to the officer's credibility,

because it's a fact intensive case by case determination.

And so the judge is looking at what evidence is going to come in.

The judge is looking at the facts in the case, and they're making that determination.

But when we're looking at the EES and what who gets placed on the EES,

it's what's potentially exculptatory, what is an exculptory in fact in each case.

And so necessarily that's going to be broader than the standard for exculptory in a particular case.

The great interest in placing on the lower list officers whose confidential

personnel files may contain exculptory evidence, those were the words of this report in 2016.

So here where the conduct is so clearly exculptory, where the legislature has said that

officers placed permanently on the list, the department deposits that the officer

must be remaining on the list to recognize the robust protections of the criminal defendants'

right to exculptory information that's enshrined in the constitution.

In 2016, we were talking about a public document.

So the reputational interest here is far greater and more significant than it was in 2016.

It could be. And I think, again, that's where the due process piece comes in.

And that's not a question in this case. It's not challenged in this case.

But the due process is protected, or the reputational interest is protected by the due process.

As a practical matter, there's something to prevent any county or municipality or city from

essentially doing what they always used to do, maintaining their own

or a list because they have reached a different conclusion about information,

about whether somebody's on, regardless of whether somebody's on the AG's list, right?

I would agree that the county attorney could maintain a separate list.

However, under this court's prior decisions, I think that list would also be public.

Thank you, Attorney King.

Thank you.

Attorney Bowden, reserve two minutes.

Thank you.

The AG's office would ask you to take a very broad look at potential.

And I think take a very broad look at what potential means.

I don't think that was the intent of the legislature to begin with.

But second, I think that leaves a lot of officers who have had some minor misconduct in their

and their past that leaves them scarred with the stigma that they're on this list.

So I think when you look at this, keep in mind some fundamental fairness as well, too, here.

He, Mr. Dowell, in this particular case, like I said, young officer does something stupid in

2003. I'm not saying it wasn't something that would be used back then.

But he has it removed from his file. He goes through his career in 2013 and would have come off

the Grafton County list because it was pursuant to the HEAD member at the time.

He continues on his career. He retires in 2015.

He then continues part-time with the department until 2021, which is when he gets notified

of this. So now he's completely retired. He's been out of it since then.

He's not going back to law enforcement. And he wasn't an officer. He was an officer from a small

town, not an officer that was handling homicide investigations or anything of that magnitude.

So keep him on the list after he's retired. He really doesn't serve any purpose. There

aren't going to be any cases that he's going to be called for to be a witness for as a police

officer. So I just ask that the court keep that in mind and keep the timeframe that

we're talking about, you know, over 20 years old in mind here too, and to provide some direction,

you know, in reference to who goes on the EES and how long they stay on that list.

You're not diminishing the constitutional interest of the defendants in cases that

he was a witness in during that period of time when he was not on the list.

No, I'm not. All I'm saying is that, you know, the likelihood of it being a major

case is probably slim to none. You're talking probably most likely misdemeanor of violation

level cases, but I'm not saying that I'm not diminishing their constitutional rights by any means.

Thank you. Thank you. Thank you, Bob. Thank you counsel.

Cases submitted.
