Proceed it, please.

This is case 2020-0222, Dean Strang et al.

versus Christmas Island Resort Condominium Association et al.

Good afternoon, counsel, attorney LaFrance.

I understand you reserved two minutes for rebuttal.

Yes, sir.

Please proceed.

Thank you.

May it please the court.

My name is Jim LaFrance.

I represent the appellants, Dean Strang and his wife,

Audra Lewis.

I'll take questions at any time.

Since Olet be blanchard in 1976, the standard of care

applied to owners of land in New Hampshire

has been a test of reasonable care

under all the circumstances.

Olet also instructed that the foreseeability of the risk

standard was a question for the jury.

The opinion concludes, and it's reasoning, and I'll quote,

surely a jury will have less trouble in applying

a foreseeability of risk standard

in distinguishing the standard of care owed by a storekeeper

to a customer from the standard owed to the neighbor who

takes a shortcut through your backyard

and finally the burglar who climbs in your window.

Like most negligence cases, the facts of this case

and the surrounding circumstances

were unique such that a jury must decide

what is reasonable care under all the circumstances.

In cat, didn't we say that the court still

has a gatekeeping role and that not every one of these issues

goes to the jury?

In what separates this case from ones

where a court can legitimately make a determination

as to whether there's a duty owed?

The case law, I agree with you.

The case law says that the trial court can still

determine the duty of care, but only when

the evidence is so clear that the reasonable persons making

up a jury could reach but one conclusion.

In this case, as a starting point,

there was a disputed issue of material fact

as to the character of the entry of Mr. Strang.

And again, there's several factual issues.

The court relied upon an email that

was sent from the Christmas Island property manager

to the Lakehouse Neighborhood Condo Association's board

president that said, would you please

issue a reminder that Christmas Island is private property?

And what Mr. Strang received was an email notice that said,

this is a reminder, quote, anything over on Christmas Island

is private property.

Is that an email in the record?

You know, I couldn't find it.

For this yesterday, I could not find it either.

And it's not disputed that that is what the email said.

That's what I just quoted.

Anything over on Christmas Island is private property.

I was kind of scratching my head.

How did that not get in the record?

But it's not disputed.

There may be a dispute as to what is meant by that.

But at the end of the day, that's not

the email that the trial court relied on.

It relied on the initial email from Mr. Matthews.

That's right.

Although Mr. Strang never saw that, that email.

He saw the one that said anything over on Christmas Island

is private property.

And of course, the gazebo where he was injured

is just a small strip of land on the mainland.

And to get to all the condominium units of Christmas Island,

the beaches, the docks, all their other amenities,

you have to go across a bridge to get to the island.

And at the end of the bridge is gated access

into and onto Christmas Island.

So to be told that anything over on Christmas Island

is private property, he could reasonably

conclude that they were referring to the island,

particularly when the gazebo on the strip of land,

he was the one maintaining the strip of land

because it's immediately adjacent to his home.

Is the Matthews email materially different?

And it refers simply to Christmas Island as private property.

I mean, are you relying on the words anything over

on Christmas Island?

I think those words do refer to the island

as opposed to the mainland.

That would be a position, the original email exchange

from Mr. Matthews is also just saying

Christmas Island is private property.

Is that referring to the whole association,

including the strip of land or the island,

still perhaps subject to debate?

But the second email that anything over on Christmas

Island email was sent by the Lake House, a Lake House

director, I think, if I understand the record,

also happens to be the co-plan if in the case.

Is that correct?

That's correct.

That was the sent to all the Lake House members.

And again, Mr. Strang, another reason

why he would not think it was pertaining to the gazebo.

He maintained the strip of land, mowed it, and so on.

He would hose down the gazebo, blow out cobwebs.

After he hung the flowers, residents

that have to pass by to go across this small bridge

onto the island thanked him for hanging the flowers

and commented on how lovely they were.

The gazebo, in contrast to the entrance to the island

where there was a gate, the gazebo

had two open entryways, no door or anything.

You could just walk into the gazebo.

So as I understand it, your two clients, Mr. Strang and Ms.

Lewis, they had different levels.

According to you, they had different levels of knowledge

about the original email.

Is that right?

Because Ms. Lewis got the original email.

She got the original email from the, or it was forwarded to her

by the Lake House Board President to her as Secretary

of the Lake House Association.

So the state of the record I gather

is that she had received and had available to her

that original email, whereas Mr. Strang did not.

Is that true?

That's correct.

That is correct.

So we submit that on the character of the entry issue

under the, say, old standard before Olat,

that even that was a disputed issue of material fact

as to what did over on Christmas Island mean.

And whether Mr. Strang was reasonable in thinking

he was not a knowing intruder in going into the gazebo

to water the flowers that he had hung there.

With respect to the standard of care issue,

whether the defense exercised reasonable care

under all the circumstances, there

was substantial evidence in the record

that the gazebo was neglected over a long period of time.

As I indicated, Mr. Strang, he had lived there for two years

before this accident happened.

During that time, he maintained the gazebo.

The evidence from the landscape maintenance contractor

who had worked for Christmas Island Condominium Association

for 13 to 14 years, he had never performed

any maintenance around the gazebo.

The gazebo was old.

It predated these condominium formation.

So the fact that there are no maintenance

by the company in charge of maintaining Christmas Island,

doesn't that undercut your assertion

that there was instructive knowledge of a defect?

I mean, how could Christmas Island possibly

know that there was a defect in the gazebo?

The contract with the Management Association

also provided for regular inspections.

But they'd never inspected the gazebo.

That's right.

So how could there be constructive knowledge one way or another?

I'm not sure if I understand.

Constructive knowledge of the hazard that the gazebo presented.

We assert that a man-made structure, the gazebo,

which is an inviting structure to people in the area that

had a bench inside it that was exposed

to the elements, because otherwise, the gazebo only

had walls that were about halfway, that if you have

a wooden bench in there and it's never been maintained

or inspected, then over time, there's

likely to be deterioration in the structure

and that a person utilizing that bench,

it could collapse and cause injury.

But it seems that your theory is that your client had

been maintaining that gazebo and had

better superior knowledge to anybody else

about the condition of the gazebo.

And as I understand his deposition testimony,

it was that he did not discern that there

was any problem with that bench, and that's

why he felt comfortable stepping up on it.

Is that right?

He did not discern that there was any problem with that bench.

It was three inches thick, and if you look at the photos.

And am I right that it was relatively newly painted

as well?

Kind of hard to say, but if you look at the photos,

on page 189 in the appendix, if you look at those,

it's clearly rotted out from the interior.

But it clearly wasn't clearly rotted out,

acceptable to him, or he wouldn't have stepped on it,

right?

Correct.

And so our position would be that if a proper inspection

or just a maintenance schedule, there was also evidence

that there was no engineering studies ever

done to have an allocation for future maintenance

for the structures in the Christmas Island Condominium

Association.

There was also five months before this happened.

The board members of Christmas Island Association,

as well as the property management company,

did what they called, and I'll quote,

a property-wide inspection of all structures.

They never looked at the gazebo.

And the report that they prepared

had a report with some structural issues, some areas that

needed painting, as well as areas in which there

was wood rot in the condominiums.

Your red light's on.

I'm sorry.

You've reserved time.

Tony, you got an item.

Thank you.

Good afternoon, Your Honor.

Attorney John Knight, on behalf of the defense,

the decision of the lower court we would submit

is supported on two fundamental grounds.

The first issue before the court is whether my client owed

any duty to the plaintiff.

And the second issue is, even if we believe a duty is owed,

whether the accident that occurred

was a foreseeable event that would subject

client to liability.

Why isn't the latter a question for the jury?

Well, the jury gets instructed to do?

Well, the case law and the roulette decision,

I believe, among others, talks about

it is the province of the court to determine

whether a risk of harm is so unforeseeable

that the issue would not go to the jury.

So the question of foreseeability

goes to the issue of duty.

That a party does not owe a duty with regard

to risks or occurrences that are deemed to be unforeseeable.

How could it not be foreseeable that a rotten bench

would break?

Yes.

I would admit that you can see that it is foreseeable

that a rotten bench could break.

And then, so how can it be, how can

the condo association or the owner's association,

in essence, close their eyes to a problem

by doing no inspection for years if it's acknowledged

that a rotten bench could foreseeably cause injuries?

Well, I think taking up on the questions

that were asked of my brother at the end,

we have to look at the state of the evidence.

The state of the evidence was, in the several months

before this accident, the plaintiff himself

was going out to the gazebo on a regular basis,

standing on the bench, which I would submit

is not a foreseeable circumstance.

If we consider the entire sequence of events

that brings us here today for this accident,

the entire sequence is unforeseeable.

But with regard to the condition of the bench,

the plaintiff who was standing on the bench

never observed any sag, never heard any cracking,

nothing about, and I presume if he was,

he would have either alerted someone

or he wouldn't have continued standing on the bench, which

I think we can set a foreseeable event.

Sure, we've seen people stand on benches.

Is it foreseeable that someone who has no right

to be on that property is going to not

withstanding that fact, want to an area

that he has no right to be?

After having been informed of that and what we have,

we don't have conversations with his wife,

but we have the email that he received regarding no right

to be on the private property.

But is it foreseeable that or is there

any evidence that the condition of that bench

was such had our client gone out there to maintain it and check

it, would have noticed that there was any condition that

required maintenance or repair?

His history is the best evidence

that there is no evidence of it.

And he described no sagging, no cracking.

And again, I think if we just look at the nature of his conduct,

he's expected to exercise reasonable care.

He stood up on that bench time after time after time,

which I would respectfully submit

is something he would not do.

There was any suspicion on his part

that there was anything about that bench, any rotting decay,

or anything of the sort that would make it foreseeable

that this injury would occur.

And in that respect, I would suggest that that

brings the case into the realm of there must

be constructive knowledge, as the court noted,

on the actual or constructive notice

on the part of my client to face liability.

That would be some evidence that my client knew or should

have known that that bench was in a condition that

required repair.

Until he had his accident, it was not

known by him or anyone else that it

was in that state of disrepair.

Afterwards, there was a post-mortem autopsy,

so to speak, that did show rotting.

So yes, that disclosed it.

But I don't think it would be a reasonable expectation

that my client, in the course of performing maintenance,

would be expected to take the type of measure.

It would be destructive measures to find out

that the bench was in the state it was in.

And the 13 or 14 years of inattention,

do we draw anything from that?

Inattention to a wood structure in the elements

on the lake?

The tree case was cited, and it

escapes me at the moment, but by plaintiff counsel,

as relevant to this case as that's

an example of a tree that had decayed over time, fell,

and then the owner was subjected to liability because of it.

What makes this case different, and I would suggest analogous

to the tree cases, a property owner

would not be found liable if a tree was decaying,

but there was no evidence of that to the property owner.

So if that was happening and the property owner was

not aware of it, property owner would not face liability.

In the same scenario here, admittedly,

there is no evidence of my client performing maintenance.

But that alone, the plaintiff could point to that

and say, well, that's some evidence of negligence.

They weren't going out there to maintain it.

But there needs to be a causal nexus.

They would have to show that had they performed

that maintenance, had they gone out there,

that would have revealed to my client

the condition was decaying such that something

should have been done.

And even though my client wasn't doing it,

Mr. Strang, who was going out there,

I would suggest was probably taking, doing more

than I don't know what type of maintenance would be done.

But even if it was just a visual to see what the bench looked

like, he was actually using the bench in a way that

is subjecting it to the type of use

that should give an indication if there's decay

or something that would require it to be fixed.

And he never encountered that.

To his knowledge, it was stable.

But the trial court never reached the issue

about new or should have known, right?

It decided based on the issue of the duty

because of that notice.

So how can we decide the case on that issue?

Isn't that a analysis at the trial court?

I assume that was that argument made to the trial court?

It was part of, it was.

But it didn't reach that issue.

It did not.

So can we, should we?

I believe the court has the option of doing that.

I'm saying to this as a separate basis

that was argued at the summary judgment level.

It would be a separate independent basis

for this court to conclude that summary judgment

was properly granted, albeit not for that reason,

that it should be granted or appellate

because of an absence of that.

So you are right.

It is not part of the decision

or the foundation of that opinion,

although it was argued by both parties

at a lower level and in the briefs to the court today.

So that is the second argument.

And your honor is correct that the first issue

that we cited to the white and the Splendid case.

And I know your honors are familiar with the language,

but which we cited to in page 18 of our brief.

But when discussing the court notes

in that decision, citing from Ouellette,

the character of and circumstances surrounding the intrusion,

and this would be of a potential trespasser,

will be relevant and important

in determining the standard of care

applicable to the landowner.

When the intrusion is not foreseeable

or is against the will of the landowner,

many intruders will be denied recovery

as a matter of law.

This case, I would submit, we have both.

You only need to have one or the other.

But the court says if the intrusion is not foreseeable

or if it's against the will of the landowner.

I'll start with what I would submit is more obvious

that it is against the will of the landowner.

And in that respect, it's the first email,

or it's the email for Mr. Matthews,

which among other things says,

Christmas Island is private property

for the exclusive use of its residents.

That clearly and indisputably

articulates the will of Christmas Island,

which is it's for the private property

to the exclusive use of its residents.

Now, plaintiff.

Then I don't understand if it's true,

and this is a fact issue,

but if it's true that the plaintiff

was maintaining the lawn and mowing the lawn,

is that sort of a comprehension

or understanding on your client's part

that he was not disinvited on this strip?

He was probably encouraged to keep mowing the lawn.

I don't know that there's any evidence

that he was encouraged.

There is evidence that some unidentified,

we don't have any concrete evidence of who said what,

but for the purposes of the record,

there is some evidence that some people

expressed appreciation or compliments

regarding the work he did

and the gazebo regarding the flowers.

The fact that if we accept that as true,

that a few people may have said,

hey, it looks great, good going or something of that,

that doesn't supplant the will of the condominium association

with regard to now permitting him or other people

to access the property.

Any individual unit owner

allows someone to come on to their property,

they of course have the right to do that

because it's their property,

but if owner of unit one or owner of unit three

said to the plaintiff,

which is what the evidence is that we get into specifics,

that looks nice, thank you, appreciate it,

that does not and give him permission to do it

because they don't have the authority

to grant that permission.

It's-

Well, it's not a question of fact, too.

I mean, that person in unit one

owns an undivided whole interest in that strip of land.

It's part of the condominium.

Well, as the record is before this court-

This is becoming a torts exam.

Long time ago.

As the record is before this case,

and I elaborated a bit, but we don't even have,

we have arguably hearsay statements from the plaintiff

that people expressed gratitude and such,

but my point beyond the email though,

the first email, the email from Mr. Matthews,

is there any other evidence in the record

that over the course of 14 years,

the condominium association ever exercised its right

to exclude in the face of what is undisputed

that the plaintiff maintained that strip of land

and mowed the grass?

No, there's nothing in the record,

but the chronology of events that's relevant to this court

is frankly not the 14 years before

because in May of 2018, Memorial Day,

when he started going into the gazebo,

walking the plants and things of that nature-

The strip of land is also Christmas Island

under your theory.

Right, but as of June of 2018,

the condominium association through the email

from Mr. Matthews expressed the prohibition,

expressed the will of the defendant that,

because that email was sent June 7th of 2018

from Mr. Matthews, that said,

Christmas Island is private property

for the exclusive use.

Reminding folks.

Perhaps remind, yes.

That's what it says.

Reminding folks that it is the exclusive use

of its residents.

So subsequent to that point,

this accident happened about a month or so later,

it can't be argued that it is anything but the will

of the defendant that Mr. Strang or others

not access what is Christmas Island private property.

But you would agree that the will of the defendant

has to be conveyed to the plaintiff here

in order for it to have legal operation, right?

A non-expressed will or a will expressed to somebody else

that never gets, the word never gets to the plaintiff.

How can that have legal effect?

Well, it was conveyed to him as it happened to be here.

So he did get that.

In sort of different wording.

Different wording.

But pretty differently.

I would submit the same fundamental expression.

As to whether it has to be conveyed to him,

I would respectfully submit that if it is against the will

of a property owner to have people come onto their property

and someone just walks into their property and says,

gee, I didn't know I wasn't allowed here.

I would still submit that it is against the will

of the property owner and the person

is not permitted to be there.

So the whole issue about the email and what he read

and what he knew, that's completely irrelevant

under your theory of case.

I would suggest that the fact that our client made it clear

that it's against the will of the association,

that makes it clear and that is enough.

However, we do have both here.

We have it being conveyed and I think there's,

I understand the exact words aren't used,

but to suggest that anything over on Christmas Island

suddenly opens it up to everything

but exactly on Christmas Island,

I think that's a bit of a stretch.

But the other way you get to no duty

is if it is not foreseeable that this plaintiff

or anyone else would be on property.

That's the second strand and I would submit,

we have that as well and the circumstances here

where beginning in May or he's going up

to treat the flowers and in the sequence of events

that follows whereby we then express the email saying

private property for residents.

It is then communicated to him by his wife and others.

It is not foreseeable at that point.

It would be appropriate for this court to so find

that he would believe he had any right to be.

Thank you very much.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Just a couple of quick points.

There was reference to the tree case.

That's Pesaturo in that case.

The court did refer to the limbs being dead

and therefore creating a risk and being visibly dead.

In this case, you have a man-made structure

rather than the tree aspect of nature.

And this is an old structure,

the gazebo with an old wooden bench.

And we know that there was no maintenance

for 13 to 14 years, but we don't know

when any maintenance was done before that.

But you agree there was no visible indication

that the bench was rotten, correct?

We do.

That was Mr. Strang's testimony.

As well as the person that did the repairs,

testimony said it appeared sturdy,

but once you saw the interior,

and obviously I'm not an expert in property management

but I'd submit to you that if this bench

is rotten as shown in that photo in the interior,

that by tapping on that,

if there was a formal inspection done

by tapping on that bench,

the sound would have been different if it was solid

and therefore this could have been detected.

Is there expert testimony to that effect?

No, there was no expert testimony to that effect.

There was the testimony of the person that repaired it

that said it was rotten

and it had been rotting out over a long period of time.

They had to look at it to know that

and he was a maintenance person who testified as to that.

This is France.

Thank you very much.

Thank you.

This case is submitted.

Thank you.
