This is case 2022, 0536, state of New Hampshire versus Tommy Page.

My name is Robin Malone, and I am here today for Tommy Page.

I have reserved two minutes for rebuttal.

And I want to speak briefly about the challenges that we've lodged in our motion.

The defendant has challenged trial counsel's effectiveness in four ways.

First, in failing to meaningfully use expert assistance to support an expert-based theory

advanced in their opening. Second, in failing to meet promises made to the jury in opening

and also shifting their theory. Third, in failing to object to the state's objectionable closing

argument. And the defendant finally asks this court to consider the cumulative prejudicial

effect of those errors. I want to start my time today speaking about the third prong,

the closing argument prong, as well as the cumulative effect of all of the errors.

Because the state's closing argument incorporated and in fact invoked the other constitutional

failures that amplifying the impact of those failures. While at the same time attacking

trial counsel's credibility and ethics, the lower court erred when it did not consider

that cumulative prejudice as Wilbur calls for us to do. I would argue that the lower court also

erred in finding that the closing was not improper. I will of course take questions at any time.

How did counsel impute in the ethics of trial counsel?

Of course. I would speak first that we do not dispute that the state and the defense are

encouraged, indeed must especially in cases as serious as this one, be vociferous and fierce

advocates for our clients. But this court has established and acknowledged that there are

thresholds. And I would say that in this instance the state went beyond that threshold. The court

has acknowledged specifically the power of words used by a prosecutor in closing arguments,

which aside from the judge's instructions are the last word. And the blows here we would

say by the state were foul and not fair. Specifically, I would draw a comparison to

Stillwell. And Stillwell, this court said that while a prosecutor may not stray into forbidden

terrain, that a defendant has a corresponding obligation to protect his own interests, and

here counsel failed to meet that obligation. Within minutes of starting the closing argument,

it appears at the bottom of the first full page of the transcript of the state's closing,

the state says those photos were Facebook fodder. That's what he said. There's no

actual evidence of that, but that's okay. He'll say it anyways because they can do that.

They need you to focus on the evidence. So the prosecutor did not say in so many words,

the defense can lie to you. But that is precisely what these words communicated to the jury.

And that the defense did not share the state's truth seeking purpose. That is what was

communicated. And that language echoes what this court found to be improper,

endowable, and a host of other cases. That was a refrain for the state in their closing.

They did not stop there. The state repeatedly used the phrase, quote, actual evidence, and

referring to evidence advanced by the prosecution, referring to defense arguments as,

quote, unsupported lawyer statements or rhetoric. And the state's argument in that aspect

also echoed that in Stillwell. Specifically, the state told the jury that Daniel Sylvester

is a somewhat convenient means to try to distract them from the truth. And that's page 922 in the

trial trend. In Stillwell, the state argued in closing and this court found it improper that the

defense team was trying to distract the jury. And again, this court found that improper. And it

is within that attack that I would suggest that attack on the on defense counsel's

character and credibility that this court should consider the state's burden shifting and

vouching, which are the other arguments that we advanced. And that language may have been,

you know, linguistically more subtle. But this, too, was a persistent refrain.

The state said, for example, what had they advanced in terms of, quote, actual evidence?

That was page 913. The state told the jury that they could trust and rely on the experts

as much as if the jurors loved ones were the ones they were treating.

And in speaking about the evidence, which both vouchers and calls into question and is

an improper comment on the defendant's rights, the state characterized the state's evidence as

uncontradicted. Were these statements objected to? I'm sorry? Were these statements objected to?

There was no objection to the closing argument. The state used the terms, if I may,

uncontradicted, unopposed, undisputed. And those words suggest that it could have been

disputed, had the defense presented evidence. It could have been opposed, had the defense

presented evidence. It could have been contradicted, had the defense presented evidence.

So you're saying that it is improper for the prosecutor to say this is undisputed evidence?

I think in the context overall that it is, I think that here characterizing the evidence

as undisputed. And I do think that it's linguistically relevant that the evidence was

characterized as the undisputed evidence, the unopposed evidence of our witnesses.

And I think that if you look at, if you look at loving the statements there were not

express comments, but the court was willing to find that they were nonetheless comments on

the defendant's rights. I would say that those were improper comments not just on Mr.

Page's rights, but also an improper comment in that they vouched for the witnesses

while talking about the fact that the jurors could trust and credit these experts as if

they were caring for their own loved ones. I would also suggest that that's an improper

call to the juror's sense of sympathy and an improper argument. I think that this is

a specific calling out of counsel's decision to not present evidence. And that is problematic,

especially problematic when we turn to the other failures that we have advanced here,

specifically defense counsel's failure to meet promises made an opening, the shift in theory,

and specifically the misstatement made an opening of the anticipated testimony of Dr.

Duvall, who was specifically the state expert witness that the defense had chosen to rely upon

to advance their own expert theory. All of that calls into question in the broader context

of the personal attacks on defense counsel and defendants' rights. All of that calls into

culminates in a prejudice that makes it bright here for the court's consideration.

As it is the state's reliance on these errors, specifically as part of their effort to discredit

defense, I think that that is where that culmination comes from and the cumulative effect is

appropriately considered. Because in reality the prejudice here was the hit to defense counsel's

credibility with the jury, which is hard to believe did not influence how the jury

considered the case during the operation. At the very least it undermines the confidence.

How should the photographs that were in evidence impact our analysis of prejudice here?

The photographs were obviously powerful evidence. I think that when there is powerful evidence

that is removed from a question of credibility of witnesses, that that imposes on counsel

both defense and the state a heightened burden to adhere to the rules such that other rights

aren't fully intact and I don't think that that happened here for the defense.

I also would point to the fact that the defense stipulated to those photographs

and stipulated to the occurrence, I shouldn't say they stipulated to the photographs,

they did not argue the allegations of sexual assault. Their theory was our client sexually

assaulted the child, you can hate the client and convict the client for that sexual assault

but he did not commit the homicide or inflict the injuries that resulted in the death.

And was that ineffective? Which part, Justice?

The portion where they chose to stipulate to or to not challenge the sexual assault?

No, the characterization of their client as committing a sexual assault,

condemning them for that but not for the murder.

Noting that I acknowledge my light, I don't know that it is justice. I would suggest that

one of the first things we learn as criminal attorneys is that we have to consider the good

and the bad, consider the unchangeable and that which may be challenging to overcome

and find ways to work around those challenges.

Particularly in a very difficult case like this one.

Absolutely. This was undoubtedly a challenging case for the state,

for the defense and for the jurors and we don't distribute that, we don't dispute that at all.

Your argument about inconsistent defense theories, the state's response is and in defense

counsel's response was well you know that really, they really aren't inconsistent, they're just

different sort of shades of the same defense theory which has to do with anger and rage

by Sylvester. Why isn't that right, the right way to think about it?

Of course, thank you Justice Bassett. I think that the distinction is the promise that was made

in opening. I think that it is one other way that the jury could see that the defense was

unable to deliver on those promises and in the broader context of the state's attack on

credibility and the fluidity with which the defense permitted to treat the facts.

I think that that could have been received by the jury as another way in which they

were loosed with those facts and I think that it would impact the credibility assessment

by the jurors of defense counsel which overall impacted how they were received. Thank you very much.

Mr. Hinckley.

Please support Peter Hinckley on behalf of the state and not take questions at any time.

Did you deliver the closing argument?

I did Judge.

Let's start there.

Excuse me?

Let's start there.

Okay.

So I think the important start place to begin is really what you acknowledged

in one of your questions is that this was an incredibly difficult case for any defense attorney

to try. For the reasons set forth in this court's opinion, affirming Mr. Page's conviction back

in 2019. The three particular errors alleged in this case would respect the summation,

would respect the experts, and would respect to a consistent theory of defense.

They fail both under the deficiency prong as well as the prejudice prong.

Getting to summation, I think we should start there at prejudice and it has not been articulated

on appeal. It was not argued below what the actual prejudice was and the trial court actually found

that counsel had not articulated let alone established prejudice. So if there's no prejudice

then the constitutional claim falls right there in the court's attendance analysis there.

But with respect to particular arguments that were made in the post trial motion with respect

to summation arguments, the trial court made pertinent factual findings. The trial court found

that there were no personal attacks on counsel. The trial court found that there was no burden

shifting by the state. And those factual findings are amply supported in the record.

With respect to the absence of a defense objection to the arguments that I made in summation,

counsel explained that when he was deposed, and that set forth on page 30 of the state's brief.

He explained that he did not find in his professional opinion that most of the arguments

that counsel cited to in the post trial motion were in fact objection. And also that he chose

tactically that not to make any objections because he thought he might be intrusive to the

jurors, which is a reasonable tactical decision by any defense attorney. So both with respect

to prejudice and with respect to actual deficient performance, the claim fails on either one of

those problems. But is it permissible for the state in its summation to point to the lack of

a defense, essentially lack of evidence, lack of a defense? That's not what was argued when I

argued that certain facts were uncontested. And in the context of this case that was a

proper argument. My argument was that you didn't hear any evidence of that from the defense.

The argument was that the defense agreed with the state's experts with respect to certain

factual issues. The defense agreed and they made that tactical decision to co-opt the state's

expert, that the state's experts were correct, that the injuries were non-accidental trauma.

The defense co-opted the timing that was provided by three of the state's experts.

So if a party agrees with the evidence set forth, then those factual issues are not

contested. So that's actually a proper argument to make in the context of this case where the

defense affirmant replied on those same facts to support the defense of alternative perpetrator,

which again was a reasonable tactical decision made by the trial attorneys in this extremely

difficult case for any defense attorney. Alternative perpetrator following Sylvester's

absence from the apartment, not before. The alternative perpetrator defense was that

she came back and it was a consistent theory of the defense that she had been frustrated

earlier in the day because she had not gotten her medication. And then when she got home,

the victim had wet the bed and that was the so-called triggering event which

resulted in her abusing her child. That was a consistent defense throughout.

It was what was presented to the jurors in the opening statement. It's what the defense tried

to present through our witnesses, including the three experts who opined on timing,

as well as affirmatively presented through defense witnesses, and it's what's counsel

tried to forcefully argue to the jurors in this summation was a consistent defense throughout.

And that defense again was alternative perpetrator. That was a reasonable tactic that has not

been challenged, either below or on appeal. The prior pre-existing injury that the victim

had sustained that was pointed out by Dr. Offenhaven. Is that something that was ever raised a trial?

It was. We actually have moved to preclude any evidence in a pre-trial ruling and we relied

on state versus Gaillat 139, New Hampshire 526. The trial court actually agreed with that

and any evidence of the pre-existing injury was excluded from mention by either party.

So that actually was the subject of pre-trial litigation. The trial court ruled on that.

Any error would be directed towards the trial court and its ruling, not counsel.

They did object and that was litigated. So there's no deficiency there with respect to

counsel's handling of that. Unless the court has any further questions, the state relies on its

brief and asks that the trial court's order be affirmed. Thank you, counsel. Ms. Malone,

you wish to use your two minutes. I have one brief addition. The state indicated during its argument

that the trial court made findings that there was no personal attack. I would ask this court

to consider that in doing so, the court, the trial court made findings inconsistent with

this court's findings and that I would encourage the court to consider. Is that a finding of

fact to which we owe deference or should we analyze that de novo? I think that the trial

court's order chose to rely on my recollection. I'm unable to find the specific words right

now. I apologize. Is that the court said for the reasons advanced by the state and it's

pleading? We agree and we find that there's no prejudice. I would say that because this court

had previously found statements that echoed those raised in the lower court in our pleading

that this court should consider its prior orders and specifically in the still well matter.

You still have time. Thank you. It's just a six, just cleaning up out there.

Because specifically there was the specific language about distracting from the truth which

this court had previously found to be improper and that statement is verbatim from the transcript.

I think that that was an error that the court should have. I yield my time. Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, counsel. Case is submitted. Court is adjourned.
