This is case 2022-04-03 in the matter of Amy Frobelcher and Richard Fisher.

Good morning, Attorney Gordon. I understand you reserved minutes.

May it please the court. I'm Joshua Gordon. I represent Amy Frobel.

I was here this morning, and I've reserved two minutes.

The party signed out of state stipulations for an uncontested divorce,

and the court had jurisdiction questions held at hearing if that jurisdiction was okay.

The court also perceived potential problems with the stipulations,

so scheduled review hearing for, it said, to explain the basis of the steps.

If the steps were rejected, this should have reverted to a standard contested divorce.

Instead, the court from the court skipped to the end, issued a cookie-cutter decree,

dissociated from the party's circumstances and their intense and with little support and record.

But even if the stipulations were not fair enough,

they did implement the party's intent. While the family court is nominally entitled to deference,

these parties had specific intents, both with regard to parenting and with their financial issues.

Regarding the parenting state, RSA 461A grants parents the widest discretion in developing a parenting plan.

These parties trust each other's parenting, and where they clearly wanted flexibility,

the court imposed rigidity. While the court's parenting plan is not unreasonable and the abstract,

it does not reflect this family's needs.

Regarding the property stip, while equal is presumed equitable, like the court said,

equity does not demand equality. Amy took on a half-million-dollar debt.

He walked away debt-free. Together, they saved the house for the child

and insured funding for her education.

Maybe there are other creative ways to implement their intent that the court would find fair.

On parenting, maybe visitation for a certain number of days per year.

On property, maybe a time buyout or a trust or something.

If the case were subject to the standard process, there would have been opportunities for the parties

to perhaps discover something that the court would approve.

At the beginning of the review hearing, and I urge you to read those few pages carefully,

there was lots of confusion regarding what the hearing was about.

Amy's lawyer painstakingly clarified the purposes.

The court denied and had already decided that the steps were unfair.

And thus, the purpose was to determine whether the steps were unfair.

But whatever the review hearing was for, it clearly was not a final divorce hearing.

Didn't the transport ask the parties on multiple occasions

whether another hearing was necessary, needed, or wanted?

I think the court mentioned the fact that there might be hearings later,

and the lawyer didn't say, well, you know, schedule them.

But I think the lawyer assumed, because this was a review hearing,

that if this turned into an uncontested divorce by disapproval of the steps,

then there would be a divorce process, the regular process with discovery

and mediation is so worth following that.

So it's not really a surprise that the lawyer didn't jump up and say,

let's schedule that right now.

He assumed, naturally or reasonably, that it would just occur in the normal court.

But whatever.

Had any discovery been conducted by the parties?

None.

In their stipulations, they waited.

Is it still, is it your position that the trial court was bound to accept the stipulation?

Well, that's within the discretion of the court.

And the court has the discretion to reject the stipulation.

The court has a discretion to reject them.

I think that my client would prefer that they be enforced,

but if they're not going to be enforced,

and I think that's probably where we are today,

then there should be a final divorce hearing with notice that says something like final divorce.

And the court issued this decree after this review hearing, without any final hearing,

and imposed this generic plan that, I don't know, it seemed like a very standard normal plan,

but it doesn't really fit the parties.

And, for example, the court ruled on whether Richard's place in Saugus was available for visitation with the child.

But we don't know anything about that.

We don't know whether this is an efficiency with a couch,

or whether it's a, you know, a tantrum manner with an English garden and all the amenities.

And we don't know anything about the brother, whether he's established in Seville,

or whether he's chipping and transient.

Yet the court ruled on the matter.

The point is, the court made assumptions,

justified by the record, after what was apparently a final hearing,

which was advertised as a review hearing on the steps.

Am I right that both the husband and wife testified at the hearing?

They did.

They did.

And what were the arguments that a council would have made on behalf of the wife

that were not advanced at the hearing?

He would have brought up numerous issues.

There was adultery going on.

He was involved in alcohol and drugs.

There was a dissipation of the marital estate.

I think that would have been among the issues that he would have brought up,

or that she would have brought up, had there been a divorce hearing.

But the point is, the court made all these assumptions.

The court asked, it was almost inquisitorial, like the European system,

where the judge asked the party's questions,

but there was no cross-examination, for instance.

And that's legal error.

And it's beyond the court's discretion.

This court should reverse and remand to either enforce a stipulation

or have a contested divorce procedure.

I want to address the preservation because my brother raised it.

This court has encouraged broad questions

and has penalized appellants with questions that are too specific.

Amy can notice an appeal question broadly encapsulating the issues

I've argued in my briefs, including an adequate notice,

eclipsing the standard process, excuse me, divorce process,

issuing a decree irrespective of the party's intent,

and making findings based on assumptions rather than...

There's no more questions.

Please, the court, attorney Israel Piedro,

for the respondent, Richard Fisher.

Your Honor's perfect procedure and notice

are not required to comply with the process.

The central concept that the court seeks to protect

is an opportunity to be heard,

and that was provided in this case.

Under the facts and circumstances of this particular case

that was provided and adhered here.

This is not a situation where the trial court

granted relief to one of the parties

based on emotion or repetition

and granted that relief

without allowing the other party

an opportunity to even respond,

as is the case in some of the cases

that were cited by my opponent.

How did your client move from an agreed stipulation

to a contested position in the divorce

on all the issues that had been agreed to?

At what point did that happen?

Well, there is objections in the record

from Mr. Fisher prior to this hearing,

what was noticed as a review hearing

or what was called a review hearing.

An objection in the record from Mr. Fisher,

and I can't remember exactly the context,

but it is essentially saying,

I did not agree to these.

I did not agree that these should be

entered as a stipulation.

And so I'd say as of that point

in the record at least, that was clear.

Prior to this review hearing.

Correct, Your Honor.

Was he represented by counsel?

He was not represented by counsel

at any point in the process prior to appeal.

So what discovery issues needed to be addressed

before this hearing, if any?

From his standpoint,

I'm not sure that there were really any.

I think that's what, in my mind at least,

a likely outcome after it contested

full-blown, three-day divorce trial

would probably be pretty much the same result

that the trial court reached in this case.

It was, in my mind, an equitable division.

It was relatively equal.

And so I don't think that there's any discovery issues

that he had specifically that he would have undergone.

Satisfy us that the parties had adequate notice

of the hearing.

So again, I think it's fact and circumstance.

In this case, it was satisfied,

specifically for a few reasons.

So the court, prior to this hearing,

did say in its jurisdictional order

that it did not feel that this stipulation

was fair and equitable.

And specifically said, I am not proving this at this time.

More importantly, during the hearing,

the court put the parties on notice

that it was going to depart from those stipulations

and issue orders that were of its own making

that did not compartmental.

You're saying, just in my mind, I think,

you're saying that in its jurisdictional order,

it alerted the parties to the fundamental problem

of the stipulation.

I think that's the gist of it, Your Honor.

The case law does say due process

depends on the facts and circumstances

under which it's presented.

And I think when you look at the totality

of the situation that the court alerted the parties,

that this was an open issue,

and then especially it's questioning

during the review hearing itself.

It asked explicitly to whom should I order support,

even though the parties submitted child support

order.

It asked Mr. Fisher what kind of parenting time he wanted.

It asked specifically, to what extent

am I going to divide the marital home

despite the fact that the parties in their stipulation

stated that Ms. Fropel Fisher

would perceive the entire marital home.

And she never objected.

And this court said, if you're going to object,

you need to do so at the earliest possible time.

There's a reason for that,

and it's because the court issued an order she didn't like.

She then moved for reconsideration.

She said, I didn't get notice.

The court made a finding. Yes, you did.

You received notice.

I think that's supported by the record.

And in this situation, although under different circumstances,

perhaps it wouldn't be the case,

and perhaps there would be a different result

under different circumstances.

In this case, she was given an opportunity

to object and an opportunity be heard.

That's what's required to comport with the process.

But isn't it just as fair an interpretation

of the circumstances here that the wife,

both parties understood that the issue was going to be,

okay, you can come to the hearing

and try to convince me that the stipulation is fair.

Or, and if you do, then I'll approve the stipulation.

And if you don't, then we're going to move on

to other issues on another day.

It was a binary choice either,

I'm going to approve the stipulation

or we're going to have a contested divorce.

Isn't that a fair understanding

that could have been had walking into the courtroom?

I think if you stopped the analysis

at walking into the courtroom, perhaps,

but I wouldn't agree that we could stop the analysis there.

Given the court has applied discretion

for its proceedings,

given the court is concerned with

preserving judicial resources,

it gives a party an opportunity

within the courtroom to address a certain matter

that it's going to issue an order on

and it tells the party that,

and I think the party is required

to raise objections at that time.

The same way that the court would be entitled

to rule upon an oral motion that's made

without giving a notice of hearing

and written notice to that effect,

as long as it's giving the opportunity

to the other party to object and be heard,

that's what's required for due process.

I think that's what happened here.

I think that the fact that the court,

that the parties were alerted to the parties

that this was an open issue

kind of re-emphasizes and makes it

an even stronger position,

but I think that colloquially during the hearing

is the primary notice that was given.

Was there an opportunity for cross-examination?

Well, the parties proceeded by offers

approved by agreement or by tacit agreement,

and under those circumstances,

it's incumbent upon the parties

to ask for cross-examination.

Were there any really disputed facts?

I mean, it seems to me the trial court had all the information

that needed to make this a ruling.

I mean, I do agree.

I would, again, submit that the only thing

that differently than the trial court

could have done was let the parties

incur a lot more time and cost

to submit the same facts and reach the same result.

So I think under the circumstances

where the parties proceeded to what was going on,

it was an appropriate result.

And the evidence was strictly drawn

from the financial affidavits, correct?

Well, there were offers of proof and discussion

during the hearing about the marital estate

and the parties...

In general, but no bank records or no mortgage documents.

And Mr. Fisher submitted his financial affidavit that day.

I believe that's correct.

I believe the court also noted

that Mr. Fisher's financial affidavit was incomplete.

I think Mr. Fisher would say that

he doesn't dispute whatever was stated

in respect of parties' financial affidavits.

And again, therefore, we're going to reach the same result

either way.

To ask further questions, concludes my remarks.

Thank you.

Tony Corden.

Notice is before you walk into the courtroom.

And these are old cases.

Morphy is in 1972.

And that's where a contempt hearing was noticed

and it turned into a child support hearing.

Douglas is in 1999, which enunciated that he processed issues...

Old is a relative term, Mr. Corden.

Old is a very relative term.

But your client certainly had the opportunity

to call a halt to the proceeding

and state on the record that further hearings

would be necessary or evidence would be necessary

to call the opposing party, not council,

party to the stand or your own client to the stand.

All of those opportunities were available, correct?

Had the opportunity, but there is two things.

One is I'll refer you to Reardon and Des Moines

that says an opportunity to present evidence,

doesn't cure the notice issue,

but also it's not clear from record.

And I've read the answer over and over.

It's not clear.

At some point this hearing morphed from a review hearing

into I guess a final divorce hearing,

but you can't really tell when that happened.

And the court was asking questions

and you don't really know why.

And the result when you get to the order

is just plain surprising.

And that's how my client,

that's how my client's lawyer felt about it.

But wait a minute, they did not expect

a final divorce decree from this hearing.

And that's the problem.

And just during the hearing,

it is not discernible that the hearing

had actually morphed.

Thank you very much.

Thank you, council.

The case is submitted.
