This is case 2022-0397, state of New Hampshire versus John Fortun.

Good morning, counsel.

For the record, Justice Sonsmore and Coney is disqualified on this case.

Attorney Johnson, I understand you reserve one minute.

Yes, Sirana, thank you.

May it please the court, Christopher Johnson, on behalf of John Fortun.

There's two broad claims in this issue.

A venue claim and a lesser included defense instruction claim.

My plan is to address both, but I'm happy to take the court's questions.

Beginning with venue and beginning with the statutory language.

New Hampshire's statute embodies the crime committed formula,

which is the same rule in many jurisdictions.

In New Hampshire, it's sourced in our statute,

but it's rooted in the common law, which is where Michigan derived it.

Under that crime committed rule, venue lies in the place where the defendant acts.

By contrast, my brief cites the statute in Pennsylvania,

a venue which chooses different words to express a broader concept of venue.

There, by statute, venue is proper where an element occurs.

I think the significance of that distinction is illuminated by the history.

And venue was a real concern of the founders.

They had seen the abuse that occurs when the prosecution brings charges in a place

only because that place is more congenial to the state.

I think this case, in certain respects, suggests that that's still a concern,

but in any event, even if it isn't, the proper remedy is to change the statute.

With the statute we have now, we have the crime committed formula

focused on where the defendant acts.

In addition, I've made an alternative argument,

and I want to just make a point about it,

that even if I'm wrong and the court rejects the crime committed formula

in favor of an elements-occurred analysis,

we still have the argument that if the test is elements,

Mr. Fortune still prevails because the death here is a sentencing factor

and not an element.

Is part one, Article 17 and 6021, are they completely coterminous?

They're very close.

I think, so there's three different places.

There's the Constitution, there's the statute, and there's the court rule.

And one of them, and they're all in my brief,

one of them has some additional language not present in another.

I think the Constitution has the crime committed formula sort of unadulterated.

The statute and the rule may add these sort of broader expansions.

But for present purposes, or purposes of this case,

those sort of expansions are useful to understand the nature of the crime committed test,

but they're not in themselves relevant as Mr. Fortune's conduct isn't captured even under those.

Was there a constitutional argument made below as to 318B26 or 6021?

So the place where it was made is in the defendant's motion, which is at Appendix, Page 6.

And that's the part where the court will find the discussion of the New Hampshire Constitution.

And what the motion says, admittedly it wasn't a very extended discussion,

but what it says is, here's the Constitution, it enacts, and I'm paraphrasing, of course,

but it enacts the crime committed formula.

That formula is embodied also in the statute and the court rule.

And so all three sort of sources of the principle were called to the attention of the trial court.

So what is, for purposes of 6021, if any person is feloniously stricken, wounded, or poisoned?

Is that apply in this case?

No. So I'd say a couple things about that.

First, that's not that the trial court relied on, nor to my understanding is it what the states are doing here.

There's a passing reference to that in their brief.

There is a passing reference.

There's a passing reference, but it's not a developed argument.

And I think, rightly so, the McBurro's Court in Michigan, which Michigan, because they don't have a statute or a constitutional text,

they had to do a lot more work to kind of get to the place where this court is able to start.

And one of the pieces of work the Michigan Court did was they came to their version of the stricken, wounded, or poisoned,

and they said, and of course it was a death result in case just as here, they said, that doesn't apply.

That's about, I mean, when you look at the stricken, wounded, or poisoned language, it reflects an idea of,

we are going to expand venue in a narrow sense beyond where the defendant acts,

when the defendant assaults somebody, and they die elsewhere.

And so, and the Michigan Court said, selling somebody drugs is not sort of a form of assault.

And particularly where the death is a strict liability kind of component of what the state has to prove,

it's very different from this idea embodied in that stricken, wounded, or poisoned conception or expansion of act

where the defendant does that kind of assault and the victim is then airlifted to somewhere else and they die there.

Are there other states other than Michigan that have come to a result that supports your position?

I couldn't find any other states to come either way.

I couldn't find a court that rejects the position either, except for, I think, the Pennsylvania Court,

which has looked at a very different statute and rightly came to a very different decision.

So it doesn't seem to be a question, and neither has the state cited a case that has yet been adjudicated.

So Michigan is the case I'm leaning on, but there wasn't one running against me either.

There was reference to a breach of bail, and I know that's not a big part of the case in front of us today,

but thinking about breach of bail, do you think the venue for a breach of bail charge is where the bail conditions were set or the breach occurs?

I think that could be different, and I would say we're not appealing that.

So even if we were to prevail on the winning reversal of his death-resulting conviction, his breach of bail conviction would still stay.

But setting aside this case, I'm curious to your answer to that question.

So I think you'd have to look at the elements of breach of bail, and breach of bail is different in that there's an act that's performed by somebody who isn't the defendant.

And so I think whereas here death is like a result element, it's not an act kind of element.

And one can conceptualize I think the defendant in a breach of bail case potentially as acting both in the place where the bail order issued and in the place where they did something wrong.

That's fair.

In a sense that's not really present here.

So if we agree, do you agree with the state that the remedy would be a retrial in the appropriate venue?

So what I would say about that is that, and I've cited the United States Supreme Court after trial, but before this appeal, decided that question as a matter of federal constitutional law in favor of retrial.

It hasn't been addressed under the New Hampshire State Constitution, and I wouldn't want to guess or foresee.

It hasn't been argued here.

I think on remand it would be possible to argue that the New Hampshire Constitution is more protective.

They'd have to look at the words and see if our venue clause is differently worded than the federal clause.

But if the New Hampshire constitutional clause was interpreted as not being more protective, yes, the remedy would be retrial.

So I wanted to address also the lesser included defense issue.

The standard of review here is de novo because the basis of the trial court's ruling was strictly legal.

The court's analysis was you don't give a lesser included defense instruction if no conviction is possible on the verdict, on that verdict.

That's a legal proposition for which de novo review is appropriate.

The court aired as a matter of law because the principle this court announced in State v. Eldridge I think governs this situation.

The availability of a lesser included defense instruction does not depend on the legal availability of a conviction for the charge described in the lesser included defense instruction.

The jury has a fact finding function.

This court has long recognized that it's kind of independent of the sentencing consequences associated with the verdict.

And so as in Eldridge, the fact that for other legal reasons the court couldn't have entered judgment of conviction and sentenced after a Sullivan County trial on the less included defense does not mean it was proper not to give the jury the instruction on that.

Was the defense permitted to argue that sort of like in a way of a jury nullification argument?

I don't think there was an express bar on any argument. I don't recall a ruling for closing argument, but an argument on a nullification theory has a much, much steeper mountain to climb than an argument on a theory where you can say to the jury,

you know, and here's the, you know, this would be the verdict. The instructions will show that you would, if you find there are reasonable doubt as to the whether the drugs that killed CW were the drugs Mr. Fortunes.

So then you should consider this lesser.

So I, for all the reasons that courts are obliged to give lesser included defense instructions when the evidence supports it.

You know, one could always say, well, if they didn't give the instruction, you could still done nullification. And I think that's true, but not inadequate. It doesn't rescue the problem.

So your brief made a passing reference to a retrial in the proper venue on that issue. Do you agree that that could occur after a guilty finding without a conviction?

Yes. So if there had been the lesser included defense instruction, just to sort of gain that out, what would have happened?

It would have meant that the jury acquitted on the charge defense or hung on the charge defense, and then the Sullivan County jury would have convicted on the lesser included.

So I don't see any bar to then prosecuting the lesser included defense in Belmatt. There wouldn't be a lock problem because the, you know, that offense was available to a jury in the first trial.

Indeed, the verdict was returned on it. So yeah, I think that's right. I mean, and that's the harm, and that's why it wouldn't have been a meaningless thing to give the lesser included defense instruction.

Because if a verdict had come back on it, you know, there would have been something that could have been done, which is different.

Of course, Eldridge, it was different only in respect of, there was a legal immunity, so there wouldn't have been another trial on the charge.

But that difference doesn't deprive Eldridge of its relevance here.

Is, is deaf an element of this offense?

So that gets back to the sentencing factor thing, question. And so what I would say is that's a question of statutory interpretation.

And so one looks at the way the legislature has constructed the statute. And I think for two principal reasons, the answer to that question is that it is a sentencing factor.

And first is the structure. This part of the, the causing death piece is in a section of this, this chapter called penalties.

The prohibited conduct is in a section of the chapter called acts prohibited. So that, that sort of reflects a sense that this is a sentencing fact.

And secondly, because this crime is to, you know, involves strict liability as to death, that is the person who sells the drugs need not even be negligent,

much less purposeful with respect to causing death, that brings to bear the general principle of criminal law that strict liability elements are,

if not prohibited, they're discouraged. So the fact that this is sort of a strict liability piece sort of makes it fit more comfortably within the sentencing factor framework.

Because the jury instructed that it needed to find that death was resulting as, that that was as an element, was it instructed as an element?

Yes, yes.

And so again, there is sort of, Apprendi is a whole sort of, is one area in which for constitutional reasons the legislature's power to classify things as elements or sentencing factors is taken away from the legislature.

So any fact that increases the punishment under Apprendi must be proven to a jury beyond a reasonable doubt.

So would we have to distinguish Marshall?

No, no. So Marshall was something different. Marshall was a case governed by the law of indictments. The question in Marshall was, how specifically does the causation element have to be described in the indictment?

The indictment it said causes death. And so the defendant's argument was, well, you need to say but for and proximate in the indictment.

And so this court's analysis of Marshall was all about, you know, was the defense right about that? And under, you know, principles of notice and indictment law, did the causation element need to be further broken down in that way?

And it said no, it didn't. But that isn't, so this isn't the case about indictment law.

And one of the things that defense said in Marshall was, look, the state has to prove this beyond a reasonable doubt.

So therefore, you know, that is but for and proximate causation, therefore, even if you call it a sentencing factor, you should put it in the indictment.

And this court said, you know, because again, this was all about Apprendi. It said Apprendi doesn't say that all the things that have to be proven beyond a reasonable doubt have to be alleged to that degree of specificity in the indictment.

Apprendi's about the jury instructions. It's not so much about the indictment. So Marshall wasn't about this. I see my light is on.

Thank you, Attorney Johnson. Attorney Woodcock.

Good morning, Your Honor. May it please the court. Elizabeth Woodcock for the state of New Hampshire. In this case, venue lay in both Belknap and Sullivan County.

There were good reasons for the state to bring the charge in Sullivan County. Sullivan County was the place where the more serious of the two events took place because the person died in Sullivan County.

If we look back, Mr. Johnson was talking about the framers. And if we look back a little bit in history, there were good reasons why venue was important to the framers of the New Hampshire Constitution and the framers of the United States Constitution.

And it wasn't simply because people were being hauled over to Great Britain to be tried for offenses that were committed in the United States or the colonies.

It was because in a state like New Hampshire, getting around was not terribly easy. And so you would try the person in a location that was suitable for the crime.

In this case, the events that took place that required most of the witnesses were in Sullivan County. The case was investigated in Sullivan County.

The woman who was with the victim when he died was in Sullivan County. She washed and take the drugs in Sullivan County. It happened in Sullivan County.

If the state had considered, well, that we try in Sullivan County, then we don't have to deal with a lesser included instruction. Would that be an appropriate basis to make that decision?

I don't think that there's any evidence that the state was that Machiavellian. I think that what they were trying to do was to try the case in a location that was convenient to most of the people who would be called as witnesses.

So convenience of the witnesses more so than convenience of the defendant because the evidence seemed to be that the defendant resided around Belknap County.

True enough, and the drugs were sold in Belknap County, the evidence establishes that. But in the Marshall case, and I disagree with Mr. Johnson, in the Marshall case, this court said you have to prove two things.

You have to prove the sale of the drug and you have to prove that it was ingested and that death resulted as a result of that.

There wasn't any argument in Marshall that somehow you didn't have to prove both of those things beyond a reasonable doubt.

So the death is an element of the offense. And when the death occurred in Sullivan County, jurisdiction lay there.

I get back to your question, Justice Sonevam, because I think that it's an important one. Prosecutors make decisions all the time that have consequences not only to the way that they try their case, but they also have consequences to what charges the defendant may face.

And they're not made, you know, I don't think that the virtuous prosecutor sits down and figures out a kind of gotcha plan.

And that's what the suggestion is here, that somehow the prosecutor in Sullivan County decided I can get rid of this lesser included offense.

I suggest that that probably is not the case. I mean it's highly unlikely that the prosecutor gave it that much thought because the injury to the people happened in Sullivan County.

The people who were harmed by the sale of the drug were there.

But the focus of the provision of the Constitution, Part 1, Article 17 and 6021, is on the defendant's conduct by use of the word committed. And that's a different concept than where the harm was received, isn't it?

I think that when you consider the fact that the death resulted from the Defendants Act, that but for his sale of the drugs there is no death, and that since Marshall has said you have to prove both of those things in order to satisfy the offense,

I think that the offense occurs in both places.

Why wouldn't the legislature at least refer to one or more elements of the crime rather than using the word committed?

And is it your position that elements are completely coterminants or the concept of elements of a crime or offense are completely coterminous with the word committed?

I'm not certain I...

I mean the issue before us is interpreting both the statute and the Constitution with respect to its use of the word committed.

In the state's position as well now, the elements of the offense here are both the sale of the drug and the death resulting.

And does that come under the term committed? Does the defendant's conduct, even though his only conduct arguably is selling the drugs in Belmab County?

Well, I think that if you commit a crime you also have to accept the consequences of it. And this is a direct consequence.

When we were mooting this case people kept asking me if you stand in one county and you fire a gun at somebody and kill them and you've just gone across the county line.

Where is venue? And it's in both places because the direct result of what you've done occurs in the consequence of your crime occurs in the second county.

So I don't think that you can... I don't think you can pull apart the... Oh, I sold the drug and pull that apart from the consequence of selling it.

And I think that that's what Marshall says. It says that you have to prove both elements.

Well, shooting across the county line it's foreseeable and knowable. You know the consequences are going to happen there.

Here there's a sale in Belmab who knows where the drug will go and be ingested and by whom. Isn't that the difference?

Well, I think that the defendant knew who was going to ingest the drugs because this was a relationship between the two of them.

But he wouldn't know where he'd ingested the drugs necessarily. The victim here could have ingested them in his car and been driven down to Massachusetts and died anywhere in between.

So what is the state supposed to do in that situation?

Well, I think that under those circumstances if he were to die in Massachusetts I think that I'm not familiar with the Commonwealth of Massachusetts law.

But I would think that there would be some venue in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts for part of that crime.

But the thing is here, when you talk about firing a gun and you said, well, you know what the consequences are.

I don't think that you would have to live on the moon not to know what the consequences of selling this kind of drug is.

It's pervasive. We have had many, many deaths in New Hampshire and it is a risk that the person who sells the drugs takes.

It's also a risk that the person who takes the drug takes.

Setting aside whatever Marshall may teach that is relevant on this case, do you agree that it is a matter of statutory interpretation?

It is unusual to find an element of a crime defined in a section called penalties.

I agree with that to a point, Your Honor, but to discount the death resulting as simply some sort of sentencing enhancement doesn't make any sense to me.

Because then the drug, it's simply, you know, okay, well, we'll look at this question at sentencing and we'll decide whether or not this applies.

A sentencing enhancement to me is something that the court generally considers.

It's not something that you say to a jury, you have to find this beyond a reasonable doubt.

If it were simply a matter of sentencing, that would cut against the instructions that jurors are given.

They're told you're not to consider possible punishment.

So then why would you be submitting this punishment element or consideration to a jury who's being told not to consider it?

It just doesn't make any, logically it doesn't make any sense to me.

And I will, you know, I accept the fact that it appears under this section called penalties.

I'm not sure that the titles of different sections in our statutes necessarily always line up with the content of them.

And certainly it's something that this court has to consider.

But I also think that the court should consider the general rules of jury trials and jurors are told not to consider punishment.

So why not give the jury a lesser included instruction here?

Well, because it was no venue.

And I think that this feels to me like...

Like it's good for the Goose, but not good for the Gander in so many ways?

No, no, I don't think it's that.

I think that what it is is as if sometimes when I do post-conviction things, the defendant has decided to represent himself.

And then he gets a standby counsel.

And then when he claims that his trial was somehow unfair,

he claims that he was given ineffective assistance of counsel.

And the answer to that is that you can't insist on two conflicting rights.

You can't insist on the right to represent yourself and then claim,

I got bad advice from my standby counsel.

That's the way the law works. You have to choose.

And in this case, the defendant chose to put the eggs in the basket of venue.

And the opening statement said it.

In the opening statement, the defense attorney reminded the jury,

we talked about this invoite year.

So it started right out of the game.

And now all of a sudden you're going to say to the judge,

I'll stand up there and say that this is the most important aspect of this case.

But oh, by the way, it's not for this lesser included offense.

But it's not as if he chose that venue.

It has reaction to being in a situation where he thought the venue was incorrect.

That's fair enough. But if you say that venue is incorrect,

and that's the argument you're going to make to the jury,

you can't then tell the court, well, for this purpose,

I want you to instruct the jury that it doesn't matter.

And you go back to the Supreme Court decision in old chief.

Old chief stands for the proposition that the state has to agree

if an element of the offense is felony conviction,

that it has to stipulate to that.

But it does not have to stipulate away its case.

Now venue is not, the statutes in this court have said

that venue is not a material element, but it's still an element.

You still have to prove it.

And so I can't figure if I could craft a jury instruction

that would allow the defendant to make this venue argument

and then say, but it doesn't matter for this particular purpose,

I think that I would be doing some real intellectual gymnastics.

Isn't that argument actually consistent?

He's saying to the jury, I should be prosecuted in Belknap County.

And in Belknap County, that's where I sold the drugs.

And so if I'm guilty of anything,

it's of selling drugs that are lesser included.

So that's sort of consistent.

But it's not selling drugs here.

The venue is in Sullivan County.

So what would the court do with a conviction

for that lesser included offense?

Would it enter a verdict of guilty in Belknap County?

I mean, it doesn't make any sense.

The court doesn't have the authority to do it.

And so by pressing this venue argument,

the defendant cut off that option for a lesser included offense.

The court made the right decision.

Can I go back to your argument about the result-driven analysis?

Does that come from the second part of 602-1, the second sentence?

It comes in part from that,

but also from the court's decision in Marshall.

Okay. Thank you.

And I think that the Marshall case is important

because the court was presented with trying to figure out

exactly what you had to prove.

And it said you have to prove death resulting.

And if it's simply a sentencing enhancement,

I think that that becomes a real problem.

I think of sentencing enhancements in a former life.

I worked at the United States Sentencing Commission for a year.

And sentencing enhancements are like vulnerable victim

or something like that that a court would consider.

But it's not something that a jury sits down and says,

well, what do we think this guy really deserves?

That's not what they're supposed to be doing.

They're supposed to be determining the elements of the offense.

Why is the Michigan Supreme Court in their analysis

and make boroughs wrong?

Why shouldn't we follow it?

Well, I think in part as I pointed out,

I see my red light as I just like to finish.

I think part of it is that it relies on the common law.

And in this case, we have a statute.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Attorney Johnson.

Just very briefly, I wanted to call the court's attention to two cases

that answer some of the questions.

First, the sentencing factor question.

In Polk, this court held a fact to be a sentencing factor

even though the state had to prove it

beyond a reasonable doubt to a jury.

So that step has already been taken.

And in Eldridge, this court held that even though

you can't enter judgment on the verdict on a lesser,

you still have to give it.

And that waver in Eldridge in the event it did waive

and this court held that the requirement

that he waive was reversible error.

And it would have been here.

Thank you.

Thank you very much, counsel.

Case submitted.

Take a brief recess.
