This is case 2020-0629, Miles Brown at all versus Secretary of State.

Good morning for the record, Justice Donovan is not able to participate in this morning's arguments.

He will be reviewing the tape of today's argument and will be participating in the case.

And Attorney Hawley, I understand you reserved two minutes for a rebound.

Yes.

Please proceed.

Good morning.

May it please the court, Jonathan Hawley, on behalf of the plaintiffs.

The issue before the court is important, but it's narrow.

Can New Hampshire citizens challenge the constitutionality of legislative enactments in state court?

And to this question, I have two points to make before taking the court's questions.

The first is that New Hampshire courts can adjudicate the constitutionality of redistricting maps.

We know this because this court has said so.

Time and time again, it is held that once the legislature draws maps,

state courts can assess their constitutionality, including their compliance with fundamental part one rights.

This was confirmed just last year in the Narelli case when this court expressly rejected

a redistricting exception to ordinary judicial review.

The second point is that plaintiffs' claims here are properly brought under the constitution.

And again, we know this because this court has said so.

In Burling v. Chandler and prior, this court recognized that districts are not constitutionally permissible

when they are designed to or would minimize or cancel out the voting strength of political elements of the voting population.

That is the legal standard that plaintiffs seek to apply to their partisan gerrymandering claims.

It is not only judicially discoverable, it has already been discovered by this court.

And it's a manageable standard as well because it asks courts to do what they do all the time,

determine intent based on direct and circumstantial evidence,

and hear testimony about the effects of legislative decisions.

Courts are readily able to undertake that inquiry.

And plaintiffs' claims are-

Did the trial court reach the issue of manageability and discoverability in this case?

To the extent that that is considered part of the political question,

as Dr. Nunder knew, Hampshire, that might be a consideration.

But the threshold consideration we have here is our have plaintiff stated a viable constitutional claim.

Because this court's political question and jurisprudence has been consistent,

that even when the legislature exercises its absolute authority,

constitutional claims involving fundamental part one rights can be heard.

That has been held over and over by this court.

To the extent that the standards are judicially discoverable and manageable,

that is at times part of the political question inquiry.

But certainly this court doesn't need to arrive at what exactly any bright line rule or

mathematical test is for partisan gerrymandering.

At this stage, it's enough for this court to answer two questions.

Have plaintiffs stated a viable constitutional claim and can courts hear that claim?

Who's going to answer the question?

I'm sorry?

Who's going to determine the question of what the standard is and

whether it's judicially manageable?

This court, I believe, has already answered the question of what the standard is.

It's partisan vote dilutionist.

Does a given redistricting map cancel out or

minimize the voting strength of a political group?

That's what this court has articulated.

To the degree to which a bright line rule or

what the specific mathematical test is,

that's not required as part of the judicability inquiry.

We know that this is a manageable standard, again,

because it's simply an intent and effect standard.

It's what courts do all the time.

We will go back to the, hopefully go back to the Superior Court and

prove up our claim and then we can decide whether or not we have some.

You know what the overriding concern of courts like us is, though,

that we don't want to be entangled in politics.

It makes us very nervous, we're not very good at it.

So how can we address this particular issue without that entanglement?

Of course, I reminded the line in Baker v.

Carb in the US Supreme Court that just because a given case has political

undertones or political elements doesn't mean it's a political case.

And here we are bringing a partisan gerrymandering claim, but

we're also just bringing a vote dilution claim under the state constitution.

One person, one vote, is also a species of vote dilution.

The details are different, but the framework is the same.

And by applying the same inquiries that courts apply to malapportionment cases,

we can arrive at the same result here without getting involved in politics,

because it's simply a creature of vote dilution.

I understand there may be a focus here in terms of the census and

every ten years this has to be done, but wouldn't it be a wiser use of judicial

resources to wait another eight years and let the political process flow?

I don't think so, Your Honor, because that would assume that there would be

a political solution to a constitutional problem.

Here again, this court has stated that partisan vote dilution is unconstitutional.

That's the constitutional injury that the voters of New Hampshire are currently

undertaking.

And simply put, there is no political solution to this problem.

The state in its brief emphasized that we should allow politically accountable

entities to take care of this problem, essentially.

But the problem with partisan gerrymandering is that it entrenched

one party in power with predetermined electoral majorities.

As a consequence, the legislature is no longer accountable to the voters.

And it's certainly not responsive to electoral consequences.

And that means that there isn't a political solution to this problem.

This is a constitutional problem under New Hampshire law.

And because of that, it requires a judicial solution, not a political one.

Isn't this case procedurally similar to Burt where the trial court decided

that it was a non-justiceable issue and we reversed and sent it back?

Shouldn't we do that?

I mean, your argument is we should do that.

Shouldn't it then go back to the trial court to try to deal with whether

there's a manageable standard or not?

We can't decide that in the first instance.

Absolutely.

I think that's completely correct, Justice Bassett.

In Burt, as in here, the trial court aired the plan to political question doctrine.

It assumed that the legislature's exclusive rulemaking authority

was enough to insulate any challenge from judicial review.

But there, as here, a constitutional claim was left, was lodged.

And constitutional claims are justiciable under New Hampshire's political question doctrine.

So remand is the appropriate standard.

And at that point, we can prove up our evidence.

We can look at what we say, what the state says.

Actually, see what are the facts here?

How does the evidence weight?

And it's up to the finder fact to determine if we've proved by a preponderance of evidence

that, in fact, this partisan vote dilution has occurred.

Did the trial court ever address the merits at a hearing or otherwise of these

affidavits that were submitted in conjunction with the preliminary injunction motion?

No, Your Honor, we did not have a hearing on the preliminary injunction.

And this case was dismissed on a motion to dismiss on justiciability grounds.

The evidence hasn't been considered, let alone weight.

And we haven't had the opportunity to develop the sort of factual record that

might shed light on what the, again, we have the legal standard.

But sort of how that standard is applied to the facts of the case,

we haven't had an opportunity to develop that record yet.

I guess back to Justice Hick's concept.

Partisanship is a fluid activity.

Your hearing on the evidence would be a snapshot in time.

I don't know where our independence, the independent registered voters,

would fit into such a snapshot in time.

And things could change before the next census.

So I'm having a hard time conceptualizing what it is we would ask the trial court

to do in determining whether there is a partisan gerrymandering problem.

And I guess I read Berling a little differently because we indicated that

political considerations are tolerated when the legislature creates the map.

They are not tolerated when we do it and we do it when there's been impasse.

And so far, as I know, we've only done it when we've had to,

when there's impasse in order to create a map.

So I'm having a hard time focusing on what it is we'd be asking the trial

court to do in this instance.

Certainly, so three brief responses to the parts of that question, Justice Hans

Marconi. The first is that you mentioned undeclared voters.

And undeclared voters, to be clear, are injured by partisan gerrymanders,

no less than are members of the minority party.

Because in New Hampshire, which is a 50-50 state, as purple a state as

you can get, undeclared voters play that key swing vote role in swinging

elections. But our evidence has showed that under these maps,

the number of competitive districts is essentially zero.

So not only are certain members of the political population deprived of

their chance to elect governing majorities, but undeclared voters

are deprived of their opportunity to influence life as well.

Zero today, but we know voting behavior can select different issues

from different sides of the political aisle.

Maybe not so much in today's world where people are dug in and it's all or

nothing, but in the normal political climate, people can side with one

party on some issues and another on other issues.

Certainly, and the political scientists who submitted declarations

before the district court, which again has not been considered or

way, we don't have that sort of factual record yet, but the evidence

is in the record. And they have tools that they can use as

statisticians to essentially control for what you're talking about.

It's true that partisanship can change and voting behaviors can change,

which is why when they're measuring partisan effect and the political

effects of districts, they're able to use composite scores and other

analytical tools to essentially account for those changes and to create

models that are stable and account for the fact that people's voting

behavior can change. But doesn't your argument ignore the fact that

candidates matter? In New Hampshire, we have a lot of split tickets.

They certainly do have matter, but the problem with partisan gerrymandering

is that electoral results are essentially predetermined. No longer

do voters retain that popular sovereignty to choose their

legislators, essentially legislators choose their voters. They

take the voting decisions away and means that candidate choice and

these other political considerations that would influence a person's

voting decision no longer have the same effect when electoral

decisions are essentially predetermined. And that is a key in

this case is that we're not talking about ordinary political

considerations of the sort that we know are acceptable when redistricting

happens. What we are alleging here and what we believe our evidence

will prove up is that the legislature wasn't motivated by

incumbency, protection or even drawing certain safe districts for

certain legislators. These maps are not the result of the

ordinary pursuit of partisan gain. These maps represent a

systematic, intentional and deliberate effort to shut one group

of voters out of the political process.

Could make for some very interesting depositions. But how

would you manage it? Would you would you depose all 400

legislators? 425 or 4 rather?

So direct evidence of partisan intent is certainly one tool that

we could use to prove our claims in this case, but it's not

the only tool, because as our experts have already shown,

circumstantial evidence can also shed light on whether a

gerrymander has occurred. That can include anything from

the quantitative measures of partisanship that our experts

have shown. Again, we've already demonstrated that in this case,

these maps represent extreme partisan outliers, more less

competitive and more partisan than 99% of alternative. So we

have statistical evidence that partisan gerrymandering has

occurred. But there's also other circumstantial evidence,

for example, the degree to which the legislature abided by

traditional redistricting principles in other gerrymandering

cases. And for the racial gerrymandering context, for

instance, that sort of evidence can also be used to determine

legislative intent. So depositions and direct intent of

legislators, that's one piece of the puzzle. But that's not the

entire evidentiary puzzle that we have.

Is a your position that partisan considerations are part of

the process and acceptable. It's just at some point they go

too far. They can go too far and become unconstitutional.

Yes, and where that line is, is where this court has

said it is. It's when the maps systematically devalue and

dilute the voting strength of certain New Hampshire voters.

That is where the line is.

And are you ultimately asking the judicial branch to step in

and draw lines here, or merely say that these maps are

unconstitutional and you the legislature should go back and

do it again?

But yes, we seek declaratory relief and injunction against

future use of these maps. What the remedial process looks

like is something that we can discuss if and when we get there

down the road and different courts have applied different

remedial standards. Often, the legislature is given an

opportunity to remedy a gerrymander in both state and

federal courts. If necessary, if no remedy is forthcoming

from the political branches, then just as last as in the

Narelli case last year, these courts can step in and provide

the remedy of the political branches will not. But in terms

of what we're seeking here, we're looking for an injunction

and declaratory relief declaring these maps unconstitutional.

How do you distinguish our discussion about community of

interest in the city of Manchester case?

Certainly, I see my time is up.

May I briefly just ask a question?

In the city of Manchester, community of interest was

the claim itself. And as this court concluded, that's not

cognizable. There's no constitutional requirement

community of interest. In our case, we're using communities

of interest merely as one piece of evidence to prove

that the legislature acted with an impermissible partisan

intent. The failure to abide by community of interest is not

our constitutional claim. It's merely evidence to prove our

vote direction claim.

Thank you, Attorney Holly.

Do you call it the area?

Thank you, Your Honours. May I please report Anthony

Gallo, the area for the state defendants. Just want to

address a couple of points that were raised by plaintiffs

Council. One of the points they raised that this

court has already decided that these such a claim is

justiciable. They point to the Burling case, but that's not

what the Burling case is. The Burling case doesn't say.

Well, what about Richards?

Pretty clear that we said constitutional infractions are

addressable by this.

Well, constitutional infractions as a general matter are

redressable. But what I'm talking about in terms of the

Burling case is those statements related to

multi member districts and the US Supreme Court cases to

which early sites talk about multi member districts being

suspect in certain circumstances.

And none of the plans here involve multi member districts.

They are all single member districts. But as to

constitutional claims being redressable, you have to look

at the fact that redistricting is a special function under

our Constitution. It is demonstratively committed to

the legislative power.

There's no language of exclusivity there, however.

Well, this court's justiciability jurisprudence dictates that

when a function is specifically reserved to a particular

branch of government, what you're looking at is whether

there are constitutionally mandated procedures.

So how do you distinguish Burt?

Well, in Burt, I think the difference here is this.

What the plaintiffs are asking for is they're asking the

court to find a restriction that is not in the text of

the Constitution, that is located in no portion of

the Constitution.

Well, I don't understand. I thought they were claiming

equal protection and an absence of fair and equal

elections. Those are certainly articulated in the

Constitution and in their complaint.

Well, the question is where in the constitutional

taxes is constitutionally mandated procedure come

from? Because they're claiming entitlement to a

certain level of political competitiveness in districts

that somehow the legislature has to form districts

that put political groups together in certain ways

that can create a certain level of competitiveness.

And there are express redistricting limitations in

the Constitution. That's not one of them.

There's Part 1 Article 11, but Part 1 Article 11 deals

with electoral processes.

Aren't you collapsing the redressability analysis

with the ultimate analysis about whether the

Constitution prescribes partisan gerrymandering?

Well, I think in the first instance, this court has to

find a constitutionally mandated procedure or

limitation in the Constitution for this to be

justiciable, to get over the first hurdle of the

nonjusticiable political question doctrine.

I don't think it exists. I don't know that the court

could decide what that is without making an

initial policy determination that is not within the

judicial wheelhouse.

I really don't understand your argument. Can you help me,

please? If it's a violation of equal protection, is it a

violation of equal protection? If it violates the

Fair and Free Elections Clause, it violates them.

I don't understand where there's policy there.

That would be constitutional jurisprudence, not policy.

Well, this court would have to articulate that

extreme partisan gerrymandering could violate

equal protection. It would have to identify.

You'll never get me to say those words.

It will have to identify the constitutional provisions

that it comes from in the policy. There are sort of

inherent policy decisions that underlie that and

complicate that determination without expressed

language in the Constitution, like whether to what

extent political considerations may be permitted in

the redistricting process.

What if the legislature said that, you know, you're

a Democrat, you're a Republican, you get one vote.

But if you're an independent in the state of

New Hampshire, you only get, your vote only counts

three-fifths of a vote. Would that be

reviewable by this court?

Well, that's a different issue. That goes to...

Not on the justiciability question. Is that

case justiciable or not?

Yes. That would have a...

Because?

It would have a burden on the right to vote. It would

treat the votes of individuals different.

But odds to elect a particularly preferred political

candidate is not something that is at least, I read

this court's cases, and I read the Constitution

expressly protect to have a politically

competitive district, and whatever that means.

Because when you look at the expert avidavids,

and I know those haven't been tested, but what we

see is that, you know, there's 13 Senate

districts that they claim have a Republican

vote share of 54.4% or less. Some of them are

less than 50%. Only six of them are between

54.4% and 53%. I'm not sure what the margin of

error on those are, and I'm not sure that those

are immutable over time, those percentages,

and how they take into account. I'm not sure

they do undeclare voters who may have voted

for a particularly Democratic candidate in one

election, but might not in another. But those

seem to be relatively close percentages. In this

court, we'll have to decide essentially whether

political competitiveness is evaluated on a

chamber wide or district by district basis. What

measure of deviation makes a district politically

competitive versus anti-competitive? Whether

such competitive standards would only apply

between the two major political parties,

because that seems to be part of the

underlying...

Well, the trial court never got to those issues

here, because it just truncated the analysis. It

said there's a textual commitment under

Articles 26 and 65 and a ball game. And now

you're making an argument about, well, this

might be allowed. This may go too far. Isn't

that precisely the type of work that a trial

court should do to suss this out before it

lands with us?

Well, the trial court could do that, but I

think it dovetails with the analysis that in

this court's justiciability jurisdictions where

you have demanded when something is

textually committed to a certain branch of

government that there be a constitutionally

mandated procedure that you can look to and

say that is a limit on the legislative

authority to do this.

So in Burt, there was a Second Amendment

issue, but what kind of guns? How big the

guns could have been that could have been

brought into the state house? That's

not, there's no bright line there, and we

didn't say, well, you know, that's not

justiciable.

But there is a bright line that guns were

protected, right? And that is that the

right to bear arms was protected. There

is no bright line here that you're

entitled to a certain level of

competitiveness or a certain quantum of

competitiveness in your district. That

doesn't exist.

An equal protection claim is not

formed in the air without reference to

the right that's being infringed.

Correct. And including the group that's

being infringed, which is sort of hard to

figure out what the group is. In this

case, for example, they seem to

alleging their complaint that it's

persons who vote for democratic

candidates, not just persons who are

registered to a particular party,

persons who vote. And why is it

limited to democratic candidates? Why

isn't it persons who vote?

Well, it wouldn't be. It wouldn't be.

We find this to be your decision.

Well, and I think that's one of the

highly complicating problems with this

is how are you going to then go

across the state and make

districts politically.

Then how do you respond to this old

saw that just because a matter is

complicated is not a reason not to

address it?

I don't think that's the issue in

this case. I think the issue is that

these sorts of political considerations

and decisions are reserved to the

legislative discretion within the

redistricting function. And that's

why in the city of Manchester, this

court said a common interest of

factors, while maybe wise, to

consider them are not part of the

express redistricting principles that

exist in our Constitution. And

therefore, the legislature does not

need to consider them. They rest

within the discretion of the

legislature until somebody goes and

amend standards into the

Constitution, until individuals get

their legislature to pass

statutes that might manage this

issue. And I think that probably

many, many voters do not agree with

our gerrymandering.

It is the defendant's position

that partisan gerrymandering can

never be unconstitutional. If

20% of the electorate can put in

place a supermajority, does that

not raise any constitutional

questions?

Well, I certainly think, as the

United States Supreme Court

suggested, that that is not

consistent with democratic

principles, but that the remedy

doesn't lie under the framework of

our Constitution and our

justiciability doctrine with the

judicial branch. That it lies in

the first instance with some,

a creation of some standard in

the state Constitution.

But the problem here is you

have a circular problem and once

you have an entrenched group,

they're not going to give up

power. And so to say that the

solution is at the ballot box

overlooks that reality.

Well, every 10 years we put a

constitutional convention on

the ballot. Individuals can vote

to have a constitutional convention

in these provisions of the

Constitution that we're

talking about today have had

resolutions that have passed

through the constitutional

convention. I think, too,

there's something to be said

for a motivated public base of

bipartisan individuals who care

about a particular issue being

able to influence politics.

And I would say that at the end

of the day, how the court

would ever go about defining

the right to the extent it

exists to some politically

competitive district in the

redistricting process, it has

to be thinking forward to

whether or not judicially

manageable standards exist to

adjudicate it.

To some degree, we wouldn't know

until it was actually tried,

don't you think?

Well, I don't know how you go

through discovery and try a case

without knowing what the

standards are and what you're

trying the case to and what

you're trying to prove.

That becomes difficult.

But you start to try to figure

out, I mean, how does this

right apply? Does it apply?

Are you looking to create

political competitiveness

in a chamber?

Are you looking to create

political competitiveness

on a district by district

basis?

I still don't see why courts

do that sort of thing all the

time.

That's what we get paid for

when we're trial judges.

To determine, as a legal

matter, I assume it has to

flow from what the constitutional

right is.

Absolutely.

Burns of proof and all of

that.

That's what trial judges do.

Decide in the first instance

that this right exists.

It's not clearly articulated

in the Constitution and

articulate some formulation

for it that can go back down

to the trial court.

And there can then be further

proceedings, perhaps, about

whether judicially

manageable standards exist

because many justices of the

United States Supreme Court

have articulated many

different standards with regard

to this.

And none of them have been

determined to be workable

standards.

But if we look, for example,

at the Hughes case, where

Part 1 Article 8 was in play

and ultimately this court

decided that about whether

the restrictions were

reasonable or unreasonable,

there's no bright line

standard there.

It's going to be a case-by-case

inquiry.

And that's perfectly

appropriate.

That's what we did in Hughes

and as what Justice Hick says,

that's what trial courts do.

But there's at least a

standard there at Part 1

Article 8.

There's no standard for when

political considerations may

or may not be taken into account

how far they may be taken.

So unreasonably restricted?

Is that a bright line standard?

I mean, that's what's in Part 1

Article 8.

I don't know if that would

make sense with respect

to the issue of drawing lines

with discretionary considerations

and political considerations

or not.

As I stand here today,

I think it would be a very

difficult standard to manage

and figure out.

I hesitate to mention this,

but isn't this a direct parallel

with the school funding

litigation where the standard

is an adequate education

and that tends to float

over the years?

For lack of a better word?

Well, I would suggest that that

area of jurisprudence has

some very significant

challenges involved with it.

And that there are parts

of that jurisprudence that may

not be actually justiciable.

And that area of jurisprudence

may have the court involved

to some degree, in certain ways,

with reserved legislative processes.

But even with that, that issue

is not as solemnly reserved

to the legislature and discreetly

reserved to the legislature

as redistricting.

So we've imposed it upon them

when you come right down to it.

Well, redistricting goes to the core

of the legislative function.

It is putting the legislature

in charge of its districts.

That function was not put

with the judicial branch, if it was.

Maybe political considerations

wouldn't be a part of it at all.

But the framers apparently did not

want another branch of government

to have that sort of influence

over the legislature and power

with respect to the legislature.

And they placed it with the framers

knowing they're a political branch

of government,

maybe the most political branch

of government.

And that political considerations

will play a role.

And many of the United States

Supreme Court justices have said

that's OK.

And that's perfectly permissible.

And Justice Breyer and his dissent

in the by of case has said

that that promotes a certain amount

of stability in the government,

which is good for government.

And being able to protect incumbents

can be a good thing.

And so they have never ruled out

that there are good aspects to this.

We would ask that you affirm

the district court.

Sitting beside Burling, the plaintiffs point

to Part 1 Article 11 as their basis

for a constitutional standard

to be applied in a tool

of our constitutional interpretation.

Well, the primary tool is to rely on text.

There is no text here.

But we also look at the historical context

and what the framers may have understood.

And the plaintiffs point to the English Bill of Rights

as support for the free,

unequal election, election clauses

in various state constitutions.

And that purpose of that was to protect

against the dilution of votes.

Do you have a response to that?

And is that an appropriate historical consideration

for us to consider?

I think it's an appropriate historical consideration

if it's correct.

And I'm not sure it is correct

as a historical consideration.

I think what the purpose of Part 1 Article 11

in that history is,

is to prevent actual interference with elections

by an executive, by the king,

who is interfering in ways that result in intimidation

and is interfering in direct ways

by opening and closing polling places at various times.

And that part of why we have a Part 1 Article 11

is so that elections can be free from that,

the election processes and procedures

can be free from that type of interference

from those type of procedures.

And why Part 1 Article 11 is never cited

in a redistricting case.

It's cited in cases that involve

regulations of elections.

Well, that's just because the lawyers didn't put it in.

But it is, it goes to the point that

that history in particular counsels

as to why in our constitution

the function rests with the legislature.

It wasn't put with the executive.

It wasn't put with another branch of government.

It was put with the legislature.

That may have been the lesser of two evils,

but that, the framers put it there in their wisdom.

Thank you very much.

Thank you, Gary.

Turn it over.

Thank you.

I'd like to begin by addressing the state's last point.

Part 1 Article 11 is cited in redistricting cases.

This court cited it in burling for the proposition

that the New Hampshire constitution guarantees

that each citizen's vote will have equal weight.

Again, this case is ultimately about vote dilution.

And so Part 1 Article 11 is the basis

in the A basis in the constitution

to reach that determination.

Ultimately, whether we're dealing

with multi-member districts or single-member districts,

the injury of vote dilution is the same.

In dissenting from the US Supreme Court's

V versus Jubilera decision,

Justice Souter identified two distinct harms

that come from parts of gerrymandering.

One is that certain voters have an unequal chance

to elect their representatives.

That's the vote dilution that this court recognized

in burling in other cases.

But also the all voters are denied

fair and effective representation

because once the legislature entrenched itself

and shuts itself off from political accountability,

they are no longer responsive to voters.

To put it another way,

elections conducted under partisan gerrymandered maps

are not free because the electoral results

are predetermined and they are not equal

because not all voters have the same opportunity

to elect their representatives.

So Part 1 Article 11 readily supplies that basis

to determine, even setting aside burling

and these other pronouncements from this court,

that partisan vote dilution is not consistent

with the state constitution.

This case, actually I'll just point about a bright line.

As you noted, many constitutional standards

don't come with single bright lines

or mathematical certainty.

They're broadly worded because that's simply

how the constitution works.

And a great example of this is one person, one vote.

In the half century since Reynolds v. Sims,

neither the US Supreme Court nor this court

has ever adopted a definitive bright line

for population deviation in legislative districts.

And that's because each time it's a case

in a fact specific inquiry.

What did the legislature do?

Why did it do it?

And what are the consequences of those decisions on voters?

Again, the details of this claim might be slightly different

but the framework in the inquiry is the same

and it's a manageable standard

that courts look at all the time.

We ask the court to reverse.

Thank you.

Thank you very much counsel.

The case is submitted.

Courts in recess.

You rise.
