This is case 2020-03-01. Brenda L. Buckkiss, administrator of the estate of Michael D.

Veyu et al. Versus DeMullis Supermarket, Inc.

Wayne Council. I understand you reserved two minutes.

Yes. Yes, sir, I did. Please proceed.

May it please the court. My name is B.J. Branch. I'm here to represent the estate of Michael Veyu.

As a threshold issue, I want to note that Mr. Veyu's sisters are here today and they wanted me to thank you

for taking this case and hearing this dispute, regardless of how you rule.

As a practical matter, this case in some ways comes down to the right of a civil person, a civil party, to have a jury trial.

Because this motion to dismiss was granted, and when you take away someone's right to a civil jury trial, you need to be careful.

And that's why the standards are so deferential. Here, the court left was unduly rigid in the manner in which

the test that they feel was in place was applied.

In fact, as a practical matter, she completely restated the second part of the test because

in her analysis where the second part of the test being it occurs substantially within the authorized time and space limits.

In her holding, she only indicated it didn't occur substantially within the authorized time.

She didn't even look at the space issues, which she should have done.

There are a number of tests that are employed by this court in looking at things.

But what this case really comes down to is the first part of the scope of employment test.

That is where, as plaintiffs counsel, we have, I suppose, the hardest task.

And that is the, is it of the kind he is employed to perform?

If you reviewed the court's decision, you will find that she said, well,

he was hired to run a dairy stand and driving his car has nothing to do with operating the dairy stand.

However, if you look at the restatement second of agency, excuse me, and

comment A to section 229, a servant is authorized to do anything

which is reasonably regarded as incidental to the work authorized or

which is commonly done in connection with such work.

Here, due to the employment manual, the conduct in question is him going to his car and driving away.

And at that point, the employer is still exercising control over the actions of that employee because-

How so?

Well, because the employee is required to park in a specific location.

And that location is chosen so that the sort of the marquee parking spaces remain available to the customers.

So each employee has a separate space, or is it an area?

They have a designated area that they're required to park in.

Not just a space, but an area.

Correct, yes, yes, a specific area of the parking lot where they are supposed to park, yes.

And while the car is there, as I noted in my brief, the employer exercises a fair amount of control over it.

They are allowed to search it.

They are allowed to inspect it.

And it's quite obvious that while that car is on the premises,

the employer is exercising control over not only the individual that they work for,

but their instrumentality, namely the automobile.

When does that end?

When does that end?

Well, I would suggest, based on their employment manual, Your Honor,

that it ends when the car departs the premises.

And that locality rule is something they talk about at other portions of the restatement of torts.

Excuse me, agency.

I always want to go to torts, not agency.

But realistically, there's a line of cases that say if an employee's acts could still be the manifestation of the master,

even if it's not on the premises.

But in this case, clearly, the car is not only on the premises.

It's subject to control by the employer while it's there.

And it's located where it's there because of what the employer has.

So any time an employee leaves the parking lot and gets in an accident on the street outside

and half the vehicle's in the parking lot, half of it's in the street,

the employer's viable for that accident?

Well, that's why it's a matter of fact for the jury to consider.

I don't think a jury would consider that to be as something that was still within the conduct

that should be binding the master.

But here, that is not the case at all.

So that's why it becomes a jury issue.

That's why it's important that it go to a jury.

So are you saying the liability extends beyond the parking space to through the parking lot,

through the entryway until you're on a public road?

Is that what you're saying?

Well, that's an issue that I think I can't answer for you right now

because we haven't had a chance to do the discovery.

But my understanding is there's a specified route to take when you leave the property.

So in that circumstance, if it happened along that route that was specially designated,

then yes, I would say that it would happen after they've left the space.

But the employee at issue here didn't even have to drive a car to work, right?

He could have walked to work.

There's no requirement of his job that he drive a car to work, right?

No, no requirement.

But that is why these things have to go to a jury

because that's just another fact that goes into the equation.

In the restatement as well, they indicate, if I can find it here,

the question of whether or not the act done is so different from the act authorized

that it is not within the scope of employment is decided by the court

if the answer is clearly indicated.

Otherwise, it's decided by the jury.

In this case, there are facts that would be teased out in discovery

that I suggest would allow a jury to be better able to make the call

on whether the ties have been cut or whether they're still in place.

And that is what we're fighting for,

is for a jury to be able to hear the facts

and for us to develop the facts that might allow a recovery.

You seem to think there's no relevance to the fact that the employee at issue,

this was 40 minutes after he clocked out and he just went grocery shopping.

You're saying that the liability and the issues here

would be the same whether that happened or not.

Is that right?

Well, that's an interesting, again,

that goes to the issue of why this is a jury trial.

Clearly, there might be a tipping point where a jury would say

that's too long of a departure from the actual place and time of employment

that we can no longer find that it's related to the employment.

I don't think it's irrelevant, but again, in terms of discovery,

if we find, as I think we will,

that there are certain incentives for them to do their shopping there

and that they have certain breaks,

they get certain preferential treatment by shopping there,

then I do think, again, the employer is in the place

exercising some level of control.

So it would seem that argument, if the employee was off for the day

and then came back shopping with their spouse

and went shopping, your argument would be the same,

that while there's this discount or there's some incentive to come back

and how could that fall within the scope of the employment?

Yes, but it would be so far distant from the authorized time

of the situation because he would never have clocked in

and was on the premises on a date that he wasn't planning on working anyways.

But when you look at the, these are all factors

that 12 people could hear along with other factors

that we're not able to get to because of the motion to this being granted.

But you agree there are circumstances where a trial court can make that decision?

Oh yes, oh yes, that decision's been made against me in a lot of those cases.

Yes, I'm not questioning the power of the court or the jurisprudence

that says a motion to dismiss could be granted.

What I am saying is that it's quite a remedy

vis-a-vis the right to have a civil jury trial

and therefore it should be employed only when it's very clear

that there is no relevant questions for the jury to answer.

That is what we are fighting for is our right to a jury trial.

Yes, it can be cut off under certain circumstances, especially in the...

So how much discovery was done in this case, any?

No, it was a motion to dismiss that was granted.

Is this fact about a specially authorized route

the employee was required to take?

Is that in the amended complaint?

It is not in the amended complaint.

I think what I said in the amended complaint was that,

because I can't state to you and will not state to you

that there is a special designated route,

I do not have competent evidence on that point yet.

I believe I would get competent evidence

if I was allowed to do discovery.

Okay, so it's not in the record or don't?

I don't believe...

I may have said on information and belief

there is a designated route they're supposed to follow

once they get in their car,

but I could not establish that with the certainty required

to hold it out as a fact to you.

But that's because we have not been able to engage

in any discovery because the motion to dismiss was granted.

And when you look at the, you know,

how we try these cases,

how the scope of employment cases are tried,

there are all these civil jury instructions

and all of the factors that you guys are talking about,

excuse me, all of you people are talking about,

my mistake, all of these factors are things

that the jury should get to hear and make a decision.

And I would agree with you on some of these factors,

we are gonna fall short possibly,

but that's why there's the multiple factors

and you look at all of them and then you determine

which way this balance is struck.

And I'm gonna suggest to you that there is at the very least

a case to be made to a jury here in terms of whether

he was within the scope of his employment or not.

We haven't had a chance to get into any of the control

that the master in this case can exert

over the employee from the time they leave

to the premises to the actual store

to the time that they are off the premises of the store.

So this is why the motion to dismiss at this point

is premature and I would suggest to you that

at the very least the court should have allowed us

to go forward with discovery

because it's more a matter of emotion for summary judgment.

And I mean, I didn't specifically say that in my brief,

but you don't like me to just stay

on what I say in my brief.

So as a practical matter, I think that it was premature

to grant a motion to dismiss with an issue

that is so intertwined with the factual circumstances

that you are all asking me about as we talk today.

And never fear that was going to be my question.

Might this be something that could come up

on summary judgment?

Certainly everything can come up on summary judgment

as a practical matter.

And it is one that would be,

I think that's a better vehicle at the very least

because then if it comes back up for you all

to hear on appeal, you would have a full

evidentiary record to decide this from,

not just pleadings in the bare allegations of a complaint.

So in closing as a practical matter,

it comes down to a couple of things

that I also talked about in my brief.

What is the law to apply?

I do think that's important because within the context

of her decision, she indicates that workers' compensation

cases are not relevant to a determination

of whether someone is acting within the scope

of their employment, but almost every jury instruction

that is in the book relative to scope of employment

references workers' compensation cases.

And so moving forward in this case,

I think it's important that this court establish

that at the very least, when you're

talking about a totality of the circumstances case,

that those factors that are relevant

to a determination of an employee-employee relationship

in the context of workers' comp

are relevant to be heard by the jury in a case involving

whether someone is acting within the scope of their employment.

Finally, I want to thank you for hearing our case.

And I think that I will close by saying and continue

to emphasize that in the restatement second of agency,

the question of whether or not the act done

is so different from the act authorized

that it is not within the scope of employment

provided by the court only if the answer is clearly indicated.

So here I would suggest to you that first,

when you look at how they define whether an act is

authorized or not, this case stands for the proposition

that certainly where they're told to park

and the conditions of the work that, if not followed,

gets them terminated clearly makes

what this employee was doing something

which is would be reasonably regarded as incidental

to the work authorized or which is commonly done

in connection with such work because to the extent

you do drive to your employment at Market Basket,

you are obligated to park in a certain specific area

and therefore this is an activity

that an employee would commonly do

in connection with the job that he's hired

to perform in the building itself.

And I believe again that the motion to dismiss

therefore should not have been granted

because it's a factually sensitive inquiry

and the factual predicate has not been established

sufficiently because the motion to dismiss was granted.

Thank you.

Tony Branch.

Good morning.

My name is attorney John Palmacato.

I go by Jay.

I don't know if he saw it in my pleadings

but Jay Palmacato for the most supermarkets.

And I'm here to discuss I guess what has happened

in this case so far and to support

the motion to dismiss that was ordered by,

sorry, the dismissal that was ordered by.

As I understand it, we are now talking just about

vicarious liability, correct?

I believe there was some other things

that were brought up within the complaint.

I'm sorry, brief, which I was going to reference

but I would like to speak to vicarious liability.

I think that's the most important aspect

of this matter right now.

So we've talked a little bit about,

Attorney Branch has talked a little bit

about the restatement.

I think the restatement is talking about

possibly drafting a new law.

I think the law is established in the poorer cases

as well as a testier case.

In Porter, kind of the beginning of it,

back in 2004, they determined that vicarious liability

is determined by a three part test

and whether or not the conduct is within

the scope of employment.

That three parts test is, one,

is it of the kind the employee is employed to perform?

Two, if it occurs substantially

within the authorized time and space?

And three, if it's actually at least in part

by a purpose to serve the employer?

Now here we're talking about-

All three of those conditions need to be met, right?

That's the way I read it, Your Honor, yes.

So in this situation today,

in regard in this case, it's very factual based.

I think we have a case that's very specific to what occurred.

In this case, we have an employee, Mr. Elliott,

who was working as a dairy clerk.

The dairy clerk was hired for a certain period of time.

He was an assistant dairy clerk,

which meant he was a part-time dairy clerk,

which means he's paid hourly.

He is required to do certain tasks during the day

and that dairy clerk will be working inside the store.

That dairy clerk will be working in the dairy department.

During his time in the dairy department,

he'll be responsible for the stocking of shelves,

making sure that area is clean,

making sure that the area is appropriately stocked

with non-expired items, various things,

but various things that are within that dairy department

and not in the parking lot, not related to his driving

and not related to anything going on outside.

Where's the scope of his employment, do you say, ended?

What's the endpoint?

The endpoint.

So my argument on that, the endpoint would be

when he clocks out, when I use the term,

that's a general term, but when he clocks out,

I mean, when he punches his time clock

when he's done for the day.

And my argument is that he was done for the day

at the time he clocked out

and then he took further steps to do a personal errand,

which was grocery shopping that day.

He spent 40 minutes that day grocery shopping.

He was not, while grocery shopping,

he was not doing any job that he was hired to do.

He was shopping for his own personal daily groceries.

So at that point, he made two steps

outside of his employment.

One was the clocking out

and two was the personal errand of grocery shopping.

So that's essentially where...

But then he had to go out to the parking lot,

to the parking space area that he was designated to park in.

Yes.

So how do we evaluate that?

So it doesn't matter, I think it was a general area

in the Manchester store,

which was outside of the normal,

closest to the store parking area.

That was not specific.

I think, as Attorney Branch mentioned,

it was not, he did not have a, you know,

spot one, two, three.

It was just a... Right, it's an area,

but it's in the manual.

Got a parking in that space.

That is correct.

It is.

I think when it's in the manual,

and that can be seen in the appendix,

the manual states that it's within a certain area.

It's a very quick one sentence statement.

I would say that statement does not rise to the level of

an employment.

It is an employment obligation,

but it's not something that would then rise to the level.

If that person leaves from that place,

that liability comes into,

the defendant's liability is now being brought into the picture,

and that demolition markets is in liable for all actions

that happen after he leaves that parking spot.

That parking spot is not,

it's not mandated by the demolition markets,

as was discussed by attorney...

It's in the fact that they're designating a parking area,

expand the authorized space and time limits.

I mean, it's contemplating in the employment manual

that he's got a part there,

and that's part of the employee manual.

So doesn't that necessarily expand the space

and time limits?

It does, to a point.

I think at this time,

maybe there'd be a further argument

if he checked out and ran right to his parking lot.

I think at this, I'm sorry, his car,

I think at this time,

he was no different than any customer in the parking lot

when he went grocery shopping.

He was not viewed,

he was not being viewed as an employee at that time

when he was grocery shopping.

It's not like he could go out back

and go get his own groceries.

He couldn't select the best milk.

He couldn't do things that made him any more different

than a normal customer.

Does he get a discount?

As far as I know, he does not.

No, no.

So his only role at that time was a shopper.

And then he did as any shopper does,

he left the store, went to his car and drove out.

Now, this area is not closed off for customers either.

This is an area that a customer could also park in.

The parking area you're referring to.

Correct, yes.

Take me on his path up until the time of the accident.

Well, we're not entirely sure.

I based on what my understanding of where he parked,

it was so there's a front of the Manchester store,

it was to the left back area.

But it was an open parking lot,

which was kind of combined with the main lot,

which was open to all customers.

Once again, it was not a fenced off area

or any real special spot for Mr. Elliott to park in.

It was again, part of the main lot.

You spoke earlier about the sort of scope

and nature of Mr. Elliott's job.

Is that in the record?

Well, I believe it was in the record

in that he was a Dairy Clerk and a Dairy Clerk.

And it was also in the record that,

at least in the motion to dismiss,

that a Dairy Clerk is not required to drive anywhere.

He's not doing deliveries.

And that in the motion to dismiss,

I also mentioned that his job was

within the inside of the store in the Dairy Department.

What does the record tell us about the employee

that's responsible for watching the surveillance cameras?

Is it somebody that's manning those things?

So I believe this was brought up

in probably the opposition on the motion to agree,

consider, and also maybe on the motion to amend

my opposition on those two things.

Those cameras are not actively monitored by,

but there's no individual staring

at those cameras, there's no person that's hired

by the most supermarkets to watch those cameras.

Those cameras are typically accessed

after an incident occurs, whether it be

a shoplifting incident, an accident in the parking lot,

such as here, an employee that was injured

in terms of, say, a worker's compensation injury.

So those types of things, but they're not.

What does the record tell us about the other employee

that was in the parking lot and witnessed this happen?

Yes.

So that individual was in the parking lot a distance away,

I believe, in the police report,

which was included in the initial motion to dismiss.

He was, I wanna say, mostly across the parking lot

at this time.

In that police report, there's also mentioned

that the individual who ended up being struck

by the car, Mr. Veyu, fell within a minute

of him being struck.

That was evaluated by the Manchester Police Department.

And within that minute time,

that individual across the parking lot,

that employee by Demolus,

did make an overt attempt to warn.

He did see him fall, not sure in the exact time frame,

but less than a minute.

So he saw him fall, so he witnessed this

for about a minute.

Yes.

Do we know how far away he was from the victim?

I believe it was a distance in the parking lot,

a far away distance in the parking lot.

So it sounds to me that this case should be decided

on summary judgment rather than a motion to dismiss.

How do you address that argument?

So at this point, there's a two-part issue

on that employee.

One is whether or not he had a duty to warn

and there's no duty in the case law for him to warn,

however he did warn.

But that duty does then not open it up

to for him fairly to do something

because it was not foreseeable.

I think foreseeability truly comes into this.

That employee does fit the respondent superior argument

that he was working, he was doing his job at the time,

he was doing all the things that the Porter case

would find to be employee-related.

So there is an employee-employee relationship.

However, at that point, we're looking at whether or not

there was a one duty to warn,

argue there's not duty to warn, but he did.

And whether or not what he witnessed

was then a foreseeable risk to the employer.

I'm aware that he saw someone on the ground,

but he didn't know anyone was going to run over him.

I mean, I think that's something that maybe won't run

through someone's mind very quickly like that.

Now, if that person observed it for a long period of time,

walked around, maybe spoke to him,

didn't mention anything,

maybe had a different position here.

But what we're talking about is a one minute,

less than one minute situation with that individual,

made an overt attempt to warn,

I believe was walking towards that person

to, I assume, offer some assistance.

And at that point was that individual's person

who fell, Mr. Vayu, was then run over

by this second person, Mr. Elliot,

which we talked about further as the Dairy Clerk.

So the individual that came over to help,

I think we're not, we don't get to the point

where Damoulas is then responsible for what occurred

within that very small period of time.

Damoulas would be responsible

if there were some defect in the parking area

where the employees are designated to park

that interfered with sight lines

or contributed to this accident,

which could have been an employee

or a member of the public.

That would be an independent claim against Damoulas.

That would be, that was, that is not going to happen.

And that wouldn't depend on whether the employees

were directed to park there or not.

So there was no, there's no allegations

that Damoulas either failed to inspect

the parking lot or something.

A man's shrubbery in the way or something.

Correct.

And in fact, the police report does state

which also was in the appendix

that the analysis of the Manchester Police Department

was that the way he fell would not be visible to a driver

because I believe where he fell under the car

and that's specific to the vehicle,

and anything that Damoulas could have any control over.

But there was no, I don't believe there's any allegations

of a median or as you mentioned,

a shrubbery or any other thing,

even a shopping cart or the design of the shopping cart

corrals or sidewalk even.

So essentially Damoulas argues that the motion

to dismiss was proper, that the motion to amend

was properly denied, as well as the motion to reconsider.

I have the same observation that Justice Donovan has

as to scope.

I mean, you yourself says it's a fact-based inquiry.

I heard you say that.

And for facts, we need summary judgment.

And particularly with respect to authorized time and space.

I mean, you're cutting a very fine line there.

It sounds like you're saying when maybe,

I guess when he checks out is when the time stops,

but whether the authorization extends to the parking lot,

it could or it could not

is what I understand your position to be.

I guess a better way to say it would be this,

that individual has a shift every day.

It's probably six to eight hours every day.

When he checks in, what he does on his way to work

is not Damoulas' responsibility.

When he checks out, it is not Damoulas' responsibility.

Furthermore-

But he does have to follow a prescribed path

to exit the premises.

I'm sorry, you talk.

Go ahead.

My apologies.

No, no, no, that's fine.

I do not believe that to be true.

Especially the way that lots set up,

I don't think that Slicky, Attorney Branch,

mentioned that was not pleaded in his complaint,

was not pleaded in his motion to amend.

So as far as I know, that is not true.

I believe the parking lot is a wide open one

in the Manchester store.

At least the one in question here

does not really have paths or small roads through it.

So I think he's entitled to go anyway

with his quickest to the main road.

So again, speak to Justice McDonald's

question.

My response would be essentially that

he went shopping.

He became a customer at that time when he went shopping.

He also checked out.

So I think there's two reasons

as to why he's no longer an employee.

It's a 40 minute period of time.

It's, I guess, depending on how 40 minutes is looked at.

However, those two actions,

which are actions of him,

they're things I think that point directly

to the author as time and space,

which is the holding of Porter as well as Tessier.

And I think that kind of ends it.

And that authorized time and space

is inside the store during his work shift,

which we're both now over at the time of this accident.

So thank you, I have nothing further.

Thank you.

You're returning to Palma Cato.

Turn your branch, Roboto.

Thank you very quickly in terms of Roboto.

You know, one of the difficulties

that we have here in this case

is that we don't get to see the video,

but the Manchester police did.

And when the officer in a police report

indicates something was approximately one minute,

it doesn't even sound like they timed it.

And I think that this is just one of the issues

why we should be allowed to do some discovery

in this matter to see that video.

There's a video of what occurred.

And therefore that would certainly be relevant

to what the employee was doing

and we can find out from the employee himself

if we are allowed to do discovery

whether he was told to take a path or not.

Have you asked the police department

for a copy of the video?

We have asked for a copy of the video

and we received from the police department

and we received a portion of the video,

but we do not know if there is more than one camera.

We're understanding is there more than one camera.

There was just a small snippet of a video

that was turned over to the Manchester police department.

And I'm gonna suggest to you,

although I really can't testify,

that what we viewed was more than a minute,

quite frankly, and more than a minute

of the driver being in the car, so.

Let me ask you, how is it that the employee manual

is part of what we should be considering here

given that it's a motion to dismiss?

Well, it has to do with the fact

that some of these things that I pointed out to,

especially where he's parked, are conditions of employment.

And if you could be fired for

not performing that particular function,

it certainly seems like it's at least incidental

for, as the test read,

calmly done in connection with the work.

So the manual dictates that they have to park

in a particular area, and therefore,

those other employees, not just this one,

park in that area when they work.

If you didn't do any discovery,

how'd you get the manual?

Off the internet, I have very good employees

who just went on the...

And is it specific to that store?

No. Is it just in general?

It's in general, not specific to that store.

I wouldn't have been able to find it, but my employees did.

Or his sisters did, one or the other.

Someone found it for me to look at.

I did not.

There's no dispute that it is the manual to mollusk.

No one has raised a dispute.

They would have certainly had many opportunities to do so.

And you've incorporated statements

from the manual into the amended complaint.

Yes, I did all of those things.

And as we all know, some of my favorite cases

in law school were the Frawlik and Detour cases

involving agency, because they're fun.

But that's also a factual inquiry

as to whether someone has so deviated from their job

that it becomes a personal errand.

Even a personal errand can be done

while someone is still within the scope of their employment.

It depends on the nature and extent of it.

So it again goes to the facts that we're talking about here.

And...

Thank you, Trent Branch.

Your time has expired.

This case is submitted.
