This is case number 202-0647, state of New Hampshire,

versus Michael R. Smith.

Mr. Newell, my understanding is you've reserved two minutes.

Is that correct?

That's correct, Justice Bassett.

Thank you.

Please proceed.

I'd like to begin by discussing competency,

and in particular, the two orders for competency evaluations

and hearings, hearings that were never held in this case.

The spirit court erred in both instances

by failing to make specific factual findings about competency,

either element of competency, and by failing

to hold a hearing on competency in both instances.

First, defense counsel moved for a competency examination,

citing specific facts that gave rise to counsel's concern,

including the defendant's mental illness,

his apparent paranoia, his inability

to discuss the case rationally or to focus

on helpful arguments to his case,

and the court ordered a competency evaluation.

The state's competency evaluation was problematic

because the evaluator found that Mr. Smith did have

genuine symptoms of mental illness.

He did have a history of mental illness,

but that the evaluator was concerned that he was

malingering, and so it was difficult

to determine the extent of his deficits.

And the evaluator relied upon a video

from, I believe, 2017 in making his findings.

Rather than holding a hearing, the court

held a status conference at which Mr. Smith was not

in attendance, and defense counsel informed the court

that we've had our own evaluation which acquitted, which

appears to be a transcript error, acquitted the state's

examination, therefore we're not contesting competency.

So when you say that the state's evaluation was

problematic, is that your own assessment of it?

What evidence of a problem with the first evaluation

is there in the record?

The evaluation itself is in the record, Justice Countway.

And there's no argument or other evaluation

by the court of the evaluation, which is the principal error

that we're pointing to in our brief, in our argument today.

But if the outcome, we don't have the second evaluation

in the record, but we have the inference

that it didn't have a different result

in terms of a determination of competency by that expert.

Is that fair to say?

I think it's fair to say that the defense counsel, for whatever

reason, wanted to waive competency

and that this court says competency is not waveable.

We don't really know what that evaluation said

or whether it agreed with the state's expert on malingreen

or anything else, because it's not in the record.

We just don't know.

Are you saying that Bertrand stands for the proposition

that it's not waveable?

Yes.

This is not a waveable issue.

I think we cite several points in our brief

that it cannot be waived by the defendant whose competency is

at issue to then waive determination of his competency.

So what's a remedy here?

Could we do a post-conviction evaluation

to determine whether or not the defendant was competent

when he was tried?

Not in this case, Justice Daven.

So in some cases, we could.

And I think that Bertrand and Haycock

explain when we can and when we cannot.

And in particular, they cite two instances.

Well, if there is a evidentiary hearing in the record,

then the court can look back to that

and perform a retrospective competency evaluation

in the first instance.

If the court decides that it doesn't have enough information,

then it doesn't have enough information.

Or if it decides in retrospective the defendant's

not competent, then it has to proceed from there

about whether it's restorable.

But in this instance, we've never had an evidentiary hearing.

And the court has never made the factual findings

that are required by Haycock and Bertrand

on both elements of competency.

Instead, the court said, in a written order,

the defendant's no longer contesting competency.

Therefore, the defendant is found competent.

And the bigger error, because I think the court's

initial error, while still error and is preserved,

was understandable in that instance.

The second error is more egregious,

because the court on its own initiative

in two detailed orders required a new competency evaluation

and a new hearing, because it was

concerned both about the defendant's ability

to represent himself competently,

and also about the defendant's ability

to participate competently, even with counsel,

and required a new evaluation on both points.

And after it received a new evaluation, which

found the defendant not competent to represent himself,

the court made another error in that it instead looks

to this court's decision saying there's

no separate standard on competency

for representing yourself, which is what this court has said,

but drew the wrong conclusion from that.

It concluded that we're no longer

concerned with competency because there's

a previous competency order, and we

can't look at competency as self-represent

because there's only one standard.

The court entered another order, and in this instance,

the court simply said, because the defendant has been

found by the court to be competent to stand trial,

he is therefore competent to represent himself.

Again, there's no factual findings

about the elements of competency

that are required that this court has repeatedly

said the court must make when there's a bona fide concern.

And the court gave detailed concerns in this case

about competence and about the problems that were

arising from Mr. Smith representing himself in this case.

And it adopted in full, as its own,

all of defense counsel's original concerns in this case,

yet it declined to hold a hearing.

Is it your position that once there

is a bona fide concern about competency

that that can never dissipate, that a trial court can't,

based on all of its assessment and interaction

with the defendant, the trial court,

that that can't be satisfied, that a trial court can't say,

well, I had a bona fide concern.

We've done all this, and now I don't anymore.

Is that not possible?

That's completely possible, Justice Bassett.

And if the court has that concern dissipate,

that's what should happen.

But the court has to follow the procedure

that this court has laid out, which is to hold a hearing.

And even if the court doesn't hold a hearing at a minimum

to have specific factual findings,

the court made specific factual findings

order for competency determination,

but it made no specific factual findings

and saying, well, the concern has dissipated.

So when Judge Horan wrote that the defense and state

agreed that the court could determine

competency based on the OFE evaluation,

your argument is that that is not a sufficient finding?

That's not a sufficient finding, Justice Countway.

First of all, that doesn't adopt explicitly the OFE

examination.

And second, it doesn't take into account Mr. Smith's objections

at the status conference to the new evaluation,

his desire for a hearing, which was not waived,

and what I think the state did not respond to,

which is his ferreterites.

Because when the court next ordered an evaluation,

Mr. Smith was representing himself.

And yet the court made a determination,

and I would refer you to page 29 and 30 of our brief,

the court made a determination that competency

was going to be argued by standby counsel.

And even though Mr. Smith, in response to the court's

question, said, I don't agree with any of this at all,

and he began raising concerns about all of the methods

used by the NIH.

But reading that transcript in context

wasn't that a discussion of the standard for representing

himself, not the competency in general to stand trial?

No, I would encourage the court to review the transcript,

because as I read it in context, he's not just

talking about the standard to represent himself.

He is raising concerns about the entire evaluation.

He's saying that the latest one was on video.

Previous ones were in person.

He was saying that every evaluator

had had different tests, and how could they be reliable.

And he was told that his legal argument on this issue

should come from his counsel, not from himself,

and that there was not going to be a hearing,

because the court only needed to determine

if there was a different standard for self-representation

competency than competency when represented by counsel.

That was particularly error, because it was also

for Reddit error.

And it was a structural error in denying him

the right to represent himself to a self-directed defense.

I don't think that the states responded to that issue,

but I think that that also requires

remand for a new competency evaluation,

and if he's found competent, a new trial at that point.

A new trial in which his admissions would be admissible?

His prior testimony, if he were found

competent at the time of his prior testimony

could be admissible.

I think that would have to be litigated,

because if he wasn't competent during the previous trial,

then there would be issues about whether his statements

were knowing and voluntary during that trial.

So I think that would have to be litigated

first in the spirit court.

Do you agree that in practice,

these hearings are frequently waived?

No, I never waived them.

In all my years as public defender,

I never waived an evidentiary hearing

on competence, and in fact, I have had cases

where I was arguing for competence,

even though I knew my client was crazy,

because that's what my client wanted me to argue,

and I've had clients who believed

that the prosecutor could read his thoughts,

and that's why he was being prosecuted,

went to testify on competence.

That testimony was helpful to the judge

in finding my client not competent,

despite my best arguments that he was competent,

that's what he wanted me to argue.

So I think even when the defense and the prosecution agree,

there should be a hearing held,

and even if this court isn't willing to say

you need to have a hearing in every instance,

this court has said repeatedly, and should say again,

court needs to make specific factual findings,

which was not done in this case.

So if we agree with the state

that everything passes muster up

until the beginning of the trial,

the state then argues that there was nothing

in the trial that would give rise

to a bona fide concern about competency,

you argue differently.

But why is the state wrong?

I think that the state is wrong

because the defendant repeatedly invoked

damaging information about himself,

including his own criminal history,

including his prior evaluations.

So he was wearing a bathrobe

throughout the trial, wasn't he?

He did, and he was cautioned

that he was exposing himself to the jury.

So there were a number of reasons to think

that the defendant had issues with competence

based upon his conduct during the trial,

and it should have been revisited.

I do wanna briefly address the restitution issue.

The sentencing order specified

that Mr. Smith or the DOC could have a hearing

on the amount or method of payment of restitution

he requested a hearing,

and specifically cited that the state at the hearing

that said it was going to provide more information,

which it did not, and that was denied.

The state in its response never explained

why it should be relieved from that obligation

to provide further information to the court.

And so even if this court does not remand

for a new competency evaluation

and a new trial if found competent,

it should order a limited remand

on the issue of restitution.

Thank you very much, counsel.

Mr. Scurra.

Good morning, your honors, and may it please the court.

Kevin Scurra for the state.

I'll focus today on the superior court's

competency determinations,

although I'm happy to take questions

on any of the issues that were raised in the briefs.

The court should decline the appellant's invitation

to second guess the many people who interacted

with Mr. Smith up to and through his trial

and found him competent

based on the appellant's overly broad

and formalist reading of state versus Bertrand.

Bertrand did not address and could not have resolved

all questions that the appellant raises

about pretrial competency determinations.

When the court ordered competency evaluations,

that did reflect a bona fide doubt about competency.

But by the time the court ruled

on Mr. Smith's competence,

both times any doubts about that competence

had been resolved.

But Bertrand, how much clearer could the court have been

and says if there's bona fide doubt

in such cases an evidentiary hearing

must follow at which the defendant

shall be entitled to present evidence

and cross-examine witnesses.

That seems pretty clear to me.

So I think that doesn't govern this case for three reasons.

First, Bertrand happened in the context of trial.

And when a bona fide doubt has raised a trial,

there's not time to inquire into competency

and let the facts develop.

The court has to hold a hearing in order to determine.

Do you realize, though, in Bertrand

that there was a pretrial competency evaluation?

There were pretrial competency evaluations in Bertrand.

And I think that's actually telling

because the court's opinion in Bertrand

doesn't say that it was error for the trial court

to start the trial in the first place.

The analysis of this court of what happened in Bertrand

is all focused on what the trial court did

after the defendant's conduct raises a doubt

about his competence during the trial.

And I think Bertrand also, one of the Supreme Court,

US Supreme Court cases that it relied on

is DROPE versus Missouri.

And in DROPE, the US Supreme Court

examined the statutory procedures for competence in Missouri,

which only require a hearing to be held

if the expert's report is contested.

The US Supreme Court said that those procedures

passed constitutional muster.

And this court cited favorably to DROPE

in its Bertrand decision.

And the other thing is that Bertrand

specified why that hearing is necessary.

And it said that why that hearing is necessary

is to give the defendant an opportunity

to contest the expert's determinations about competency.

But what you have here is a defendant

who's telling the court that he does not

want to contest the expert's determinations about competency.

That's clear at the first hearing because defense counsel comes.

He says that the defense expert agrees with the OFE

and that the defense is resigned to a finding of competency.

And it's clear because we certainly

agree with Justice Countway's reading of the hearing that

takes place right before that second determination

that it is true that the defendant does say

he objects to the entire report.

But that happens in a discussion that's

in response to the court's questions about competency

to self-represent, not in a discussion about competency

to stand trial.

And I think it's also clear because the defendant,

then he compares the other competency evaluations

favorably.

He references those favorably.

And those also found him competent to stand trial.

And when the trial court proposes a plan to move forward

that's going to assume his competence to stand trial,

the defendant acquiesces in that plan happily.

And I think what he says about that

is that's what we were supposed to do in the first place.

And that's the avenue I thought we was going at.

That's at that hearing at page 9.

And the defense brings up the point about maybe this

is also a violation of Mr. Smith's forever rights.

But I don't think it can be.

First, the court did not tell Mr. Smith not to submit

anything.

It just said that the standby counsel should submit something.

It also inquired with Mr. Smith.

It asked him questions at that hearing about this very issue.

And finally, I think most importantly,

it ruled for Mr. Smith on the issue.

So he wanted to be found competent to represent himself.

And the court found him competent to represent himself.

It gave him what he wanted.

It can't have violated his right to represent himself

at a hearing where he got what he wanted.

Any more than a defendant's right to represent himself

could be violated by the state no processing the charges

against the defendant.

I mean, the Bertrand court goes on to say the trial court must

make specific findings of fact on the record

and must state the evidence on which it bases its decision.

How did the court comply with that directive?

So I think whether that applies depends

on whether there's a bona fide doubt about competence

at the time that the court is making its determination

about competency.

And so if there is a bona fide concern,

then you agree that that's required.

So if there is a bona fide concern at the time

that the court is making its determination,

then we would agree that that's required.

But there was not a bona fide concern by the time

the court's making its determinations here.

At the time of the first determination,

you have two experts who have evaluated the defendant,

found him not competent to stand trial.

You have one of those expert reports

is in the record finding the defendant not only competent

to stand trial, but malingering,

trying to actively manipulate the competency process

to his own benefit.

And you also have defense counsel,

who was the person who raised the initial doubts

about competency in the first place,

coming to the court and saying, we're not pushing

this issue anymore, we agree that he's competent.

And I think when you have that,

the state also has an obligation to raise competency

if they think it's an issue and did not do so here.

If the court's still harbored doubts,

it's certainly under that circumstance

would be required to hold a hearing.

But I think the fact that it entered in order,

finding the defendant competent indicates

that the court didn't have any doubts either.

So you have the OFE thinks that the defendant is competent,

the defense counsel thinks defendant is competent,

the state thinks the defendant is competent,

and the court thinks the defendant is competent.

And I think it's hard to see what the value

of a hearing would be here,

especially when Bertrand explicitly says

that what it's trying to protect

is the ability to challenge the expert's determinations.

But nobody wants to challenge.

What's your perspective on how routinely

these hearings are waived in practice?

There's no evidence about that in the record,

Justice Conway, I'm certainly aware

that it has happened in the past,

that these hearings have been waived.

But there's no evidence about that in the record

before the court now.

Do you think- Certainly we would put a greater burden

on courts, the OFE, the state, and defense counsel

to prepare for hearings

every time that competence is raised.

Should this court consider the determination

of malingering in its analysis?

So I do think that the OFE's determination

that the defendant was malingering

is relevant to his competence,

because I think it does show

that he understands the proceedings well enough

to be trying to manipulate them to his own benefit.

So I think the court can consider that way.

What about our argument

that there were bona fide concerns

that arose during the trial

because of the defendant's behavior at trial,

including wearing a bathrobe and exposing himself?

So I think it's important that that's before this court

on an unsustainable exercise of discretion standard.

What this court has is a transcript

and Judge Howard, who's the trial judge,

is in the room with Mr. Smith,

listening to him, watching him conduct himself.

And also has the benefit of having heard him

through multiple pretrial hearings

and having experience with Mr. Smith.

And I think that a lot of things that the defendant did

during trial demonstrated that he did understand.

He had the necessary ability to consult with his lawyer

with a reasonable degree of rational understanding

and a rational as well as factual

understandings of the proceedings against him.

I think the best example of that

is the way that he cross-examined

the state's expert in computer forensics,

who the state called an expert in computer forensics

who said that he had examined the defendant's laptop

and found word versions of forged documents

that were created by a computer profile

in the defendant's name on a date

after the victim had passed away.

And the defendant got up, cross-examined the expert,

pointed out that just because the computer profile

has one name, that doesn't mean

that that's the person who was sitting at the computer,

pointed out that metadata can be manipulated,

pointed out that you can remotely access

and hack into a computer.

And he understood the inferences

that the jury might draw from the state's expert's testimony

and he, I think, did a pretty good job of getting up

and undermining those inferences.

Even in the case of his focus

on the circumstances of the search warrant execution,

he calls officer Jeff Moore, who testified

that an initial security sweep of the property

largely resolved any of the safety concerns.

And Mr. Smith immediately recognized

that that testimony undermined the testimony

of the state's investigator, Kalise Ducey,

who said that the reason she had turned off those cameras

was because of safety concerns.

And he connects the dots between those things,

he points it out, and he comes back to it

in his closing argument.

I think that those things demonstrate

that Mr. Smith did have a rational understanding

of the proceedings that were taking place,

especially on an unsustainable exercise

of discretion standard.

In terms of the restitution issue,

why didn't the state go back with more information?

So, I think on the restitution,

we do think that that issue has been waived.

And I think there are three separate issues.

One is whether the amount is correct in the first place.

The second issue is whether the court aired

by delegating too much authority

to the Department of Corrections.

And the third issue is whether there was an error

in refusing to hold a hearing.

And I think that the challenge to the court's refusal

to hold a hearing was only raised

for the first time in the reply brief.

So I think that argument's been waived.

But as to the order itself

about the amount of restitution,

I think that that order was final when it was entered

and the defendant had 10 days to file a motion

to reconsider and did not do so.

And what about delegation to DOC?

In terms of delegation to DOC,

I think state versus oaks,

this court approved a restitution order

that allowed up to $10,000 in counseling costs

that had not yet been incurred.

And so I think any delegation that happened there,

the DOC would have to determine

whether counseling costs were incurred,

whether they were incurred as a result

of the defendant's conduct, how much they were,

and then require the defendant to pay.

And the restitution is,

the administration of restitution

is statutorily delegated to the Department of Corrections.

And so their job all the time in restitution cases

is to determine whether a payment's been made,

how much it's been made for,

deduct that from the amount outstanding.

And so requiring them to do that in this case

is well in line with the simple job

of administering restitution orders

that's always delegated to the Department of Corrections.

If the court has no further questions

the state will rest on its briefs.

Thank you very much, counsel.

Mr. Noll, do you wish to take your two minutes?

Thank you, Justice Bassett.

First, this court has said in view

that the right to be only tried if you're competent

is probably not subject to waiver

and that was correct.

A lot of the state's argument rests upon,

well, the defendant agreed with being found competent.

Our position is that the defendant was crazy

and so it should not be able to waive the issue of competence

and particularly at a minimum,

making specific factual findings

which the Superior Court did not twice on competence.

The state argues that once bonafide concerns are gone

there's no need for factual findings.

Well, we know there were bonafide concerns

because the state made the court,

excuse me, made specific factual findings

in two sealed orders about its concerns for competence

and then made no specific factual findings

dissipating that concern.

I don't think we can get from concern to no concern

without some level factual findings.

And finally, I refer the court to page 33 of our brief

where we did specifically argue

that the state's restitution recommendation

was followed by volunteering

that the number might not be accurate.

It promised to provide additional briefing.

It did not, so I don't believe that issue was waived.

Thank you.

Thank you very much, counsel.

Okay, submitted.

The court is in recess until this afternoon.
