This is case 2020-0197, Daniel Richards versus Union Leader Corporation at all.

Good afternoon. Attorney Harris, I understand you're reserved two minutes for a re-bottle.

Yes, thank you.

And the defendants are splitting the time. Attorney Lewis and Attorney Sullivan, seven and a half minutes each. Is that right?

Thank you. Yes.

Great. Please proceed.

Thank you. May it please the court, your honors. I'm Samantha Harris for the appellant, Daniel Richards.

And if it's all right with the court, there's one thing I'd like to kind of just say generally before I sort of dive in and start answering questions.

And that is that the appellees will portray this as a broad attack on free speech, as an attempt to undermine the First Amendment.

And I want to be clear that that is not what this case is about.

The Union Leader and Robert Ozzie published all sorts of insulting invective about Daniel Richards that he has not challenged their right to say.

He has not challenged their right to call him part of a coven of mendacious white men.

He has not challenged their right to say that he espouses anti-American excrescence, that he's an unreconstructed white apologist, or that he's biased and repugnant.

What he has challenged is their right to make false and damaging statements a fact, that he's shown that he will lie, that he supports suppressing the franchise,

and that he disseminated white supremacist ideology across multiple media platforms.

So I want to be clear that this is a narrowly focused case on statements that imply underlying defamatory facts and not a broad attack on anyone's right to publish insulting invective

in the service of political debate. So I just kind of wanted to say that before we begin here, and I'm happy to keep talking or happy to answer questions as you would like.

So the first lie that was contained in this article is that Dan Richards has shown he will lie in order to protect his power and privilege.

And the lower court aired in holding that this was merely a prediction.

This isn't a prediction, it's not about something that he will do in the future.

Why isn't it an opinion?

That he's shown he will lie?

An opinion.

You could say that about me and it wouldn't bother me at all.

It implies that the author has information about something that Dan Richards has said that is untrue.

And in the Milkovich versus Lorraine Journal, the Supreme Court held that, quote, John Jones is a liar, is a false statement of fact if the underlying facts aren't disclosed.

Well, aren't the facts disclosed here in terms of the commentary on critical race theory and the public discourse that your client engaged in regarding House Bill 544?

Not with regard to Dan Richards, your honor. His name appears once in the editorial. There's nothing linked that he said or wrote.

So there is nothing for readers to use to judge for themselves whether Dan Richards has in fact shown that he will lie.

And to the extent that the article tries to connect other positions such as support for suppressing the franchise to advocacy for House Bill 544,

there's no reasonable nexus between saying that somebody supported House Bill 444 and saying that they support suppressing the franchise.

And the question here is what a reasonable reader would take away from the article.

And if you say that someone has shown they will lie or that they support suppressing the franchise without providing any information about things they have said or done to justify those statements,

People accuse courts of doing that all the time suppressing the franchise, whatever you want to say. People accuse judges of doing that all the time.

We don't have a right of action. We don't sue. We're not defamed.

Well, I think that if somebody said that a particular judge or individual supported suppressing the franchise without saying because of their opinion,

because of the opinion they authored in this case or because of the way that this decision impacts voting rights,

this person has acted in a way that suppresses a franchise or supports suppressing the franchise.

I think that saying that somebody supports suppressing the franchise without providing the reader with any context for why that is the case is defamatory.

But didn't Mr. Aziz say that he believed that there were misrepresentations made about what critical race theory is?

Didn't he say that in the article in the op-ed piece?

Not by Dan Richards.

But those who were criticizing critical race theory were making misrepresentations and didn't he say or imply that Mr. Richards was one of those people?

He said in the article, well, first he said these people have shown that they will lie, but then he also said they're either being dishonest or they're ignorant.

And I think it's very different to say, and of course we have not challenged his right to claim that Dan Richards may be ignorant based on his views of critical race theory.

What we've challenged is the fact that saying that someone has shown they will lie suggests that you know something they have said that is untrue

and that the reader doesn't.

And this is someone who has to do business in this community and impugning his honesty without providing the reader with any context for why you believe he is dishonest, we believe is defamatory.

Do you agree that Mr. Richards is a public figure having injected himself into this important debate?

I do not, Your Honor, and that's not something that the lower court ruled on.

They set aside the question of whether he is a public figure.

I mean, certainly he did testify in support of HB 544 and make a limited number of public comments on it.

I think whether that is sufficient to render him a limited purpose public figure is something that the court has not yet decided.

I also believe that if he were to be ruled a public figure that the actions here would meet the actual malice standard, but that hasn't been decided.

And I think that particularly given New Hampshire's robust tradition of public participation in the legislative process,

saying that because somebody testified in support of a bill and made a limited number of public comments in support of legislation,

rendered them a public figure that that would have a chilling effect on people's participation.

Because part of what renders someone a public figure is the kind of access they have to the media to rebut false statements that are made about them.

And Dan Richards, although he, you know, had some access to the media in connection with his advocacy for HB 544,

he's not the kind of person who can just respond in the media to allegations made against him.

He's not a public figure.

Is that a disputed fact that he made a limited number of statements regarding House Bill 545 and the theory that's that issue behind it?

Well, yes, I'm sure that the union leader, you know, the union leader has opined that they do believe him to be a public figure.

That's not something that the trial court ruled on.

They didn't deem it necessary, you know, to decide the case.

Are there facts in the complaint sufficient to conclude that he's a public figure?

I mean, just the four corners of the complaint, which is what we hear out on, the motion to dismiss,

are there facts in the complaint that are sufficient to make the legal determination that he's a public figure?

Are there facts in the complaint from which a court could conclude that he is a public figure?

Are the facts alleged in the complaint sufficient to support that legal conclusion?

I mean, I think that if it depends on how many comments the court feels is sufficient to render someone a public figure,

it's undisputed that he testified in favor of House Bill 544 and that his testimony was published

and that he made a certain number, you know, he gave a certain number of public statements in connection with his testimony.

But it is also undisputed that he's not someone who has widespread access to the media

and who is, you know, regularly opining on things in the media beyond that immediate controversy.

This goes to a larger question I have in part raised by Attorney Sullivan and Herb Reef.

Whether the trial court went beyond the four corners of the complaint in reaching its decision

and what your view of that is, I mean, particularly concluding the larger context of what critical race theory is

and the larger debate about that, did it go beyond what was properly before it in terms of the complaint?

Well, my understanding is that the appellees are arguing that the court should have gone beyond the four corners of the complaint.

And I'm asking whether it did, whether in your view it did.

I mean, I think that it took into account the statements that Defendant Ozzie made in his editorial.

I don't think the court obviously declined to take judicial notice of the much broader academic discussion

that Appellee Ozzie refers to in his brief, nor do I think it should have because I think that that very academic debate,

which Appellee Ozzie admits in his brief, he has immersed himself in

and that may be understood by a certain class of intellectuals as a sort of debate that's happening in society right now.

I don't think that that is a debate that has trickled down to the reasonable reader of the union leader.

So I think that the court was correct in looking at the context that Appellee Ozzie provided in his editorial

but not in looking at, you know, textbooks on critical race theory and other things that the average reader of the union leader would not have access to.

Isn't the distinction here between critiquing an opinion of someone else and lobbing accusations as to someone else's character?

Isn't that what we're looking at?

I think what we're looking at is whether the accusations or whether certain of the accusations that Robert Ozzie leveled about Dan Richard's character imply statements of fact, right?

I mean calling him repugnant is obviously just an opinion about his character, saying that he has shown he will lie or that he favors suppressing the franchise.

We believe that those imply that Robert Ozzie has certain facts about Dan Richards that were not made available to the media and that were not available to the reader.

And I think, you know, it's telling that the other local outlets that published this same editorial, the first paragraph did not contain the name of Dan Richards or the other private individual.

It just focused on Newt Gingrich and the other obviously public figures in the case, and I believe that that's because whoever edited those papers knew that you couldn't just say, throw someone's name into an editorial and say that they're a liar

and say that they favor suppressing the franchise without providing a reader with more information about them, which in his editorial Robert Ozzie declined to do.

Well, that assessment made by the other papers about whether to include the name or not, that shouldn't affect our legal analysis, should it?

I think that it's relevant in terms of what the union leader may have known that other...

Isn't that more speculative than anything else we need to think about here today? Why that name was omitted?

I do not know why that name was omitted, yes.

Exactly.

White supremacist ideology, does that have a common definition?

It does. People, the average reader understands white supremacy to mean a belief that the white race is superior.

So that's different in your view than somebody calling somebody racist?

I think that the phrase, I mean look, this court obviously has not decided whether generally calling someone a racist or a white supremacist is sufficient to constitute defamation,

but it doesn't have to decide that for the purposes of this case because the accusation of disseminating white supremacist ideology is far more specific

and calls to mind the kind of flyers that people leave around my Jewish neighborhood, for example, saying, stand up white man.

It conjures something different and multiple courts have acknowledged that simply calling someone a racist or a white supremacist may not be sufficient to constitute defamation,

but that a more specific allegation such as that someone made racist statements or was an avowed racist or an open white nationalist were sufficient.

And I think, again, you know, Robert Ozzie in his brief, which is 20 pages, explains at length why he believes white supremacist has a different meaning.

But he didn't write a long article explaining this to the readers of the union leader.

He wrote a 750-word op-ed and the average reader of the union leader is going to understand disseminating white supremacist ideology as disseminating materials suggesting that the white race is superior.

And in fact, the bill that Dan Richards testified in support of, whether or not you support the bill, actually prohibits teaching that one race is superior to another.

So I don't think that the average reader is going to draw a connection between advocating for a bill that literally prohibits teaching white supremacy and being a white supremacist.

Thank you.

Attorney Harris, do you have a light sign?

Uh-huh.

Thank you.

Attorney Lewis.

Thank you, Your Honors.

And may it please the court.

My name is Michael Lewis from the law firm of Rath Young and Pignatelli on behalf of Mr. Ozzie.

As I believe is the case, my 12 years of New Hampshire public education was deficient in regard to teaching me a complete and credible curriculum of American history.

The remedy over the next 20 years has been supplied by Part 1 Article 22 of the New Hampshire Constitution and the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.

And there in lies the true New Hampshire advantage.

The text of our Constitution protects a greater breadth of liberty with regard to expression, speech, contestation, and condemnation than any in the Republic.

For this court to provide a remedy that would allow the dragging down and the imposition of cost to an opinion as expressed by Mr. Ozzie when viewing that column in total would be to have a deeply undermining impact on those freedoms which make us an exceptional jurisdiction.

We already said that we don't, that we analyze the statements individually and not in total.

You've said conflicting things.

Okay.

So what you have said is that, and this is how you, as I've read your analysis, this is how your analysis has always proceeded.

In automated transactions, for instance, you have, and in Boyle, you have viewed these issues first through the prism of defamation law.

And you have analyzed each statement challenged through defamation law.

But in footnotes you have also acknowledged, as I think you must, that every defamation case implicates free speech and free press.

And so for reasons that I think have to do with potentially your traditions of analysis, you have first begun with the common law.

I would challenge the court on that and say that the superior law is where you should begin when a party raises it.

And are you advocating for a different standard under our state constitution than we have applied under the federal constitution?

I am arguing for, I am arguing for at least as strong a standard as has been applied in cases like City of Keen and also in Snyder versus Phelps, which City of Keen relies upon.

And my analysis is-

Which imports the federal standard.

It does.

But we should begin, I think, where I think we should begin is with the text of the state constitution, which is stronger than I believe the federal constitution is.

And then I believe the coordinate state constitutions are throughout the republic.

And I recognize that I routinely watch your arguments and I routinely listen to you ask, including Justice Bassett routinely ask the question,

is your position supported by the text of the constitution? Where in the text of the constitution is your position supported?

Read it.

Free speech and liberty of the press are essential to the security of freedom in a state.

They ought therefore to be inviolably preserved.

Free speech, and I'll let you go then, but free speech with respect to issues of public concern.

Right.

How does that relate to personal attacks on individuals?

Free speech with regard to a very robust discussion that individuals are engaging in, in regard to this particular matter, the matter of the teaching of American history in public schools, is absolutely protected under-

It's an issue of public concern.

But again, how do you extend that to personal attacks on an individual without, as in automated transactions, laying out the rationale for those conclusions?

Consider Snyder versus Phelps.

It's a very disturbing decision.

It was written by Chief Justice Roberts.

It's a case in which, and I'm offended by the facts of the case,

a West Baptist church went to the cemetery of a veteran who had been killed in action and called him all sorts of terrible things,

and called people who are soldiers who fight for this country all sorts of terrible things, and called important matters with regard to this country and its priorities, terrible things.

And Chief Justice Roberts wrote that in a society that protects the freedom of speech under the First Amendment, notwithstanding a multimillion-dollar verdict, that that kind of conduct is off limits with regard to civil liability.

But that opinion did not delve all that deeply into the issue of undisclosed but implied facts.

It didn't need to.

If I recall.

It didn't need to.

Right.

And that, I think, defines just how broad the freedom is here.

That notwithstanding the very awful attacks that were leveled in that case, despicable, the court nevertheless, and shallow, the court nevertheless found that those statements were protected by the First Amendment.

Well, as I understand your position here, is that the facts are disclosed.

They are.

And they're laid out in the column.

And they're not just disclosed in this column.

Mr. Ozzie has written many, many, many columns.

I mean, 500, I believe.

And in prior columns, which are part of the record here, though outside the four corners of the complaint, he has laid out his views about contested concepts, like what constitutes white supremacy?

What is a proper teaching of American history?

What we should be concerned about publicly in regard to that very important issue?

Mr. Richards testified before the legislature.

He appeared in YouTube with other public figures.

He wrote columns.

He went to other states to advocate his position on these issues himself.

He entered a public debate.

Well, given that the court didn't decide the issue of whether he was a public figure, can we or should we reach that issue?

You should.

And because it's a case involving free speech and free press.

And the authorities that we rely upon, including in our statement of standard review, say you have to.

That heightened scrutiny, at least under the First Amendment under Howard versus Antilla, requires you at the earliest opportunity to look at whatever is before you.

And come to the conclusion regarding whether the challenged statements or writings are protected under principles of free speech.

Because not doing that would impose additional civil liability on expressive activity.

On the issue of whether he's a public figure or not, the trial court didn't make any factual findings in regard to that.

And wouldn't we be required to make factual findings in order to determine whether Mr. Richards is a public figure or not?

It's an interesting question because this court has said with regard to this entire subfield that things that you might ordinarily call questions of fact or questions of law.

Because what's at issue is protected speech.

So you have said this in your decisions, including in City of Keen.

That the question of whether speech is protected or not at this stage, even at a motion to dismiss, becomes a question of law subject to a review of the entire record before you.

So we can look at the record and determine whether Mr. Richards is a public figure or not?

Among other things, yes.

What record?

I'm sorry.

What record?

The entire record as identified in the appendix before the court.

In pleadings, in links that are identified.

But it goes beyond what was before the trial court?

No, I don't believe so.

I think that what was before the trial court was included in briefing and referenced and accessible to the trial court.

So we would go beyond the four corners of the complaint because of Antella and that teaching.

Yes.

And appellate court should do that where a trial court hadn't.

Yes, Your Honor, and it's because of the subject matter here.

You've said in your decisions that the implications of continued civil liability are so great.

That you must in order to protect this important right and to ensure that, you know, that we have the kind of free speech that I believe is a true New Hampshire advantage here.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Ms. Sullivan.

Good afternoon.

May it please the court?

Kathleen Sullivan, representing Union Leader.

I'd like to pick up, if I may, where you just left off.

And quote this court in automated transactions in talking about, in viewing an alleged defamatory statement.

Quote, in conducting this inquiry, we may also consider documents attached to the plaintiff's pleadings, documents the authenticity of which are not disputed by the parties, official public records or documents sufficiently referred to in the complaint.

So it is well-established law in New Hampshire, as well as in the First Circuit, in the case of Riley Bihar, that an alleged defamatory statement must be considered not only in the context of the four corners of the document or the pleadings,

but in the broader social context as well.

Well, automated transactions didn't include documents from a broader social context.

It included documents that were specifically at issue in the claims made in that case, having to do with presentations made by the defendants to others and the supporting documents to those statements.

I guess I don't see that case as standing for the proposition that the court made a broad dive into other perhaps available social information.

Well, in Boyle v. Dwyer, this court stated, it is in part the setting of the speech in question that helps determine the way in which the intended audience will receive the speech.

And in Milkovich, the type of language used, meaning the meaning of the statement in context, whether the statement is verifiable and the broader social circumstances in which the statement was made should be considered by a court determining whether a statement is defamatory or not.

But I guess just to follow up on just as Hans Marconi and I am interested in this because what you just quoted is part of our typical standard of review and emotion to dismiss.

Frequently, a party in a contract case will attach a contract and it's part of our standard of review and emotion to dismiss will accept the terms of that contract.

That is materially different than a broad inquiry into the social context of speech.

And I think you're asking for us to do something that's new in terms of how we review something at a very early stage of litigation in terms of conducting a really wide ranging factual inquiry to understand the context.

I would submit that it's not new. It is different because defamation is different.

But in Thomas v. Telegraph, this court stated, allegedly defamatory words are to be considered in the context under the circumstances of their publication as the context of a statement can significantly affect its fair and natural meaning.

This approach is consistent with our case law discussing how statements of opinion must be evaluated in the defamation context.

These cases are different.

But I would submit to the court that this court doesn't need to consider it should, but doesn't even need to consider the broad social context because the statement itself is an opinion that sets forth the basis for the opinion in itself.

So it seems to me the judicial notice issue is the flip side of the standard review issue.

So we don't need to reach that based on the statement alone? Is that what you're saying?

Yes, that you don't need to reach that. Should, but it's not necessary for a finding that Mr. Ozzie disclosed the facts that were the basis of his opinion.

Our position is that the statements aren't actionable because they're protected pure opinion and not, as Mr. Richard claims, statements of objectively verifiable or false fact.

But even if they were, if Mr. Richards could somehow prove that the ideology that he disseminated, and that's not disputed, that he disseminated ideology across multimedia platforms,

that if he could prove that that ideology was somehow incapable of characterization as white supremacist ideology,

and if he could prove that all of the statements, the public controversial statements that he's made about race, diversity, equity, critical race theory are all objective truth,

the outcome of this case would be the same, because as this case decided last October in Gasgard v. Hall, and I'm quoting again,

even a provably false statement is not actionable if it is plain that the speaker is expressing a subjective view and interpretation,

theory, conjecture, or surmise, which I would submit, is similar to a prediction in the trial court's order,

and rather than claiming to be in possession of objectively verifiable facts,

the first statement that he disseminated, this white supremacist ideology, just like in the Gasgard case,

Mr. Richards only pled the beginning of the statement, and he left out the qualifier and the context provided by the end of the very same sentence

that that statement is in. The sentence in its entirety reads that he had disseminated ideology that is white supremacist ideology

to keep Americans from learning an unexpurgated American history from its 1619 origins alongside the white 1776 origins.

How does that define what is meant by white supremacist ideology?

It doesn't define what is meant by white supremacist ideology, but it clarifies or explains Mr. Aziz's opinion that censoring American history equates to white supremacist ideology.

That is an opinion, and it's not a fringe radical, crazy opinion as Mr. Richards states.

The definition of white supremacy, which, again, is influx, is evolving, that is not a crazy fringe idea.

The critics, the proponents of that idea, that white supremacist ideology encompasses much more than it did 50 years ago.

People like Robin D'Angelo, Ibramex Kendi, people that Mr. Richards rails against, they write New York Times bestselling books.

They're at the top of the charts for months at a time. They are not, it's not a fixed definition of white supremacist ideology.

Attorney Sullivan.

Yes.

Great white song.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Attorney Harris, the bottle.

Yes, thank you, Your Honor.

I just want to say a few, make a few quick points in response to the points made by the appellees.

First, you know, the reason that the appellees are so focused on documents outside the complaint is that they are now looking for the opportunity to backfill Robert Ozzie's editorial with all of the sort of supporting documents and context in this academic debate.

What about the suggestion that the action's based on an incomplete dissection of a sentence in that editorial? How do you respond to that?

Say that again.

What about the accusation from this side of the podium that the alleged quoted defamatory statement was incomplete?

The statement.

In your pleadings.

The full statement does not specify why that ideology would be considered by any reasonable reader to be white supremacist.

So it's not incomplete or is it incomplete?

Do you mean literally like did we provide the full sentence in the complaint?

Yeah.

No, we excerpted the portion that we believed was defamatory.

But I do not believe that the remainder of that sentence sheds any additional light on why that would be considered white supremacist ideology.

And to be clear, the full article was before the trial court.

Yes, indeed.

And you know, if there are reasonable disputes over the meaning of a term, if a term can reasonably be understood in more than one way, that is a question of fact for the jury.

And we submit that accusing someone of disseminating white supremacist ideology, accusing someone of favoring, suppressing the franchise, those have a meaning that reasonable readers will understand that has done tremendous harm to Dan Richard's business.

And that implies undisclosed defamatory facts.

And, you know, Appelli Ozzie's reference to the city of Keen, you know, this, this, that was not a defamation case.

The elements of defamation and the analysis this court performs in a defamation case already accounts for First Amendment concerns in a way that the elements of a tortuous interference claim do not.

I see my time is up.

Ms. Harris, can I just ask you if, if we were to determine that your clients a public figure, would you agree that the complaint doesn't make sufficient allegations to satisfy the actual malice standard?

I would not.

I believe that the complaint does satisfy the actual malice standard and we did address that in the trial court.

I think that Robert Ozzie knows that Dan Richards does not support voter suppression.

I think he does.

He knows that Dan Richards is not a demonstrable liar and a white supremacist.

And I think that he's used these terms, again, to try to make a point, but to try to make a point without providing readers with the context they would need to actually judge for themselves.

Thank you.

Thank you very much, counsel.

Case is submitted.
