This is case 2022-0184. Teresa Narelli et al. versus Secretary of State et al.

Good morning everyone. I understand on behalf of the plaintiffs, Attorney Devaney will be taking 15 minutes, reserving two for rebuttal.

And then Attorney List on behalf of the Speaker and Attorney Lehman on behalf of the Senate President will be taking seven and a half minutes each. Is that correct?

Great. Attorney Devaney.

Good morning, Your Honors. John Devaney on behalf of the plaintiffs.

Your Honors, it is now clear that the legislature and the governor have been unable to agree on a congressional voting plan as evidenced by the governor's veto this past Friday of SB 200.

May I just interrupt there? You did, in your supplemental brief, reference the governor's veto message.

And since that is in part a triggering event for us here, you referenced the veto message.

We actually have it, but no party has submitted it.

So I just want to get on the record that the governor did veto both Senate Bill 200 and House Bill 52.

Do you agree with that?

Thank you, Your Honor. And that, of course, means that the responsibility for adopting a map falls to this court.

And it couldn't be any clearer today that the court acted prudently in establishing this procedure that has led us to where we are today with the special masters report.

And on behalf of the plaintiffs, we very much appreciate that the court has done that.

And there is no special session that's been scheduled, to my knowledge.

So there's no imminent possibility of a map being adopted.

So this court, as other courts have said in a similar context, has the unwelcome obligation to adopt a map.

And so that's where we are.

Is there any indication that the Secretary of State might extend the deadline?

I assume you're referring to the candidate filing deadline, and I've not seen any indication of that.

I, of course, did read their brief where they talked about the fact that if they had a map by June 6th, I believe,

that they could extend the deadline.

Actually, not extend the deadline.

They'd still comply with the June 10th deadline.

So if a map came, if this court were to adopt a map later than that, June 8th is the date they said,

they would have to extend the deadline to the 17th by allowing amendments.

And our point in response to that is we don't see any reason to do that.

There's nothing to be gained.

It's not as though a map is going to be adopted during the period that the candidate filing deadline might be extended.

And so we feel strongly that the prudent course here is to comply with the statutory deadline or window, if you will, of June 1 to June 10th.

Adopt the map today.

Allow that window to go into effect tomorrow.

It might be different if there were a map that were to be immediately adopted and by in a few days could result in a legislative solution.

But that's just not the case.

And, of course, New Hampshire is the only state in the country now that does not have a congressional map.

Which further highlights the need to act expeditiously, literally in our view today, so that we have a map and the candidate filing period can begin tomorrow.

I will briefly address the lawfulness of the map the special master proposed.

You all have no doubt read his report, and so I don't want to just regurgitate the report.

But I think it's important for me to state as plaintiffs on the record why we support that map.

And it does meet all the constitutional requirements of both the U.S. Constitution and the New Hampshire Constitution.

It also strictly complies with the criteria this court established in its May 12th order.

First, and perhaps most important, it complies with the one person, one vote principle embodied in Article 1, Section 2.

And it complies with this court's directive to draw districts, quote, as equal in population as practicable.

It achieves the lowest deviation that is mathematically possible, just one person.

So, from a constitutional perspective, clearly the one person, one vote requirement is fully satisfied.

And as the special master discusses in his report, the Supreme Court of the United States has stated that court-drawn plans must be held to an even higher standard of population equality than legislatively passed plans,

citing Chapman v. Meyer in 1975's U.S. Supreme Court decision.

So, the fact that the special master's plan achieves essentially perfect population equality is especially important in this context where the court ultimately will be adopting the map.

But the special master also says that the differences among several of the plans are not statistically significant.

He does say that. That is correct.

And as we choose, assess the recommendation as between those plans that are within that band, how should we think about it?

You know, since the plans, the plans that the parties submitted, and when I was before the special master, when was that, roughly a week ago, excuse me,

we endorsed three plans as actually complying with the Constitution and with this court's criteria.

They were, not surprisingly, the plan that we submitted as plaintiffs, the minority plan,

and plan number two submitted by the House...

The majority plan. Majority two. Thank you. Majority two.

All of them were acceptable, in our view, in complying with the Constitution and with the criteria of this court.

But in the context, and they all had different population deviations,

and I do think the special master makes a good point, that in the context of a court-drawn plan,

as you balance the competing considerations, that the thumb really ought to be on the scale for achieving the best population equality as possible.

And so, while all four plans now, with the special master's plan added to the mix, are acceptable from our perspective,

we think that the special master's plan is probably the safest, most prudent course, given that it has, essentially, perfect population equality.

And then, of course, adding to that is the fact that the special master's plan complies with this court's lease change mandate,

by moving essentially the fewest number of people necessary to achieve population equality.

It moves 8,973 to achieve population equality.

Only the majority plan, number two, has slightly better, lower number of people.

I think it's five, 8,968. But it has a higher population deviation of nine people.

And the small number of people the special master moves also furthers this court's mandate or request

that constituents in the districts largely remain the same, to the greatest extent, practical.

And so, because he achieved moving essentially the smallest number of people possible,

he's kept those constituents in their districts in the way this court expected.

And then, last, of course, the plan complies with the Federal Voting Rights Act of 1965.

I don't think anyone contests otherwise.

We all recognize there's not an opportunity to create a minority district under Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act.

So, really, all the plans have been submitted comply with the Voting Rights Act.

The districts are wholly contiguous, as this court has required.

They don't divide political boundaries, cities, towns, municipal wards, or unincorporated places.

And last, the special master made it very clear that he did not consider political data

or partisan factors in drawing the districts.

So, I think I've summarized the criteria established by this court.

The special master, in our view, has done a terrific job of explaining his adherence to both the Constitution

and the criteria established by this court.

So, we urge the court to adopt the special master's plan and respectfully ask that you do so today,

so the candidate filing period can begin as statutorily established tomorrow, June 1st.

And if there are no questions, I will see the rest of my time.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Attorney List, on behalf of the Speaker.

Good morning.

Sean List, on behalf of the Speaker of the House.

I plan to just briefly comment on where the bill currently is, despite the diligent efforts

of the general court in passing two different bills that contained constitutional U.S. congressional districts.

Now, I would say it's pretty clear that the Governor is going to defer to this court

and that we'll be back at it next session, essentially.

May I just, for the record, ask you that you agree that the Governor is, just so the record

is clear before the court, the Governor vetoed both Senate Bill 200 and House Bill 52?

Yes.

So, Attorney Lehman, I believe, is going to comment on where it is technically, but I've seen the veto message,

so whether or not it's actually been through the official channel yet, I have no reason to doubt

that the veto message I saw is, in fact, authentic.

So, yes, I would say that's fair to say.

And I would also say it is highly unlikely that either bill will garner enough support to override the vetoes.

So, do you agree it's imperative that we issue an order today adopting a plan?

Well, as far as the timing goes, I believe that the Secretary of State's office said by June 6th.

At this point, I don't think it matters either way.

I certainly am not urging the court to wait.

As you chart your course, Mr. List, you may consider the impact of the Tenth Amendment of the United States Constitution

on the issues that you will be facing and your clients will be facing.

I would say that the Tenth Amendment is a constant consideration. Thank you.

So, if there are no questions for me, I will cede the rest of my time to Attorney Lehman.

Does the Speaker have any position as to which map?

The Speaker does not take a position on which map the Court should adopt.

Thank you, Attorney Lehman.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Richard Lehman for the Senate President.

I asked the Clerk to text me at 9 o'clock this morning before the hearing started

to provide information about whether the bill had been returned to the Senate as is required by Part 2, Article 44.

And as of the beginning of this hearing, it has not been.

I can advise you, in your order, you said, be prepared to update you on the status of the bill.

That's what I'm here to do.

The bill, SB 200, was presented to the Governor on Thursday after session.

And it has not yet been returned with his objections.

Attorney List is correct that online there is a veto message, but the constitutional process for vetoing a bill

involves returning it to the House in which it originated.

That hasn't happened yet.

I'm not here predicting that it's not going to happen.

I'm just telling you what the status is right now.

In terms...

How typically...

How long does that...

Is that just a matter of walking it down the hall?

It's about 60 steps.

Yeah, okay.

It always happens within five days.

It was presented on Thursday, the end of the fifth day.

Sunday is excluded as tomorrow.

Memorial Day counts.

And that's the status of the bill.

In terms of what plan to adopt, the only position the Senate President takes is that,

of the plans presented, the plan presented by the minority leaders would be an inappropriate

one for the reasons that it results in a higher...

in a larger deviation and moves more people than is necessary to do it.

The others...

The presented are ones you're going to choose among.

And...

With respect to the vetoes, it's both the House Bill...

House Bill 52 and Senate Bill 200.

The House...

Oh, I don't know the status of House Bill 52.

That one gets returned to the House.

The Senate Bill gets returned to the Senate.

They go to where they originated.

And as far as the Senate Bill is concerned, it hasn't happened as of this moment.

So the plan recommended by the Special Master is acceptable?

We're not...

The Senate President does want to take a position on the plan recommended by the Special Master.

Our position we laid out several weeks ago.

You made an order.

We understand the court's order.

Thank you very much, Attorney Layman.

Thank you.

Attorney Madison, just very quickly, the filing date opens tomorrow.

You're here on behalf of the Secretary of State.

Yes, Miles Madison on behalf of the Secretary of State.

Good morning, Your Honor.

And so the filing period opens tomorrow, June 1st.

Does the Secretary have any intention at this point to extend it?

Consistent with what the Secretary filed on Friday, no.

So really next week is the time period when the Secretary would be considering the need for any extension.

He believes that currently there is not a need to extend it.

But at the beginning of next week, moving to the middle of the week, that's when he would be looking at the actual mechanics to extend it, to give time for candidates to file and amend, if necessary, based on whether there is a map in place.

Assuming there is no plan, he would make that determination?

He would, yes.

Very good.

Thank you.

Can I just ask a question about mechanics?

Yes, sir.

I apologize.

Which is this all involves the congressional maps.

If there were a delay in the beginning of the signup period for congressional candidates, does that affect the signup periods for other candidates or not?

So the Secretary of State hasn't altered the filing period at all yet.

One of the reasons is to try to avoid any confusion from any messages relating to a change of a filing period.

So that would be his preference.

Currently would be to not have to change, and why he has not changed the filing period as it relates to congressional candidates, just because there may be practical consequences of confusion relating to any other candidates.

So I'm assuming the Secretary's position is certainty and clarity, the sooner the better, is preferable?

Yes.

The Secretary is looking to administer an orderly election.

And so he is taking every step that he can to avoid confusion.

At this point, that means not extending, not changing any of the requirements for the filing period.

If there were a need to change the filing period to extend it, if a map were not in place, he would be making that determination next week.

And that is essentially the latest to be able to avoid unnecessary communication that could result in confusion relating to any of the filing periods.

So just to clarify, if we weren't to issue an order until the end of the week, would the other filing periods open for the other offices tomorrow?

Yes.

And according to law, they would open for the congressional candidates as well.

No.

So just to make this perfectly clear, no matter what happens, tomorrow the filing period opens.

That's correct.

Okay.

Thank you.

Thank you, attorney Madison.

Very briefly, Your Honors.

Council suggested that the only plan submitted that was unacceptable was the minority plan, which of course we disagree with.

But implicit in that is that majority plan number one would be acceptable.

And I just want to be very clear for the record that that is not acceptable.

It moves more than 365,000 people.

Does not comply with this court's lease change mandate.

Doesn't preserve constituents.

Has political considerations that are built into it.

Merges Manchester and Nashua.

And it's about as far as lease change as you could almost get.

So just want to be very clear that we strongly oppose majority plan one.

And the special master does a very effective job of explaining why that does not comply with the court's criteria.

And want to be certain the record was clear about that.

That's all I have.

Thank you.

The court is grateful to the parties, the interveners, amicus for their assistance as we work through this process.

The court intends to issue an order as soon as possible.

The matter is submitted.

And the court stands adjourned.

Please rise.

Please rise.
