This is case 2022-0407, John Doe v. Salem Police Department at all.

Mr. Bowden, as I understand it, you saved one minute for rebuttal.

I did, Your Honor.

And before you begin, let me just note that Chief Justice McDonald and Justice Hans Marconi are disqualified from this case. Please proceed.

Thank you, Your Honor. Good morning. It's a good news of the court. My name is Mark Bowden, and again, I'm here representing an appellant in one of these EES cases.

This one's actually an interesting case in that this matter went before a Superior Court judge in Rockingham County for an in-camera review of the appellant's personnel file.

The judge examined the whole file and issued an order that basically said that he did not find that there was anything in the appellant's file that was exculpatory in this case or any future litigation.

So at that point, I ended up taking that order and I sent it over to the AG's office and I asked him, I said, you know, Superior Court judge has made this determination.

You know, can you please remove my client from the EES?

This was Judge St. Hilaire.

Judge St. Hilaire, correct. At which point the AG's office said that they were not going to remove him from the list, which is why we had to file the 10513D.

Did the Chief join in that request?

From my understanding, the town of Salem has been relatively silent on the matter. They're not arguing the matter. They haven't had any skin in the game, so to speak.

And so I've been in front of Justice Rufo for the 10513D argument. The AG's office filed a motion to dismiss, which was granted, which is why we're here today.

And all the arguments that I put in there is kind of unique in a sense that I said that this, you know, that the Judge Rufo should have given full faith and credit to Justice St. Hilaire,

and also under the concept of Res Judicata. And I know the AG's office has argued that it doesn't quite fit that, but I think for the purposes of EES it does,

because the state is always going to be the state. Whenever he calls a witness, he's always going to be a witness in that particular state.

But he's not a party. You admit to that, right?

I admit he's not a party in the captioned case, because it would be a state versus a criminal defendant.

But I think for the purposes of the analysis, I think the criminal defendant, whoever that is, would be a relative in this case,

because it would be the state and the witness would always be the same in privy with each other.

Does it matter whether the case is brought by the AG's office or by a county attorney or just a local?

No, because the state is the state. And I think the second prong is met, because it's the same cause of action.

So when I say the same cause of action, you're doing the same thing. You're reviewing the appellant's personnel file.

Ash Carl is a final judgment on a marriage that must have been rendered. And in this case, I think when you look at Justice St. Helaire's order,

he made a final judgment on that. He said, I reviewed this. I looked at this. There's nothing exculpatory here.

In this case, are any future litigation?

But how could he make a judgment about any future litigation? Isn't it a very case-specific analysis?

No, I don't think so. You are. And I think how he made it, I can't speculate as to how he made it,

but I want to say one of the arguments that he made it would have considered under it would have been the Shane case.

And what I mean by the Shane case, I want to read you a quote there. I think that quote applies to this particular case.

The Shane case, the only conflict that issue here is a petitioner's involvement in a single incident of alleged excessive use of force.

And there's no suggestion that they attempted to lie about or cover up their conduct.

Even if the accusations were true, this incident would be something more such as untruthfulness would not be admissible

to impeach the petitioner's general credibility because an instance of excessive use of force is not prohibitive of truthfulness or untruthfulness.

What we're looking at here is a single incident that occurred back in 2012. It was a prank that was pulled.

Granted, it wasn't a very smart prank, but it was a prank on the left.

But it was a common prank that was being pulled on down in Salem at the time between senior officers and junior officers.

Does it matter that it wasn't just like pulling somebody's chair out at a table? It was something that put the public at risk?

I think if you look at it, did he technically break some laws at the time? Yes.

Did it put a lot of people at risk? Probably not due to the time that this occurred at.

And what happened, I think what's important too here is that the Salem Police Department looked at this and said,

you know, we need to curb this behavior. And one of the things I think we have a hard time working at is we're trying to impose our values

that we have now and what we believe the police should be doing now back then.

So back then, this was a common prank that was going on. It's not now because it was curbed.

Could you address what is a unique aspect of this case, which is the annulments?

So as I've written in my notes, Judge Ruhoff issued his order in May of 22, and it was less than a month later that charges were annulled by the Rockingham Superior Court.

How should that fit into our thinking about this case?

Well, I think it should fit into your thinking on this case because as you know, the incident occurred back in 2012.

He was disciplined. He received a one-day suspension and that was, he took responsibility for his actions.

He took the one-day suspension and he gave up his appeal, his right to appeal it because of that agreement.

He then moved on as a law enforcement officer in his career and continued on.

And in 2016, he was promoted to the rank of sergeant. So he was considered a good police officer down in Salem.

From there, Salem hired the crawl to do an audit of the police department.

Crawled into an audit and that's how this came to light.

The AG's office got an unredacted copy of the crawl report.

They then saw some of the IA's that went on and they were, I can't speculate as to why they did it,

but they decided to charge the appellant with reckless conduct and a misdemeanor charge as well too.

Who made the decision to place him on the list?

So what happened there was the AG's office contacted then a civilian at police administrator because they didn't have a police chief at the time.

It was a civilian administrator and suggested that he should be put on the list.

So he didn't have an EES hearing and was represented by counsel there again,

but I'm not sure how much experience a civilian administrator had when he recommended that he be put on the list.

Well, do you see your client afforded due process at that point?

I mean, he met with the administrative chief, presumably with a lawyer, and argued that he shouldn't be on the EES.

Yes. And I understand the due process argument that you're asking about.

I don't think this is a due process argument case. I don't believe I've argued that here.

I'm looking at it as, again, almost similar to the other two cases, that this doesn't mean potentially exculpatory.

And the reason I say that is for the number of reasons.

You know, one, you have a prior judge that has already made a decision that this wasn't exculpatory in that case and any future litigation.

And ironically speaking, I just learned of this week that Judge Rufal just recently reviewed this again in camera

and determined that it wasn't exculpatory in that particular criminal case.

Was not.

Was not.

So again, you have an officer here who is he going to be regularly, you know, judges are going to regularly look at this

and probably say, well, this is an exculpatory for this particular case.

So again, why are we keeping this officer on the list other than to just, you know, sell his name and embarrass him?

So why don't you have 1-5-13-B for those instances that may be in this particular case somewhere out there that might be there

that you could bring this forward and have a judge do an inquiry.

It seems like the thrust of your argument is independent of the annulment issue.

But it seems to me that the annulment issue is a significant question for us whether or not someone can be on the EES list

based on an annul charge.

An annul violation.

Yeah.

And then I was going to get to that, Garonis, too.

You're absolutely right.

The AG's office, obviously, is argued in the first case that you saw on Tuesday that, you know, criminal convictions should put you on the EES list.

Here you don't have a criminal conviction.

You know, he was charged with it.

He pled to a violation, a simple speeding ticket, which as you know is later annuled.

So it does not have that criminal charge in the background, so it doesn't fit under that.

But one of the things that I thought was interesting was that Judge Rufo and his analysis and his reason to grant the motion to dismiss was

that he said that the appellant's behavior was an egregious dereliction of duty.

What I find odd about that was that the appellant wasn't on duty at the time.

It had nothing to do with his law enforcement duties.

Off-duty misconduct.

Grant involved a fellow police officer from his department that was on duty.

He was off-duty, so this is an egregious dereliction of duty.

This is simply a prank that shouldn't have happened.

Is it your position that anything that happens off-duty shouldn't be part of the analysis?

I think it can be part of the analysis, but I think you also have to look at off-duty conduct slightly different than on-duty conduct,

depending on what it is.

And again, those could be fact-specific situations.

There's no allegation of deceit or dishonesty here.

No.

He admitted to his conduct.

Correct. He came right in and he admitted what he did.

In fact, I think that was mentioned somewhere in the investigation that he was completely truthful.

How should we weigh in the cases such as this where the town makes some kind of an agreement at the time of the resolution of the original misconduct?

So here I read it that the town agreed there would be no further action.

How does that weigh into the analysis?

I think that does weigh into the analysis, in that sense, under what Justice Dobbin said, if we were to make a due process argument here.

So again, what we have with these issues with these EES cases is we're going back 10, 20 years and looking at these and trying to figure out how do we reconcile that with today.

And one of the issues, like you said, is back then that was an uncommon to make an agreement.

And he gave up some of his due process rights when he made that agreement, thinking that this would never come back to bother him again.

And it wasn't until the AG's office looked at and redacted an audit that was done by the Coral Report and decided to bring charges forward over eight years later.

What should we make of the fact that his report was included in the audit, although it didn't fit within the time frame that was requested?

You're right. When the audit was conducted they asked for so many years of past IAs from the department.

His IA was just over that outside and outside of that period that they were asking for.

Now there was some speculation that the reason that this was put in there was because the town manager and he were at odds because he was also the union president at the time.

I can't speak to that, but that's just one more speculation that was there as a result, but his was not supposed to be in that Coral Report.

I see that my lights are on.

Clothing that would ask the dishonorable court to determine that the appellate spot of duty misconduct is deemed non-sculpatory pursuant to 105, 13D, section 2, subsection D1.

And as a matter of fact, or as a matter of fact, the Superior Court, with the standard that it should develop in order to find that it basically provides a fundamental fairness here.

This individual should not be on this list for this.

I'll just mention these two things that I've argued on the last two is obviously the definition of what potentially is.

I'd ask that the court develop a standard as well in this particular case.

And I'd also ask that the court also look at staleness in this case as well too, because the incident is from 2012, which is now well over 10 years.

So with that, I cede my time and unless the court has any more questions.

Thank you very much, counsel. You've reserved one minute.

Ms. Trick.

Hey, please, the court. My name's Mary Trick, and I'm here on behalf of the Attorney General's Office.

Since we've been here before, I'm just going to start with some of the questions that you've been asking the appellant.

I want to start first with the annulment issue because sort of like the theft in the first case, I think this is a little bit of a red herring.

This officer was not placed on the EES list because of his criminal conviction.

He was placed on the EES list before the criminal conviction.

Hold on. There's no criminal conviction here though, right?

Yes, the guilty plea in the annulment. So I'm sorry.

It's a violation level offense.

Yes, correct. It was a violation level offense that was annulled, and so I would not disagree that effectively that's as if he was never charged, right?

There was never any criminal involvement at all.

But that criminal involvement is not a necessary component of placement on the EES list, right?

Is there any fact that he was off duty factor into our analysis?

I don't think so. So I did want to talk about the facts of this case and first point out that Joe doesn't contest the truth of the underlying facts.

So what we have is that he did engage in this misconduct.

The misconduct was, I would say that despite his attempts to minimize, it was particularly egregious conduct.

He led officers on a high speed chase.

They were going over 60 miles an hour and a 30 mile an hour zone.

It was middle of the night, so it was dark.

While the record doesn't expressly say this, I think we can assume that because it's a 30 mile an hour zone that this is a sort of residential or business type area.

It's route 28 and nobody drives 30 miles an hour and a 28.

Well, he's going 62 in a 30.

For nearly two miles, the police officers who are on duty go so far as to displace bike strips, which he avoids.

And when he pulls over, multiple officers feel the need to pull their guns and approach the car with guns.

And then he believes that this is a practical joke.

When the trial court assessed it and concluded it was a dereliction of duty, do you agree with that categorization?

I don't know that it matters whether we call it a dereliction of duty.

Well, it matters if the Attorney General's office has a list of names and they have a category of what the conduct is.

How do you classify this conduct with the category system that your office uses?

So I do think it's a dereliction of duty, but I will not say that whether it's a dereliction or duty controls whether or not he's on the list.

Who decides which category to label an officer's misconduct on the AG's website?

I do not know that. It's outside of the record in this case.

Can you provide us with an example in which this misconduct would be admissible?

Sure. So in this conduct, if you just bear with me, I hope you're telling me the answer to the question.

I believe this conduct is demonstrative of an exceptional lack of sound judgment and a willingness to wholly disregard the safety and well-being of others

and a belief that one is above the law.

And I think that those pieces of information, whether admissible, I do think that there are cases where it would be admissible.

For instance, if somebody attempts to evade this officer in a similar manner that he behaved.

But even if it's not admissible, the EES list is tied to favorable evidence.

And favorable evidence includes not just that which is admissible, but that which can lead to admissible evidence,

and that which is otherwise relevant to the preparation or presentation of a defense.

And I think any good defense attorney would say, particularly if they have this officer in a case that involves the importance of following the law

or high-speed pursuit would find this information relevant to their preparation and presentation of their defense.

You agree that the prosecutors, Brady obligations and the duty of the court to look at a personnel file operate independent of the EES list

maintained by the Attorney General's office, right?

They do.

And so these arguments you're just making, why isn't it appropriate for those arguments to be made in an individual case to an individual judge

and then you could make all the arguments you just made rather than putting somebody on a public EES list with some sort of categorization?

Yeah.

So I guess that takes me back to a point that I think we didn't quite finish in the last argument,

which is that the EES case, it predates being public, right?

It predates 10513D.

The EES list was a tool created by prosecutors to use to effectuate their duties.

And just because the legislature chose to make that list public doesn't change the nature of the list or the nature of the tool.

The EES list...

But it does create a greater reputational interest for the officer, doesn't it?

It does, but that was a policy determination made by the legislature.

I think that the legislature weighed the policy, the interest of the police officers and the interest of criminal defendants

that assuming the officer had an opportunity to have sufficient due process,

assuming the such that they had not been doing any proof that the behavior was untrue,

but that once we established the behavior is true, if it's potentially exculpatory, they go on the list.

But why wouldn't the Attorney General's office have abided by Judge St. Hilaire's order?

Well, Judge St. Hilaire's order was issued in a criminal case and said it wasn't exculpatory in this case.

The judge in a criminal case cannot say that it's never going to be exculpatory in any other case.

I think we can agree that that judge can't say it's not brainy material in other cases.

Did anyone appeal that order?

I do not know the answer to that.

Should we consider the fact that Judge Ruoff recently decided that this information was not disclosable?

Well, again, it's another criminal case that said it's not exculpatory.

And I just want to get to this point that that's a different question, right?

Whether it's brainy material in one particular criminal case is different than whether it's potentially exculpatory

for purposes of placement on the EES list.

So the order had to do with whether it was brainy material in that case.

That judge cannot say it's not brainy material in any other case,

nor was that judge even asked to say whether it's potentially exculpatory for purposes of 10513D.

The EES list, I want to bring it back to the fact that prosecutors are people.

They have duties, but they're people and people use lists to avoid mistakes.

The EES list minimizes duplicative work of prosecutors.

It allows more experienced prosecutors to help new prosecutors by flagging files that should be examined more closely.

It very simply reduces mistakes.

The fact that 10513D, by passing that the legislature decided to make this tool of prosecutors public,

doesn't change the nature of the list.

And nothing in 10513D suggested that the legislature intended to change the nature or function of the list.

Is Duchain still good law?

I think Duchain is good law in some points and not in others.

So how is it not good law?

I think that the main point of Duchain is that you can't remain on the list if you've effectively proven in your appeal process

that the misconduct didn't occur, that you didn't do the thing.

And so I think that remains good law.

If you're an officer and you prove through the new process you're provided the employment action that you didn't do the thing,

then your interest in not being on this list is sufficient a way to get you off the list.

But as Attorney Boyden pointed out, we ruled that even if the allegation of excessive force were true,

it didn't mandate that the officer's name be listed on this list.

I can think of dozens of cases in which that information is disclosed, particularly in a resisting arrest prosecution.

And so I guess I would say that that does not hold true after 10513D,

because 10513D says anything that's potentially exculpatory.

Any officer who has potentially exculpatory information and their personnel information must be on the list if the AG's office is keeping the list.

So is it the AG's position that any officer who's going 30 miles over the speed limit should be on the EES list?

Well, I don't think that there's a one size fits all.

I don't think I could speak to any officer ever going 30 miles an hour over the limit.

So you mean not when they're on duty with their lights on.

But that's not the situation we had here.

And I would say that it's important to these facts that not only did these events occur,

not only did he drive more than 30 miles an hour over in the middle of the night for a long distance while other police officers are following him,

but he and his judgment believed that that was a joke.

He thought that that was an appropriate joke.

So that should get him on the EES list?

I think that it speaks to his lack of sound judgment.

It speaks to his belief that as a police officer he's above the law.

But sound judgment isn't what the EES list is about?

Well, the EES list is about potentially exculpatory information and information that is relevant to the preparation or presentation of a defense.

But wouldn't that encompass virtually every human being in the world that they have demonstrated lack of sound judgment off duty?

I think if you phrase it that way, everybody has exercised a lack of sound judgment.

I would definitely push back that everybody has exercised this kind of excretive lack of sound judgment.

And I would certainly push back against assertions made by the appellant in this and other cases that all officers engage in this kind of misconduct.

I simply don't think that that's true.

I do want to take the time before I run out of time here to talk about the staleness issue because that is briefed

and I know there's been some questions about it.

And I would have a couple of points to make about the staleness issue.

First, as sort of a broader point, I think the staleness issue comes up in these cases

because we have the long standing EES list that were at this point because of the passage of 10513D

trying to sort of, for lack of a better word, clean up with current litigation.

But going forward on placements should be made when misconduct occurs

and the potentially exculpatory information goes into someone's employment information.

And so it's likely to come up a lot less in the future.

And so we don't know that it's centrally important to the standard that's applied.

So the use of the word permanent in the statute is a prospective concept?

No, so that's my secondary point, which is that the legislature also said it's permanent, right?

So going forward you should be put on when the misconduct occurs

and that that placement is permanent.

And so this represents a statutory scheme that indicates that the legislature certainly did not intend

for staleness to become a consideration because if you're permanently placed on the list

then literally everybody on the list, the conduct that got them on the list

is going to become stale at some point.

But isn't it different to apply the permanency concept going forward

when everybody knows the rules of the game than to apply permanency as a bar

to an examination that's authorized by the statute?

I don't believe that that's true, but if this quote were to think that that's true

I think that this case would not be the kind of case that would need to be overturned for staleness

for two reasons.

First, which I think I've already pointed out, is given the egregious nature of the conduct

but I would also point out that this officer was placed on the EES in 2019.

At that time the conduct was only seven years old.

So we're not talking about conduct.

It might be, I believe it's what, 12 years at this point.

But it was only seven-year-old conduct at the time of his placement on the EES.

Let me just ask you this.

So Judge Ruhoff's order that is on review here was issued before the annulments.

So why at a minimum shouldn't it be sent back to Judge Ruhoff and say,

whoa, things have really changed here.

Can you consider the legal effect of these charges being annulled?

Because I don't think the annulment really changes here.

The only thing that was annulled was a speeding violation.

The others were null-prost along the way.

Yes, the others were null-prost.

I don't see the situation as fundamentally changing because the placement on the EES again

was not because of the charge.

It was not because of the null-prost.

It was not because of the annulment.

I mean, it was not because of the speeding violation.

But you were talking earlier about the speeding violation being evidence of bad judgment.

It's not because of the fact of the speeding violation.

It's not because of the fact that there was a speeding violation.

It's because of the underlying misconduct in the employment file.

So the EES is the potential.

So doesn't the fact of the plea reflect that the Attorney General's office in prosecuting this individual

made a determination that they couldn't prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the charge actually occurred?

So presumably they negotiated down to a violation-level speed offense.

How can you reconcile those two different positions?

I would say two things.

One, I don't think we can assume just because the prosecutor decided to not move forward

that they didn't think they could prove their case.

That is one reason a prosecutor might go forward,

but it's certainly not the only reason a prosecutor might go forward.

And I think that the EES placement has to do with the employment action in this court's case law

is very clear that annulment doesn't mean the underlying behavior never happened.

We act as though the conviction or in this case the speeding violation never happened.

We don't act as if his behavior in 2012 never happened.

And so I guess that gets to the heart of what I've been trying to point out

and maybe not as articulately as I had hoped that it's the behavior in 2012

and not the criminal proceedings that didn't go forward in the annulment

that gets someone on the list.

If none of that stuff in 2019 and 2020 and 2021,

if none of it had ever happened,

it would have changed the need for placement on the list, which actually happened in 2019.

Thank you very much, counsel.

Thank you, Your Honor.

I just want to point out one thing.

Again, the Department of Justice here is arguing for almost like a strict liability

or per se standard for potentially exculpatory.

Again, which I think casts such a widenet that there are a number of officers

that you could put on this list.

And I think we still have to go back and look at the standards as laid out

in Brady, Giglio, and Warren.

And then Warren, for example, says favorable evidence is material under the federal standard

only if there is a reasonable probability that had the evidence been disclosed

in the defense, the result of the proceeding would have been different.

A reasonable probability is a probability sufficient to undermine the confidence in the outcome.

This standard does not require that a prosecutor disclose everything that might influence a jury.

So I think, again, you have to look at this, have some type of balancing test with this

and not cast such a widenet.

Otherwise, you're going to be putting a lot of police officers on the list.

So does the word potentially invoke the concept of possibility or probability?

I think when you look at the Bible as a dictionary,

I think it tends to weigh more towards probability

because it gives examples of future grain or trees that are planted, fruits of trees.

So I think you're going to lean a little more towards probable than something fanciful.

With that, thank you, Your Honour.

Great. Thank you very much, Council.

Case submitted, the court is now in brief recess.
