This is case 2020-0696, petition of city of Manchester at all.

Good morning, council.

Thank you.

I did reserve two minutes.

Good morning. May it please the court.

Name is Gary Harding from Bernard and Merrill on behalf of a group of eight

employers aggrieved by the Department of Labor's actions.

We are here today because the Department of Labor is denying the

employers the right to any hearing on disputed

second injury fund claims.

Section 43 and we're dealing with workers compensation statute 281-A.

So this section of the statute 43 requires an initial level hearing to be held

based on the dispute between the second injury fund and these employers.

The plain reading of the statute requires the department to schedule a hearing.

The statute is not ambiguous.

Assuming an ambiguity, then a liberal interpretation of the statute read as a

whole along with the legislative intent still requires a hearing to be

scheduled.

Excuse me.

The heart of the department's argument is that a right to a hearing on

denied second injury fund claims is not allowed because section 54 of the

statute says nothing about a right to a hearing.

That's a quote from the department.

Well, this argument fails because there are other sections of the statute for

which there is no express provision for a hearing.

But the department routinely schedules hearings on those sections.

What are those sections?

Well, first and foremost, the most notable section is causation of

injury to employment.

This is the most or one of the most important sections under the statute.

But section 2 says nothing about a right to a hearing.

Yet the department schedules and holds hearings on this issue on an almost

daily basis.

Other sections of the statute.

That's under section 43.

That's the, I understand that the dispute is to causation, but the

hearings are held pursuant to section 40.

Correct.

Correct.

And that's how they schedule.

Section 43 is the mechanism of which the procedure is to schedule these

hearings.

And other sections of the statute that say nothing about the right to a

hearing are injuries outside the state, computing average weekly wage,

determining date of injury, contractors, liabilities to subcontractors,

employees' right to reinstatement, award of fees and interests.

Yet the department routinely grants initial level hearings for these

sections.

So is that administrative gloss issue or argument you're making and how

does that pertain to this particular provision?

In this particular provision, administrative gloss is moved at

this point because they were trying to apply this administrative gloss to

the procedure where once the fund denies the claim, it goes straight to the

CAB hearing.

But now the department says and concedes, you're right employers,

you don't get a hearing at the CAB in the first instance.

So administrative gloss is moved essentially because they've already

conceded it doesn't go that way.

And so what's the remedy?

They're saying you don't get a hearing at all.

That's what they're telling the employers.

There were hearings.

Correct.

Correct.

And the department at some point 10 years ago or so stopped doing

hearings and there was no legislative response.

They didn't know.

This was an unwritten policy by the department about just going

straight to the CAB.

Now that they've conceded it doesn't, where are we left?

Let's go back to having department of labor hearing, compensation

appeal hearing and then appeal to this court.

That's what the employers are looking for.

Now section 43, the argument that section 43 does not provide a

right to the hearing on second injury fund claims is simply

wrong.

Employers are requesting this court to order the department

to schedule an initial level hearing pursuant to section

43 which plainly states in a controversy as to the

responsibility of an employer or employer's carrier for the

payment of compensation and other benefits under this

chapter, any party at interest may petition the commissioner

in writing for a hearing and award.

Well, let's look at this.

The statute unambiguously grants a right to a hearing.

To any party at interest in a controversy as to the

responsibility for the payment of compensation and other

benefits in a controversy takes two.

And this statute says the employer and the employer's

insurance carrier is going to be one of those parties under

the statute.

The other party is the second entry fund in this case.

Does the Vasquez case shed any light on this?

The Vasquez case said, department, you have the authority

to schedule these hearings on coverage issues.

And here in this case, these cases, there is a

controversy as to the responsibility of the employer

or the employer's carrier for the payment of compensation

and other benefits.

Is there a controversy?

Yes.

And the very question is who is responsible for the payment,

the fund or the employer?

Because these payments have already been made.

Correct.

Correct.

They've been made.

And what happens is the employers and the carriers are

required to pay their money into this fund and they're

requesting reimbursement from the fund because of the

employee's second injury.

So how do you address the fund's argument that the

statute focuses on controversies as to the responsibility

of an employer or the employer's insurance carrier

and says nothing about the fund or any other party?

Well, that section under 43, the employer and the

employer's carrier are always going to be a party.

This section of the statute doesn't mention anything

about claimants having a right or attorneys having

a right for attorney's fees or hospital or a provider

having issues for payment.

And under section 58 of the statute, subject matter,

the commissioners shall administer and enforce all

provisions of this chapter, except otherwise provided

by this chapter.

And there are no exceptions regarding enforcement

on denied second injury fund claims or applications.

Therefore, Department of Labor hearing must be scheduled

under section 43 in order to enforce the provisions

of section 54.

These employers are simply looking for a hearing so

they can prove their case to the fund that they're

entitled to reimbursement.

I realize that your position is that the department

has moved the goalposts here from the original

positions and briefing so that now there's no

right to a hearing.

But what's the problem with just having a hearing in

front of the cab or making these arguments in front

of the cab in the first instance rather than

with a hearing's officer?

The statute doesn't allow it at first.

So that would be ultra-veries?

Yes.

And what happens is because of the complexity

of the statute, and this is under appeal of Faye,

in Ray Faye, and appeal of Stanuels,

limiting the issues reviewable by the compensation

of appeals board ensures that parties can reasonably

anticipate the issues for which they must

prepare evidence and argue.

So that's what these employers are trying to do.

Find out what the issue is at a department

of labor hearing, and if the department comes

with a decision or an order that says,

no, you're not allowed reimbursement,

then that gives the employer the right to have

an appeal hearing so it can present evidence

to the compensation appeals board.

And only on those issues identified,

there can't be new issues added in before the cab, right?

I mean, issues identified at the hearing

would be those that would be then able

to be appealed to the cab.

Correct.

And essentially it helps everybody resolve

the issues at first and then figure out,

on appeal, okay, this is where we need

to bolster our evidence or whatnot,

under the lab rules.

And there's already a procedure in place

for these types of hearing.

All other sections of the statute go through

this process of department of labor hearing,

appeal to the cab and appeal to this car.

So why not section 50?

Can you address the issue of the APA?

The APA?

The Administrative Procedure Act.

Does that have application here?

The state raises it?

No, the APA argument is

when there's two conflicting statutes,

a general provision and a specific statute,

the more specific applies.

And that's what would happen in this case.

These hearings aren't held under the APA 541A,

I believe it is.

It's under 281-A.

That's where the argument arises

or that's where the issue arises.

Under section 54 of the statute.

So the more specific statute controls

over the general statute.

And the APA is simply a generalized statute

helping agencies develop their procedure.

And the department already has that procedure in place.

Do you agree that the practice for the past 10 years

has been not to have these initial hearings

as you contend your clients have a right to?

I don't know the amount of years

that it's been since it just went straight

from a denied letter from the fund straight to a CAB.

I'm not too sure when that practice was established.

And in the department's brief,

they said they don't even know.

But assuming it's 10 years.

So for those past 10 years,

it has gone that way.

I don't know.

But now that they've conceded

that's not the proper way to do it.

I think now the only alternative

because then the employers have absolutely no remedy

for their protected property interest.

Just to follow up on the chief's question earlier

given that it's been functioning this way

for 10 years

and the legislature hasn't done anything about it.

Why isn't that the proper interpretation

and construction of the statute?

That's almost like the administrative gloss type argument.

Yes, it is.

That is what it is.

It is what it is.

And as I stated,

they've conceded that that's not the proper way to go.

So what is the remedy in there?

And there's been no decision changing that process

that could have been challenged.

Correct.

There has been no promulgation of any rules to that effect.

There's no rules.

And I believe I mentioned this in the brief

that this didn't go through the APA process

of rulemaking procedures.

They just did this on an unwritten policy.

And just to get to it, it was...

And this court doesn't ordinarily accept

sort of a practice as an administrative gloss proof,

if you will.

Yes.

May I just make sure I understand

your plain language argument?

Mm-hmm.

Under Section 54,

an employer or carrier notifies a commissioner

of a possible claim against the fund.

Correct?

Correct.

And then the commissioner, as I understand,

has delegated this to a fund administrator.

A fund administrator issues a denial letter.

Correct.

And your argument is that under 43.1A,

that implicates the responsibility of an employer

or an employer's carrier for the payment of compensation.

Is that right?

Yes, that's...

And that's why there needs to be a hearing.

Correct.

Or an employer or a carrier can petition

the commissioner for a hearing.

Correct.

In order to resolve the dispute under Section 54.

Okay.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Good morning.

Good morning.

May it please the court?

Laura Lombardi for the Department of Labor.

Do you mind just responding to that interpretation right away?

Why is that incorrect?

That is incorrect because Section 43 is dealing

with controversies involving the payment

of benefits to injured employees.

And I think you also...

The employers are taking individual words

and sentences out of context.

If you look at the entire statute itself

and in the context of the entire statutory scheme,

first, within Section 43,

you have in paragraph 1A,

it talks about holding the hearing,

quote, at a location nearest the employee,

showing that an employee is one of the parties

to the controversy.

Paragraph 2, which requires that payments begin

as soon as possible after a decision,

describes the payments as, quote,

payment of weekly compensation

in entitlement to medical and vocational benefits.

This shows that the benefits being discussed

in paragraph 1A are benefits being paid

to an injured employee.

They are not anything being paid

to an employer or an insurance carrier.

Paragraph 1B says that an appeal to the cab

does not suspend the award.

And again, this is the award of weekly compensation

and benefits to the injured employee.

And that goes to the very purpose of Section 43,

which is to ensure that an injured employee

receives as timely as possible

the benefits to which they're entitled to

under the statute.

But in Vasquez, we said that 43 applied to disputes

and contractual interpretations

between insurance companies.

Correct. And in Vasquez,

there was an injured employee as a party to the case.

And the issue involved the injured employee in Vasquez

was not receiving benefits.

There was large outstanding medical bills still at issue.

Right. But the employee wasn't an effective participant

in the dispute.

He was sort of collateral damage in Vasquez.

He was a party to the appeal.

Right.

And I believe he was a party below in terms of...

He was a party, but still,

he had very little control over the dispute that got to us.

The dispute below...

I mean, he was part of the dispute below

because it was his request for benefits

that was essentially...

he was granted the benefits.

But the dispute between his employer

and the insurance carrier was out of his hands.

Correct. And this goes back to the numerous statutes

that were just referenced

that do not cite to 43

but which do come up within a hearing under 43.

All of those statutes involve issues that would arise

in an employee's claim for benefit.

Isn't there an injured employee here?

The focus of the second injury fund payment?

But there's no controversy

about that injured employee's right to benefits.

Right. It's just a question of who pays the benefits.

No.

This is not even a question as to the responsibility

to pay benefits.

The statute 54...

Well, whether there's reimbursement of payment of benefits

from the second injury fund,

the ultimate responsibility for who pays

for this series of benefits,

that's a dispute similar to whether the employer in Vasquez

or the insurance company in Vasquez was responsible.

But it's entirely separate from the employee's interest

and the employee's access to benefits.

So the employee...

No claim can be made on the fund

until the employee has been provided the benefits.

So this is an entirely separate issue

in terms of a claim on the fund.

And again, the fund is money that the employers have paid into.

Right. So without section 43,

where is the due process for the employers

to access these funds that they paid

for a specific purpose?

It's through the Administrative Procedures Act.

So I think it's important to point out here,

there has been no claim of a due process violation.

At all times in the history of the second injury fund,

employers have been provided a hearing.

Most recently, that hearing has been

before the compensation's appeal board.

Which isn't really authorized.

We do agree.

And I think part of the confusion in the past history

of how the process has played out

is that the department recognized

that employers should be given a hearing.

They have always been given a hearing.

Not necessarily two hearings.

They've always received a hearing.

The department was looking within the framework

of the workers' compensation statutes

to find the authority to give that hearing.

But that statute does not provide that authority.

So now there's no hearing?

No. There is a hearing.

It comes out of the Administrative Procedures Act,

which applies to all agencies.

And that's being implemented now as we speak.

The department has a proposed draft rule

to change the process to provide

a department level hearing

for denied second injury funds.

But due to this ongoing litigation,

did not feel it would be appropriate

to send that to JLCAR at that point.

There's no intent to stop the hearings.

They've always had a hearing.

And again, I want to point out, too, this is...

So these people would then get a hearing

in the case in front of us?

Yes. I don't believe the hearing should be at the CAB.

So those should be dismissed.

And I guess I want to point out, too,

that this is a petition for a writ of mandamus.

So there's no allegation

that employers have had their due process

by rights violated at any time.

There is the suggestion that there's a concern

that the department, because of the way our brief is written,

might in the future deprive due process.

So if we were to mandate the department

to provide a hearing,

this process that's stalled at the moment

could go to JLCAR and satisfy that mandate?

I don't believe that this court should mandate that.

I think to have a petition for a writ of mandamus,

that's a very high remedy.

It's an extraordinary remedy

where there has been no allegation

of an actual due process violation.

I don't think that the employers have made a case

to require this court to order the department to do anything.

It's clear that the department has, at all times,

provided a hearing.

So the department has complied with due process

to the extent that there is a property interest.

And again, I don't think that the issue of due process

is before the court,

because there's been no allegation of a denial yet.

So what we would ask,

what the department would ask,

would be for the court to hold

that Section 43 does not apply

to denied second injury fund applications

and then to deny the employer's request

for a writ of mandamus.

And then the department would go forward

with their proposed rule,

which would permit employers a department-level hearing

under the APA,

complying with the Administrative Procedures Act.

Would these folks be time-barred

or somehow procedurally barred from accessing that process?

That's a very good question.

I would assume there would be a way to ensure

that these pending hearings would,

they would be able to get their hearings.

So how long has this proposed rule been in the making?

During the context of this litigation.

So why not stay the appeal

and act the rule,

give the appellants what they're looking for,

a hearing, and be done with it?

Because it's not what they're looking for.

And again, they're not looking for a hearing.

They're looking for two hearings.

So they're looking for a department-level hearing.

The reason why they want that to fall under Section 43

is because then they could get an appeal to the CAB.

And I want to point out, too, that's not the process.

Not all workers' comp-related department-level hearings

follow that process.

And if they got a department-level hearing,

the appeal would be where?

Under the APA.

Spear court.

Under the APA?

No.

Under the APA, there would be no appeal.

Because under the APA,

there would have to be authorized by law.

So the legislature would have to put it within Section 54.

To have that.

So it would be, right, it would be,

there would be no right to appeal,

but they could always do a petition for red assertionary

to get here,

but they wouldn't have that second de novo hearing.

And the CAB hearing,

sorry to be so complex on this,

but it's not de novo.

No, the CAB hearing is de novo.

Is de novo.

Right.

And I think to point out with the CAB, too,

the purpose of that is for these hearings

related to an injured employee's rights to benefits.

And so the CAB sits as three members,

one member from labor,

one member from sort of to represent employee interests.

And that kind of shows also the intent is

this is dealing with benefits to employees,

not benefits to employers.

Under Section 7 of the Workers' Comp Statute,

which deals with civil penalties

that could be assessed against the employer,

employers get a department level hearing

under that section under 27311A.

Those department level hearings

that relate to the employer,

but not an injured employee,

are not appealable to the CAB.

They're appealable to the Penalty Appeals Board.

And then also within Section 43 itself,

if you looked at the third paragraph of Section 43,

disputes between an employer and the carrier

regarding premium charges for independent contractors,

they're given a department level hearing,

but not under Section A.

So there's no right to appeal to the CAB.

But those which do not involve an employer's ability

to access benefits are not appealable to the CAB.

They're appealable to the Superior Court.

So I just want to point out that there are other...

These disputes that don't involve employees

do have an appellate avenue.

Correct.

Statutory created by the legislature.

Here, if the legislature wanted to create that...

If it knew there was no two-step process,

it could create it.

It could create it.

In the meantime, the department's looking at finding a way

to at least provide one hearing.

Yes.

And the department has always provided a hearing.

The issue is...

Till now.

No, they have always provided a hearing.

Okay.

What do we do with the fact that for 10 years

the department apparently has said,

oh, go to the CAB for a de novo hearing.

But now they're saying, oh, geez.

10 years we've been making a mistake.

That's a legal error.

Sorry, you can't rely on that.

Yes.

And I think that goes to...

So the administrative gloss argument,

I acknowledge it cuts both ways.

And I don't think it really applies.

I agree with them.

It doesn't apply.

Because if the statute's clear and ambiguous,

you wouldn't apply the administrative gloss.

So the fact that they've done the CAB for 10 years

and realize now that that's not the way the statute is written,

you wouldn't continue to do that improper process.

I mean, you acknowledge we've had a series of cases here,

most recently, appeal of loss and group last year

where they came to us through a de novo review at the CAB

and nobody said boo about it.

Like, geez, sorry, we shouldn't have done that.

Correct.

It's the way it's been going for at least 10 years.

We don't know when exactly the process changed.

But there has always been a hearing.

What was the authority to hold the hearings 10 years ago?

When they were doing the two.

They believed it was under section 43.

And so then, and so now it's recently we've realized

that does not fall within section 43.

And again, I think it goes to the department recognizing

that there should be a hearing and they were looking

within the workers comp statute.

That appeared to be the section that could most,

you know, could work the best.

But it's not consistent with the statute,

the purpose of the statute, the language of the statute.

It really is the Administrative Procedures Act.

Because again, this is an application too.

So we're not talking about a controversy

between multiple parties.

We're talking about an application for benefits.

But it is a controversy between the employer

and the second injury fund, which is not specifically

the department.

It's the administrator of the fund.

It's the administrator, but it's a different thing.

But the fund is something created,

paid into by all the employers.

So it's kind of the employer,

the fund is protecting the funds on behalf of all employers.

So it's almost like two,

the two different parties are the employers.

The employer is seeking reimbursement

in the second injury fund saying...

Right, it's almost like a dispute between

the employer and his insurance carrier

as to who is responsible,

ultimately for the payment to the employee.

It's another kind of group pool insurance,

if you will.

And so they're seeking to get a claim.

So it's an application.

And application under the Administrative Procedures Act

can either be done by non-adjudicative processes.

And the employers agree that it's fine

to do the first step with a non-adjudicative process

because this is an application.

And then the department, after that,

if it's denied, then has the authority

under 541A29 to provide an adjudicatory hearing.

And that would...

No, no, go ahead.

That would render it a contested case

under the definitions of the APA.

I don't think that issue should be decided in this case

because a contested...

It's not...

Well, it is...

The department's position is a little bit confusing

because for purposes of rulemaking,

wouldn't it be conceding

that this is a contested proceeding?

It's a contested case where the rights and liabilities

of either the employer or the insurance carrier

are at risk or at issue.

That is true.

So, I mean, yes, if we...

Actually, you're exactly correct.

If once they create the rule,

then there is requirement by rule

and so it would be a contested case.

And the requirement by rule would be

what is required by law under the...

Well, to be a contested case,

it would be required by statute, rule, or due process.

So I don't think you need to reach the due process issue.

They're planning to do the rule,

and that would be required by rule

would be a contested case,

and then you go through all the APA.

And I see my light as well.

Is it a legitimate concern for us to pull back

and look at the overall purpose of the statute,

which is liberal to compensate employees?

And here we have a fund that is designed

to overcome an employer's reluctance

to hire an injured employee.

If it becomes more difficult and more cumbersome,

and ultimately you might go through the APA

and never get a right to appeal,

should we be thinking about that,

that this could result if we were to adopt your view,

make employers less willing to hire injured employees,

which would be completely counter to the purpose

of the fund and the overall statute?

I think so, because they're entitled to a hearing.

The question is, are they entitled to two hearings

under a specific section of a statute

that just linguistically does not provide the authority to do that?

So I think there's still,

if they meet the eligibility requirement for reimbursement,

they get reimbursed,

and if they're denied, they get a hearing.

So I don't believe, you know,

whether you get one hearing or two hearings,

I don't think that would,

I would hope that wouldn't encourage employers

not to hire disabled employees.

Thank you.

Thank you very much, Attorney LaParty.

Attorney Harding.

Thank you.

Just a couple of points, and I'm hoping I didn't.

Have you seen the proposed draft rule?

No.

No.

I don't know what it says.

But hopefully I didn't mishear her,

the department here when they said

they didn't always allow two hearings

for second entry fund claims.

That's wrong.

Peel of Hartford.

It went through Department of Labor hearing,

then it went to a CAB hearing,

then it came up to this court.

So there has always been two hearings allowed

until they changed the procedure.

Would a department level hearing

followed by a possible appeal to this court

by certiori satisfy your clients?

No.

No.

Because the statute doesn't allow that.

And in fact, I believe I mentioned this in my brief,

that rits of certiorari have been taken away

out of the statute by the legislature.

Specifically, when Section 24 provided

the exclusive remedy with the department,

that only went up to the Supreme Court

after the Department of Labor hearing.

But the legislature removed that section.

Excuse me.

And the sections cited by the department

where there wasn't a compensation of Peelsport,

the legislature specifically provided that

under Section 43, Roman 3,

that paragraph it specifically stated

for that premium dispute between employers

and independent contractors or what have you.

It specifically states it goes to the Supreme,

I mean the Superior Court for the appeal.

Same with Section 7.

It provided a second hearing,

penalties appeal board.

So there's always...

The legislature can't take away the rite of cert option.

Well, they can...

They can take it out of the statute,

but that doesn't mean it disappears.

Correct.

But here in Section 54,

there is no rite or rite provided.

Rite of certiorari provided.

Thank you.

Thank you.

The case is submitted.

Thank you.

It's in reset.

Right.
