This is case 2020-0690, Appeal of New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services, and 2020-0691,

Appeal of North Country Environmental Services, Inc.

Mr. Brooks, you're going to argue for five minutes. Is that right?

Correct.

And then Mr. Gould, ten minutes.

That's correct.

Great. Please proceed.

Thank you.

May it please the court? Name is Allen Brooks.

I invite you to ask questions at any time.

I'm really here to answer any questions that you may have.

Simply stated, our position is that the other parties go too far.

So the hearing officer and CLF, their position is too rigid.

NCES's position is too permissive.

The rigid framework set forth by the hearing officer simply does not work for a few reasons.

One is...

Can you identify his position before you get there?

Is it that you can issue a permit to a proposed facility unless it satisfies a capacity needs

throughout the life of its facility?

No.

Okay, what's the position?

Because identify it for me if you can.

The hearing officer set up a regime where both in time and amount, it was strictly limited.

So you didn't have to satisfy... Let's say there's a shortfall for 18 years of the 20.

You don't have to satisfy the 18 years.

I think we hopefully clarified that in our reply brief.

But what he did say is with numerical certainty, and he says this a couple of times,

if you have one ton of projected shortfall in year one,

you can only, meaning DES, can only permit one ton of capacity in that year.

And if you have no capacity shortfall projected in that year, you can't permit it...

Permit it for one year?

Excuse me, sir.

If you have a one ton shortfall, it can permit it for only one year, or 18 years.

This is what I believe he is saying is that you would need, at a minimum,

what you permit, again, to fulfill a longer program is one thing.

But at a minimum, the threshold you have to meet, and then you cannot go above,

is to say your capacity permitting always has to never exceed the projected shortfall.

That projected shortfall is based on an estimate of New Hampshire waste, an estimate.

That regime does not account for the fact that there will be fluctuations.

There will be fluctuations naturally over time because it's just a projection,

and there will be significant fluctuations if there's a crisis.

If you ask folks in Vermont whether Montpere this year is going to generate more solid waste,

I bet they'll tell you that they will.

And that will not be accounted for.

So there's no margin of safety in that hearing officer's decision.

At a minimum, DES would need that.

And finally, and I'm sure that Attorney Gould will talk on this much more,

the statute does not try even to limit out-of-state waste.

It does not say you cannot accept out-of-state waste.

In general, the facilities in New Hampshire accept about 50% from out-of-state waste.

So you think NCES does better than that.

It's in the record that this Bethlehem facility will accept about 70% New Hampshire waste, including Stage 6.

But you can't limit that.

So if you just say New Hampshire waste generation is one ton, even if you get that right,

that doesn't mean they're going to accept one ton of New Hampshire waste.

That means that the purpose of the statute will not be accomplished.

The purpose of the statute is to accommodate New Hampshire waste.

Mr. Brooks, I take it your position is that there is some flexibility built into the statute here?

And where do you see that in the language of the statute?

It is up to DES in their discretion to determine what the need is.

It says that DES will determine whether a facility this type, size, and location is necessary.

And it sets forth some minimums that they are supposed to do.

But DES has a discretion to determine whether there is need.

And the concept of need is different than the concept of shortfall, which is based on a mathematical.

Is that based on administrative costs?

No, it's based on the language of the statute.

And I'm sure Attorney Gould will argue in favor of administrative costs.

We do not believe that there is an established administrative costs in this case.

But the statute itself uses two different words to describe two different concepts.

It says need when it means need, and shortfall when it means shortfall.

So the question is how should DES use its discretion?

We would look forward.

I know DES would look forward to this court providing more guidance as to how to do that.

This is an uneasy statute to implement.

It's very important for the people of New Hampshire.

Currently DES essentially implements it by saying once you pass a certain limit,

we're going to give you some fairly broad latitude except in very exceptional circumstances.

But could you provide more guidance as to how they might achieve a better proportionality?

So are you saying that DES has discretion for the task of identifying a shortfall in capacity?

I can see my time is up, may I answer your question?

Please.

So DES has the task of identifying the shortfall.

That's a mathematical projection.

So all you do there is to say once you figure out what New Hampshire waste generation is going to be,

you already know what the permanent capacity is.

You just read the permits that are out there.

Compare the two numbers, the shortfall.

But the question then is if that's the shortfall, understanding how all these systems actually work,

that they take in out of state waste in state waste, that there are fluctuations,

how much discretion does DES have?

In the legislative history, you'll see that the goal seemed to be to keep the outlier from being permitted.

So the language in the legislative history is it has to show some relationship.

It was not vastly disproportionate.

It's not far in excess.

It's not clearly not needed.

Those are the types of things that the legislators were saying DES should put a stop to.

So are you arguing that statute's ambiguous?

It is ambiguous, yes.

Thank you very much.

Mr. Gould.

Excuse me.

Not quite done.

Can you address the distinction between identifying the capacity shortfall during the planning period

as opposed to during the operational or projected operational period?

If I understand the question and the way that we use this terminology may vary from party to party

because I think NCES views both the regime and those words differently than we do.

We would say we're certainly looking at the 20 year planning period,

but then we'd be looking to say, okay, within that planning period,

how does this facility satisfy a need?

So there's still a relationship there.

In DES's mind, it was a fairly rough relationship,

but there's still a relationship.

It appears NCES is saying something much more broad,

which is if it occurs anywhere within 20 years,

you stop looking at exactly when you're satisfying that need.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Mr. Gould.

Thank you, Your Honor.

May I put you to court?

I'm Brian Gould with me at the council table.

This is Kulia Royo.

We represent North Country Environmental Services.

Before I get into the meaning of paragraph 5 of RSA 149M11,

I want to point out that there should be a remand in this case on the ground

that we were denied an evidentiary hearing on the standing of the two individuals

that CLF put forth as establishing its organizational standing.

CLF submitted affidavits from those individuals.

We submitted a counter affidavit from the manager of our facility

that called into question the truthfulness of the assertions in those affidavits.

By statute under RSA 21M3 Roman 9C,

questions of fact are reserved to the counselors instead of the hearing officer.

The hearing officer noted in his order on our motion

that the question of standing is a factual issue.

Yet he took it away from the council,

said that he adopted the affidavits of the two members,

disregarded the affidavit of our manager,

and determined that CLF in fact did have standing.

That could not have been determined given a conflict in the facts

without an evidentiary hearing, which he expressly denied.

That being said, if we adopt your interpretation, the statute wouldn't be necessary?

That's true. That's true, Your Honor.

Yes, as a symptom of a matter of prudence, though,

you would think that you would remand for hearing on whether there was jurisdiction in the first place,

because of course standing is a jurisdictional issue.

But obviously the court has the latitude to handle the case in any manner it wishes.

So let's get to paragraph five of RSA 149M11,

because that's the cross of what's before the court.

And upon reading the briefs, one thing that became apparent to me is that

both CLF and the hearing officer misconstrued what we mean when we say

that this statute is unambiguous.

We mean it's unambiguous in the sense that if there is a shortfall of capacity

over the 20-year period, and the proposed facility will provide equal to or less than that,

that there is a capacity need, that you meet that element of the public benefit.

And it doesn't matter what year that capacity need falls.

That's correct. That's correct.

So there are two fundamental errors, I think, in the hearing officer's order

and in CLF's brief on this point.

The first is that under RSA 149M113A,

it says that there must be a short and long-term need for the capacity.

And both CLF and the hearing officer treat that as a separate criterion.

So instead of determining capacity need,

instead of following the statutory language which says that which capacity need

shall be identified as provided in paragraph 5,

they overlook that and say that short-term and long-term need are separate

from the determination of capacity need.

And the language I just quoted from the statute

actually equates short-term and long-term need with capacity need.

I also want to point out that CLF intentionally omitted from its notice of appeal

before the council that cross-reference to paragraph 5.

And that's important because that's the language in which to the extent language is found.

So the way that CLF proceeded until the hearing officer's order

was to argue there was no short-term or long-term need for this capacity.

It did not argue that there was a violation of the to the extent language.

Only after the hearing officer reached that conclusion did CLF adopt it.

Now under paragraph 5, and this is the more consequential error in this case,

and the error is what Attorney Berks just said,

that is that the shortfall and capacity need are two different things.

That's the error.

And in fact, if you look at the language, it says that what DEGES has to do

is project the total waste generation in New Hampshire over a 20-year planning period

and must determine at the time that the permit is set to be issued

how much capacity there is for that need.

And if there is less capacity than there is projected waste,

then there is a shortfall.

That's the term the statute uses.

And the sentence that is critical here is if such a shortfall is identified,

a capacity need for the proposed type of facility shall be deemed to exist

to the extent that the proposed facility satisfies that need.

And what the hearing officer did is focus on the last clause of that sentence.

That is the to the extent language.

But he ignored the implications of the first clause.

The 20-year shortfall is equivalent to capacity need.

Otherwise, why even do the calculation?

What does that calculation represent if it's not the capacity need?

To make the intent even clearer, the legislature said that a capacity need is deemed to exist

if there is such a shortfall to the extent.

And then it goes on to say to the extent.

Do you want us to read to the extent out of the statute?

Not at all.

The question is what does that mean?

And what it means is if the shortfall,

remember the result of the subtraction,

if the shortfall is, for example, 10 million tons,

DES cannot approve a facility that will provide 12 million tons of capacity.

And if the proposal is to operate beyond the 20-year planning period,

DES cannot approve that.

We've actually had that happen in New Hampshire.

Or there's been an application to extend beyond the 20-year period.

DES said, no, under this clause you can't do that.

So does to the extent have a temporal component to it?

Only in the sense that the legislature provided for it,

which is that it is an aggregate figure.

If over that 20-year period there is a shortfall,

there is deemed a capacity need.

And you asked earlier whether there is flexibility.

And I want to suggest to the court that the legislature included that language

and structured it in this way to provide exactly that kind of flexibility.

That language being to the extent?

Or which language?

The language on that capacity need is deemed to exist to the extent of a shortfall.

And the reason for that is New Hampshire relies upon commercial landfill facilities.

New Hampshire doesn't own its own facilities.

And as Mr. Brooks said, that means that the dormant commerce clause prevents

prohibitions on importing waste.

So we have imported waste in New Hampshire.

And when the legislature calculates a 20-year over a 20-year planning period,

it doesn't take into account the amount of waste that's being imported.

So the suggestion that the result of this statute is that there is 20 years of capacity

for New Hampshire waste and only for New Hampshire waste is simply not true.

It's far less than that.

And that's the level of flexibility the legislature built in.

That it took into account the New Hampshire does receive imports about a state waste.

And it built into the statute and upwardly so that you could not have an endless amount of capacity

available to take imports.

But there is built into it an offering because of this language that says

if there is any shortfall over the 20-year period, then there is a capacity need.

All right, I've got a quick question.

So the hearings officer spent a lot of time focusing on your companies or your clients.

2020 application, the burning process that occurred at that point in time.

To what extent do we need to consider any of that in reaching a conclusion on this appeal?

I think the only thing you need to consider it for is the fact that

this was a significant departure from the department.

Until 2020, you may have seen in CLF's brief what I call the crossover chart that shows

the protection of waste and the capacity.

Until 2020, DES had never used that.

I see my time.

So please finish.

Finish.

And the reason is it didn't matter when in that 20-year period that shortfall took place.

The legislature never said in the statute that DES was to determine when the shortfall took place

and DES never applied the statute to make that relevant.

It was only in 2020 that DES began looking at the point in time when the shortfall took place.

Which motivated the subsequent application for the permit?

What motivated the subsequent application, Your Honor, is that DES said they denied

the pending application unless we extended the period of operation by at least a year.

Is an alternate reading to the extent language that the facility has to meet the shortfall,

i.e. your 10 million ton identified capacity shortfall would then not allow for a project

that would satisfy 8 million tons?

I don't think so.

Because it's to the extent that it would satisfy.

It doesn't completely satisfy.

That's correct.

Because DES has no control over the size of the facility that's going to be proposed, Your Honor.

Understood.

Thank you, Mr. Gould.

Mr. Marco.

Good afternoon.

Heidi Tremarko.

May it please the clerk.

Heidi Tremarko for the Conservation Law Foundation.

This is a straightforward matter of statutory interpretation.

And it can be determined based on the plain meaning of words in the statute.

And the legislature created the solid waste management statute with limitations on when DES

permit landfills and said that DES can only permit a landfill if there is a capacity need.

And here the council correctly determined that there is no capacity need for this landfill.

Is that a question of fact?

Sorry.

In what time frame?

No capacity need.

Thank you, Your Honor.

The council determined that the landfill operations and the capacity need must occur at the same

time.

They need to be contemporaneous.

And that's based on the language in the statute.

One year within many?

Or every single year?

The council determined that it must occur entirely during a time of capacity need.

Because the statute says that a capacity need only exists to the extent that the landfill

satisfies that need.

So the landfill, there's a capacity need.

The landfill starts operating.

There's no longer capacity need.

It stops operating?

Well, DES put issue the permit that way.

So when they engage in writing the permit, they project as you've heard out the capacity

need over the next 20 years.

And then they permit the landfill for that time.

So DES could certainly tailor a permit to only operate during a time of need, or in this

case, they could have allowed for NCES to begin operations in 2026, the first year that there

was a capacity need.

So who would invest the money to do that kind of stop and start operation?

DES, when they issue the permit, they do engage in this long term planning.

And the applicants can see that when there was a need.

So when this permit came out, they projected the need for 2026.

And so a landfill company could certainly apply for a permit to operate when there is a

need and receive the permit to operate in that time.

And they could invest in those.

And that's not operating when the need goes away?

If that is the term.

If we start recycling, right?

For instance, the permit here was of four or six groups.

And so it was for a limited time.

And so your point is it shouldn't start till 2026.

Exactly.

And that is based on the language and the statute from the legislature's

determination that there is no public benefit in excess landfill capacity.

And that's also in the solid waste management statute where you see the

waste hierarchy that ranks landfilling as the least preferred method of

managing our waste.

And would basically be expanding one section here, section six of the

existing landfill?

Is that what the permit would provide for?

So how much planning needs to go into an expansion of a landfill in order to

satisfy a need?

So if I'm understanding the question correctly,

DES is required to engage in long term planning.

And they do that when they issue the permits.

And the permits include in this capacity need assumption includes capacity

needed analysis includes several assumptions that DES makes along the

way.

And the record here, DES notes that it makes conservative assumptions to

build a cushion into landfill operations.

And so we have plenty of landfill capacity until 2026.

And so DES is charged with using their expertise and their

discretion to engage in that long term planning and to permit the

landfills to accommodate our waste.

So this permit was provided that the expansion could occur in 2026.

There'd be no lawsuits.

We'd be happy.

We'd be all set.

Well, we did challenge it on other grounds, but the council

correctly determined it was unlawful based on the capacity need.

And if permit had allowed them to begin operations in 2026 when

there was a need, then that capacity need provision would have been

that.

And presumably that's what the hearings examiner officer might have

met because he remanded the case back to the commissioner.

Right.

So this next, there's not going to be another phase,

regardless of what we do here.

Yes, your honor.

He determined that it was issued unlawfully and it does go

back to DES and they could reissue a permit to begin in 2026.

If they redo that, I think it's not on the record now,

but there have been additional landfill permits and expansions

in the state since that time.

So the capacity analysis may be different.

So the 2026 projected need could go away.

That's correct, your honor.

Would there be a challenge if that projected need goes away

after the permits issued?

Not to start till 2026, but it's just sitting out there

in preparation for the shortfall.

And then the need declines.

So would there be a challenge to that permit hanging out there?

I'm not sure I understand the question.

Are you asking if CLF would challenge the permit?

Right.

If the permit were issued, as my colleague suggested,

with a start date of 2026 and then between now and 2026,

all of a sudden the numbers come in and we have no more capacity.

So would it be pulled?

I think it would depend on DES's capacity analysis at that time.

So DES would need to engage in the capacity analysis

that they're required to do under provision five

and determine if there is a capacity need.

And then we would compare the permit to that need.

What is your response to DES's argument

regarding the discretion that it has in this regard?

Yes, your honor.

DES has a lot of discretion in issuing these permits

and engaging in the long-term planning, as I said.

And so when they do the capacity analysis,

and they've noted this since some of the footnotes

in the application review summary,

that they use their discretion and their expertise

to analyze the existing permitted landfills,

anticipated generated waste within the state.

It doesn't have to be the strict numerical number

that we heard earlier, but there is room for DES

and they should use their discretion

and engage in some conservative assumptions

to allow for long-term planning.

So where does your position on the legal matter

depart from DES's position

in terms of exercise of their discretion?

Your position differs in that DES can use their discretion

in conducting the capacity analysis,

but the legislature has limited when DES can issue permits.

And the legislature said they can only issue landfill permits

to the extent the permit satisfies a capacity need.

And DES does not have discretion there.

The legislature determined and enacted into statute

that it must satisfy a capacity need.

But the statute doesn't establish a time frame.

That's correct.

It uses the tense that it must satisfy the need.

And the council correctly determined here

that that means they must occur contemporaneously.

And that's because an existing landfill

does not satisfy the future need.

An existing landfill is filled with waste now

and as you heard, up to 50% of that waste

is imported from out of state.

And so it's not safe for future use.

New Hampshire doesn't benefit from that.

Rather, New Hampshire with excess capacity

becomes a dumping ground for other states

that are closing down their landfill capacity.

But how do you plan again?

How do you economically plan for a permit

to be issued simultaneously with a shortfall?

DES can engage in this long-term planning as they've done.

And as we can see,

we have sufficient landfill capacity through 2026

and at this point beyond that.

So if I'm a landfill provider,

I have to speculate that I'll get a permit

if I'm investing funds in attempting

to provide additional capacity.

Yes, but the landfill providers are aware

of the capacity information

and all of this information is available.

But it's fluid.

As different landfills are permitted over time, correct?

And that is the scheme that was set up

by the legislature to limit us

from having excess landfills.

In regard to standing,

Mr. Gould says there should have been

an evidentiary hearing held

and that the affidavits are conflicting

and that that tension has to be resolved

through that type of hearing.

Why is that not right?

Thank you, Your Honor.

There is no need for an evidentiary hearing here

for several reasons.

One is the council rules simply don't contemplate

evidentiary hearings at every step of the way.

The council does not meet that often

and the rules don't allow for evidentiary hearings.

Another is that we had a hearing in this matter

and NCES could have brought forth

their standing witness at that time

and they did not.

And so they had an opportunity

to raise this argument with the council

at a hearing.

They did not try to do that.

They did not bring forth the witness

or any witnesses which got standing in any way.

So the state of the record

is they're dueling affidavits?

No, Your Honor.

The affidavits are not dueling.

The affidavits from CLF witnesses

describe their personal experiences

and how they are impacted by the landfill.

The affidavit from NCES's employee

does not speak to those individuals' personal experiences.

It does attempt to counter some of that

but it cannot speak to their personal experiences

in their homes.

And you've seen these affidavits on the record

for instance, Andrew.

But those personal experiences were related

to some of the other challenges

that are not before us.

So query whether those affidavits addressed

this capacity issue.

Yes.

Yeah.

Yes, they do, Your Honor,

because the affidavits allow for CLF.

They show the CLF members are directly injured

and they feel the impact on their homes

and the properties that they own

and they can see and smell and hear.

My guess is though the counter affidavit

had to do with capacity need,

not with personal impact.

No, the counter affidavit, Your Honor,

had to deal with whether these people

could have these experiences at their homes.

But the capacity issue here

and the landfill permit here allows the existing landfill

to continue to operate for six years.

And so the affidavits do go directly to that

because they experience injury at their homes

and another six years of operation

allows for another six years of harm

to these individuals.

And who considered the affidavits?

The hearing officer or the water counselor?

It was the hearing officer

and the hearing officer determined

three times that CLF has been in this matter

and DES has once challenged the

standing here.

Is he entitled to make that factual finding?

Is he authorized to make that factual finding?

Well, as I said,

the rules don't contemplate

an evidential hearing

on standing before the council

and that has not been the council's practice

and so that he properly

made the determination based on those sworn statements

and applying those facts

and there were uncontested facts as well

and some contested between the two affidavits

and some uncontested

and the hearing officer properly applied those facts

to the law and made the determination,

the legal determination that CLF had standing.

As we turn to the interpretation of the statute,

is it ambiguous such that we should

look to the legislative history or not?

No, Your Honor.

The statute the council correctly held

is not ambiguous.

No party over the course of the appeal

argued that it was ambiguous

and in fact you heard today from NCES

that it is not ambiguous.

Well, we have parties all saying it

or apparently saying it's not ambiguous

but it means this.

So maybe there's reasonable room

for disagreement as to what it means.

The parties may disagree

but this is the first time the language

was tested by the council.

To the best of our knowledge,

the first time this clause went up to the council,

the capacity need provision and was tested

and this was the council's determination

based on the planning of the statute

and so there's no need to look at

legislative history or administrative loss

or prior DES determination.

That's a question of law

that we can review de novo.

That's right. Yes, Your Honor.

You don't have to use all your time.

Well, I would like to...

We touched briefly on administrative loss

and that did come up right now

just briefly with whether the statute

was ambiguous or not but I would like to be

clear here that it is our position

that administrative loss simply does not

apply in this case

and it was not before the council

before as we've seen in our brief

NCES not pursue that argument

during the hearing or

during the whole the year of the appeal

and so the argument was waived

and that's also in DES's brief

that the argument was untimely.

Even if the court were to look

at prior permitting decision

as you've heard from DES

there is no

pattern of behavior. There is no

consistent pattern of DES prior permits

and so

while the doctrine doesn't apply

and it doesn't apply where the statute is unambiguous

even if the court were to

try to apply administrative loss

there is no gloss on the statute

there's no established pattern of behavior

and so there is

the gloss can't do anything to change

the statutory language from the legislature.

Any further questions?

Thank you very much council

the case of submitting the court is adjourned.
