Justice Hicks, why don't you call the case?

Yes.

The case before the Court is in the matter of Papatone and Papatones, case number 20220467.

The record will reflect that Justices MacDonald and Bassett are disqualified in this case.

Attorney Muir, please begin when you are ready, and none of my time will count against

you.

No, you get two minutes left.

No.

Good afternoon and may it please the Court.

My name is Anthony Muir, and I represent Mark Papatones in this matter.

Trial counsel in this case argued all along, and we still do now, that this is really a

simple matter of applying the plain language of final divorce stipulation and applying

contract principles to it.

The stipulation, the key part of it for discussion today, states, marks up in Joanna Alamone in

the amount of $2,650 per month, continuing each month thereafter until the death of either

party.

Joanna's remarriage marks retirement from full-time employment, where Joanna's receipt

of inheritance funds in the amount in excess of $100,000, whichever occurs first.

Now, do you contend that those terms are ambiguous, or?

We don't believe that they are ambiguous, Your Honor.

I believe the finding of the trial court was that, specifically, the term retirement was

an ambiguous term, but we don't believe it was.

And we believe that should the Court find that this is not ambiguous, the analysis

really ends there.

The trial court only got to reformation because it found that that work of retirement

was ambiguous.

But it never should have reached reformation.

The position of this Court in contractional interpretation matters, which applies to a

final divorce stipulation because it is a contract that simply becomes a court order.

The party's intent is to be determined from the plain language used in the contract.

This Court does frequently look to different dictionary definitions for guidance on the

plain meaning of terms.

The term retirement, as the trial court found as ambiguous, is not ambiguous.

The dictionary definition of the word retirement contained in the New Oxford American

Dictionary 3rd edition says that retirement is the action or fact of leaving

one's job in ceasing to work.

Do you say that if he had retired after the ink dried on the stipulation,

that would have been no problem, would have relieved him from the alimony obligation?

It would have, Your Honor, but he would not in a position to do that at the time

the parties were both aware of that.

He discussed at the trial court level that he could not have retired at that point.

He was only able to retire a bit earlier than anticipated, at least earlier than

Joanne had happened to have anticipated because his financial position had improved.

He had, his retirement account had increased because of market forces and fluctuations.

So he could have retired the day afterwards.

And there's actually another provision of the final decree which calls for alimony

to terminate if she, Joanne Papantonis, was to receive inheritance funds in the amount

in excess of $100,000.

That is outside of the party's control, but it still implicates that alimony could

have terminated the day afterwards.

And the parties would have been okay with that, according to the terms of their.

What if he took a part-time job and worked 35 hours a week instead of 40?

Well, same result.

It's the same result because it says specifically, retiring from full-time employment.

If Joanne Papantonis didn't want that language in the stipulation, she shouldn't

have agreed to that language.

So it would be the same result, Your Honor.

And it's undisputed that Mr. Papantonis did leave full-time employment on January 31st,

2020, at the age of 59, and he ceased working full-time.

So that's when her alimony obligation ended, or his alimony obligation ended, perhaps.

In her brief, Ms. Papantonis says that it really should fall on Mr.

Papantonis for not including any sort of clarifying language in the stipulation,

basically saying that if he wanted additional wording in the stipulation

that allowed him to retire early, he should have been the one responsible for

putting that in.

But he would have no reason to do that because of his belief that this was

unambiguous, that when he retired from full-time employment, that was it.

Likewise, I think if she wanted to make sure that the alimony obligation did

not end if he was to retire early, she should have been the one responsible

for putting that language in there, saying, well, he can't retire until the

age of 67 if that's what she wanted.

So it doesn't follow that it should be to Mr. Papantonis's detriment that there

wasn't clarifying language, that it wasn't more clear to her because the plain

language controls and the plain language says retirement from full-time employment.

He left his full-time employment.

We discussed this in our reply brief that even though the new alimony

statute doesn't apply here, the distinction raised in that new

statute is indicative of really what our argument is because the new alimony

statute, RSA 45819AA states that, in cases, alimony will end up on the

payer region full retirement age or actual retirement.

Here, in our stipulation, it talks about ending at retirement from

full-time employment.

The legislature clearly considers there to be a difference between

actual retirement and full retirement age.

So to the extent that the trial court is now trying to conflate

retirement from actual employment with full retirement age, there's

not support in the record for that, but there's also not support at the

legislative level either.

Now, if the court finds that there is some ambiguity and we believe

that it's a de novo analysis looking first at the language, if the court

finds that there is ambiguity, then the next inquiry is whether the

trial court applied the principle of reformation appropriately.

And we contend that the trial court did not.

Reformation requires three things to occur.

One, that there was an actual agreement between the parties.

Two, that there was an agreement to put the agreement in writing.

And three, that there was a variance between the prior agreement and the

writing.

Here, we don't even have problem number one.

And the court says, this court has said that the burden of proof and a

reformation action is a heavy one.

And there's a good reason why.

We don't want to be binding parties to agreements that they never

actually intended to enter into.

That flies in the face of one of the core principles of contract law,

which is that there has to be a meeting of the minds between the parties.

The trial court specifically found that Mr. Papantonis reasonably believed that

he was allowed to retire when he chose to do so.

So based on that finding, if he reasonably believed that he was allowed

to retire, the trial court really can't also go on to find.

Well, is it reasonable to believe that the trial court would have

approved a stipulation for a divorce of a 30-year marriage with disparate

incomes if the terms were, she gets four years of alimony?

And that's it.

Any court approved that type of stipulation?

Well, I believe the trial court routinely approves agreements between the parties.

Not if you judge Rossio.

It depends, but typically there is a great amount of deference

given to parties in fashioning these sorts of agreements.

And I think in the divorce and family law context, one of the reasons for that is

this is the lives of these people.

They have lived this life.

They are able to control their destinies with some respect to what happens afterwards

because it is such a personal area of law.

So I do think a court would have approved that, and it did.

What if the agreement did say retirement at age 67 and no earlier?

Could she have forced him to work until the age of 67?

I think she likely could have, Your Honor.

How would that work?

I'm going to retire in a couple of months, and you're not going to be able to force me to work.

Of course, we're not married.

Well, he would have been bound for that, Your Honor, but there are standards

for modification of alimony when there is a substantial change in circumstances.

So if that were to have been the language of the agreement and he stopped working,

he would have had to go on to have provided some sufficient rationale to the trial court

saying here's a substantial change.

This is why I can no longer work and pay alimony.

And it would be up to the trial court to determine whether that was reason enough

for that substantial change in circumstances.

But by the letter of the law until he went for that modification,

he would be required to pay her.

Yes.

Another argument that...

I'm sorry, one moment.

Additionally, opposing counsel for Ms. Papantonis has raised the argument

contained in the case of Arvinitis and the trial court relied on that case

in making its determination that it was fair to order Mr. Papantonis

to continue to pay alimony because he was not at retirement age.

But the Arvinitis case is different from this situation.

In Arvinitis, the actual order that the trial court issued originally

was simply the amount of alimony and I believe a duration for that amount of alimony

didn't have any sort of other language like we have here

where it said that alimony would end up on retirement.

So in Arvinitis, this court looked at what was a reasonable age to retire

and the court looked at a Florida decision which talked about retirement

at age 65 generally seems to be fair and reasonable and said that

in order to rebut that presumption, it's a heavy burden to do so.

But it's different because in Arvinitis, he didn't have the option to say

retire and end alimony whereas we have that here.

We also raised the issue with some of the findings of the trial court

specifically that with respect to the modification of alimony,

the trial court found that Ms. Papantonis would have been on the public dole

if she was not receiving alimony and likewise that Mr. Papantonis

had the ability to pay alimony.

What was wrong with that presumption?

Well, the presumption was it's not supported by the record.

Well, maybe it's hyperbole. We know people who are hyperbole.

Sure, it could be hyperbole but the court still has to look at reasonable need

versus ability to pay and the record doesn't bear out that Ms. Papantonis

had that reasonable need. We provided this court with the entire transcript,

all of the exhibits that were omitted and looking at that, I think the court

has to determine whether or not the trial court acted in its discretion

in making those two findings that she had that need and Mr. Papantonis

had the ability to pay because Ms. Papantonis, if you review her financial affidavits,

it's noted in her testimony as well that she didn't receive any gifts,

she did not accrue any substantial credit card debts, not get any loans,

was paying down her loans.

Do you dispute that she's totally disabled?

I can't recall if that was part of the record or the decision.

And I don't think it necessarily factors in here, Your Honor,

because the trial court, I think this court looks at the record before it

in terms of what the trial court had to consider.

That might have happened after the hearing.

I don't recall. I'm sorry.

But with respect to her finances, if you review her financial affidavits

and her testimony, her debts were not going up and her retirement account

was going down, so I don't know that there is evidence in the record

to support the trial courts finding here, understanding that it may be

certainly the public dole comment, but she still has to have some sort of need

and she didn't bear out that there was a need.

And likewise, Mr. Papantonis, he was having to withdraw from his own retirement accounts.

He was not needing Enzmead himself, but the court held him responsible

to continue to pay alimony under the same alimony amount

as what he was spending.

The court never did a modification analysis.

I'm sorry?

The court never did a modification analysis.

It really didn't, and if it did, it was very thin, Your Honor.

And part of the difficulty we had is that the trial court justified its decision

by listing four very disparate rationales saying that it's based on either

modification or reformation or extension or one other that I'm drawing a blank on.

But these are all very distinct, very distinct analysis.

And at least with respect to extension, and I believe modification,

it's discussed in our grief that there's a requirement that there be at least notice

if those things are going to be taken up.

Obviously, there was notice of modification because we were making that argument.

But as far as extension or the other things that the trial court tried to justify its order in,

I think it's better for the trial court to have said,

here's the decision I'm going to go with, and here's a list of potential rationales,

and I'm not going to necessarily specify which one it is.

Right. If there was a termination, the recipient of alimony could have moved for an extension.

Right, exactly.

But this was all sort of tied up together.

It was, Your Honor, and that's very astute.

It seems as though the trial court had in its mind this is the decision that I want to reach,

and as to how I get there, you kind of figure it out,

which we don't believe is a sustainable exercise of discretion.

Additionally, the trial court, we believe very clearly did not follow the Nassar decision

with respect to gifts that are treated as income for alimony purposes.

That case is pretty clear that the trial court, because gifts are discretionary,

and the Nassar case, it was, some gifts were also housing allowance that the court looked at.

It said that those can't be counted on, so we can't include those as income.

The trial court simply included the gifts that Mr. Papantonis received from his mother

in the analysis, which we don't think was appropriate by the same amount of time.

Yes, thank you very much.

Ms. Goldstein?

Goldstein, which is it?

Goldstein, please proceed.

Good afternoon, and may it please the Court.

My name is Meredith Carroll Goldstein, and I'm an attorney at the law firm of Oregon O.

We represent Johanna Papantonis.

This is a case about the good faith performance of an agreement.

As the trial court found, to interpret the party's agreement as Mr. Papantonis suggests,

would result in nothing short of a worthless and unenforceable agreement that would lead to unjust and absurd results.

Today I have two main points, and I'm happy to take questions at any time.

First, the trial court did not reform this agreement, and it did not add material terms.

What the court did was interpret the party's agreement.

In interpreting the agreement, the trial court determined that when the parties referred to full retirement from full-time employment,

the parties must have intended to refer to full retirement age.

Were the parties represented in reaching that final stipulation?

They were, yes.

So the trial court looked to that language and determined, based on our principles of contract interpretation,

what the reasonable interpretation was.

And it went so far to say that there's no other reasonable interpretation here.

As Justice Donovan pointed out earlier, the idea of an agreement being able to be terminated the day after it's made

likely would not have even been approved by the court below.

It's complete unilateral control.

At the age these parties were, 59 isn't unheard of as a retirement age.

Sure.

So I think four years back, so someone's 55, how would we anticipate the reasonable expectation of the parties

when they just use the word retirement?

I mean, there's retirement at 59, 60, 62, depending where you are.

Certain jobs you can retire after 20 years, so having a hard time finding a basis for the expectation

that this is going to be 62, 65, 70?

Sure.

So I think that goes to, how do we know what reasonable retirement age is?

Doesn't say reasonable retirement age, it just says retirement.

Right.

So applying, and I agree that is the plain language we have to work with,

but applying the principles we have to look at contracts from when we interpret,

we're supposed to look at what is reasonable.

And that's when we can look at the Arvanitis case that did exist

when this agreement was implemented by the parties.

And in Arvanitis, although it is a modification case,

the court explains what is generally expected as a reasonable retirement age.

It talks about age 65, but that's generally accepted.

It does make a note that there can be times when earlier retirement would be justified.

But here wouldn't we also take into account that the retirement accounts themselves were divided?

So both parties received part of his two pensions, one from Velcro, one from, I forget the other company,

but so that retirement might trigger payouts, if you will, to both parties.

So certainly we can look to the totality of the agreement,

and yes, the retirement accounts were addressed in there.

But keeping in mind that reasonable standard that we have to work with,

it's simply unreasonable to find that Ms. Packentonis would have agreed to this agreement

if it really meant it could terminate at any time that any party would have.

What we also can tell from the agreement is two things.

One, that the parties agreed alimony was necessary.

There was a financial need here for it.

So for somebody to agree to something that could have disappeared the next day,

and for example not provided the ability to plan it all for the future,

or future financial security, the trial report correctly found was just unreasonable.

The other piece that we can draw from the agreement is looking at those four times

that may trigger the termination of alimony.

All of those considerations have to do with a change in her financial circumstances.

A great example of that was referenced by opposing counsel about the $100,000 she could inherit.

Certainly if she'd lost a family member, for example, the day after the agreement was signed,

she inherited those funds, alimony could have been terminated.

But her financial circumstances would have been drastically changed.

She would now have $100,000 to do what she needed to do,

and she would not have lost it perhaps, or use it for other purposes, to get her to the next phase of her life.

But if something happened to Mr. Papanton's, he gets hit by a bus.

No, I want that to happen.

And he didn't retire, but now he can't work.

Wouldn't there just be a revisit of the alimony amount?

So why not do that in this circumstance too, if your client still has a need for alimony?

Sure. So in this circumstance, I understand that either party could have passed away.

We all don't know what the next day has for us.

But looking at the language of the agreement, that was put in, in my experience,

is relatively standard in alimony agreements.

Rather than retirement, there was an understanding of retirement meant stopping work.

And I think it's also important to point out as well that the trial court concluded that Mr. Papantonus didn't really retire.

The day that he retired from Velcro, he signed another employment agreement with that company to see on part-time

in the same department, working on the same projects with the same people,

working slightly less hours, but actually making more money per hour, resulting in substantially the same income.

But he's retired from full-time employment at that point, correct?

And that's language that your client agreed to.

So I agree that he retired in that sense from his full-time position.

But the trial court also looks at this job he has with his family,

working part-time as the property manager for their rental property in Massachusetts,

and says essentially he's working full-time hours.

So whether he retired from full-time employment is in question.

This is not somebody who retired and took perhaps a part-time job as something he enjoyed,

like a golf course or something.

He continued working in the same department, doing the same work,

and continued to hold on to his second job as well.

But I'm concerned with the trial court's order requiring Mr. Papantonus to pass alimony

when he was no longer working, when he was out of work, he'd been laid off.

And he wasn't working for the better part of what, a year or two?

So it was during the pandemic.

I believe he was subject to some layoffs that occurred around the pandemic.

And he was looking for work.

The trial court looked at that in two pieces here.

So first of all, when he starts working again, again, he's carrying the two jobs.

So that's the same argument about full-time hours.

As we look at the piece about him being laid off and no longer working,

that's our argument that we discussed in our briefs,

that he chose to leave retirement his full-time position,

likely making him more vulnerable for a layoff situation.

Not that anyone could, of course, predict that the pandemic was coming,

but he chose to voluntarily retire from that full-time position.

I also want to just highlight as well the idea that there's this principle

that we're all familiar with, good faith and fair dealing.

This agreement just does not compute with that principle either.

The idea, again, that somebody would enter into this agreement

that could perhaps be terminated the next day just is unreasonable.

It's also just interesting that Mr. Papantonis continued to work for four years,

potentially seeing that he needed to continue this obligation under the agreement

and then just decided not to, when an opportunity should work

in the same capacity making more money became available.

That's something the trial court looked at as well.

I will just briefly address the modification argument that does come into play here.

The Arvanitis Court talks about what's reasonable retirement.

We've discussed that.

It also gives us a great guidance of when voluntary early retirement can be appropriate.

And it was the first case to say that it could qualify as a substantial change.

That case explains that in determining whether or not it is a substantial change,

we have to look at the age of the obligor, their health, their motivation for retirement,

and what's normal in their position, which goes to your question,

Justice Hansman Coney, of when perhaps it may be reasonable to retire at 55.

An example I can think of would be a police officer perhaps,

where the case discusses that the difference there would be the physical requirements of the job.

There's certain jobs that we're all aware of that you simply, at certain ages,

because of perhaps different health things that come up in your life may not be able to perform.

But we have no evidence of that in this case.

We don't have anything to tell us that he was unable to continue working.

And that's further shown to us by the fact that he did continue working.

He did stay with that same employer after what he argues was his full-time retirement.

Where do the evidence of Mr. Papatonis believe that he shouldn't pay alimony at the outset?

Yeah, so where did that evidence come from?

Sure, that was during his testimony.

It's page 243 of the transcript.

He talks about whether or not he believed he should be paying at all.

And in that back and forth during his examination, it was uncrossed, yes.

Did that have to do with the division of property being a basis for not having to pay?

No, no, that didn't come into the discussion.

The division was equal of property.

And Mr. Papatonis agreed to this alimony provision despite perhaps being able to seek more under the statute.

But the discussion in his testimony did not relate to it.

Being entitled to more because of fault or need?

The length of this marriage, the third-year marriage, half of the marriage could have been the maximum

for her alimony based on the party's ages that would have brought her farmhouse.

But I'm talking about property settlements.

She might have been entitled to more property?

Oh, no, I'm sorry.

And then she would have been entitled to more alimony than the agreement.

Yeah.

Yes.

Just to bring in Arvanitis once more.

There is that presumption in Arvanitis as well of 65 being reasonable retirement age.

So another case we cite, too, that's helpful is the Pierce case that talks with a special agent

who began taking some different medications and no longer could meet his requirements for that position.

Again, that's when voluntary early retirement may be appropriate.

We just don't have those facts here.

The trial court didn't get facts of that nature to rely on to make any finding that this was appropriate.

My opposing counsel also discussed briefly my client's financial need.

My client's financial need, in discussing it in the brief, and we did respond in our brief,

it's mentioned that she was paying down debts.

So clearly her financial circumstances were not so bad.

She was paying down her debts.

The debts that she was paying were her routine expenses.

Her mortgage, for example, her car, just routine life expenses that have to be paid.

Her financial circumstances have not improved.

Was her disability before the trial court?

Yes, it was. There's discussion of her disability.

She was deemed disabled and began receiving Social Security in April of 2020.

That's her sole source of income?

It is, yes.

And as the trial court found, she was a stay-at-home mom for the entirety of the marriage.

She worked a little bit in the children's schools as a paraprofessional,

but she, after 30 years of marriage, did not have the ability to increase her income,

especially with her disability.

And was there any evidence as to when the two pensions, her share of the pensions,

would start in payout status?

So her share of the pensions, she's not receiving them yet.

My understanding is that they trigger at retirement.

So the trial court pointed us actually to the attempt to bridge the gap

to get her to retirement age when she could access those pensions.

So your understanding is they start at her retirement age?

That's my understanding.

And that would be 65 asian?

Yes, it was for her. Yes.

I'll just briefly mention as well that the notion about her retirement account going up

is also flawed.

Her retirement account went up in 2020 and 2021 with the stock market

and has since fallen with the stock market.

She was not adding more money to it.

As has his, right?

Sure, absolutely, sure.

But he made the choice to greatly diminish it.

And we don't know if his pension benefit starts at a different time,

his retirement age or upon his actual retirement.

I'm not sure what his pension benefits are.

I believe based on his age, his retirement age is 67, but I'm not sure the pension terms.

If there's no further questions, I'll just briefly conclude

that a party cannot unreasonably retire to avoid their alimony obligations.

Thank you.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you both for well briefed and well argued case.

The court is now adjourned.
