This is case 2022-0155 Schleischer and Stevens Hotel LLC at all versus Star Surplus Lines Insurance

Company at all.

May I please-

Good morning, I apologize.

This case is on an interlocutory appeal from Merrimack County.

There were three transferred questions before the court.

The way oral argument will proceed this morning is that we will hear argument on the first two transferred questions.

And we'll hear initially from Attorney Connor who has reserved two minutes for a rebuttal.

Then we'll hear from Attorney Galinsky for 15 minutes.

Then we'll hear the two-minute rebuttal.

And then we'll turn to the third transferred question which relates to access.

And Attorney Galinsky will have 15 minutes and then Attorney Gallagher will present on behalf of access.

Does that sound right?

It does, Your Honor.

Okay.

Thank you, Attorney Connor.

Good morning, and please proceed.

May it please the court.

I'm Doreen Connor from Permer, Piper, Eggleston, and Kramer on behalf of all of the insurers.

I've reserved two minutes for a rebuttal.

I'd like to make three brief points before taking questions.

This court should reverse and enter summary judgment in favor of the insurers, terminating the case,

because one, the trial court misapplied Mellon as the alleged molecular presence of the virus did not physically alter any property

and did not render any property distinctive demonstrable.

Two, the alleged presence of the virus at the hotels and adjacent properties did not necessitate repair,

replacement, or remediation efforts as required under the period of restoration definition of the policy.

And three, the government COVID-19 orders were not issued because of physical law or damage to any particular property.

The trial court misapplied Mellon when it relied upon the danger the virus poses.

Well, let's get to that later.

Isn't there at the very least an ambiguity in the policy issued by your clients?

No, Your Honor.

No, Your Honor.

And in fact, that was not argued below.

The trial court references that in its order.

It really doesn't matter if we find an ambiguity, does it?

Well, that has not been briefed, Your Honor.

But there also is no ambiguity because language, direct physical loss of or damage to property was at issue in Mellon.

And this court construed it as a matter of law finding no ambiguity.

May I ask another threshold question?

Sure.

One is framed as follows under Mellon.

Does the presence of COVID in the air or on services at a premises, if proven, satisfy a requirement under a property insurance policy of loss or damage or direct physical loss of or damage to property?

Are we talking about a policy?

Or are we talking about the eight policies that have been submitted to the court and were before the Superior Court on the petition to complain for declaratory judgment?

We're talking about all eight.

Unfortunately, for Your Honor, the language at issue is the same with regard to direct physical loss of or damage to property.

So isn't a threshold question for us, which law applies to those eight policies?

The conflict of law issue was reserved and not ruled upon down below because at that time there was no conflict between the states with regard to that.

The policies were issued with regard to hotels located in three different states.

Are things changed now?

Excuse me?

Has it changed now?

Yes, both Massachusetts.

Well, it depends on whether or not the court reverses Judge Kissinger.

Then why wouldn't we remand?

Why wouldn't we remand in that case?

Because you can decide as a matter of law that Judge Kissinger misapplied Mellon and then there is no conflict between the states.

But we don't even know what the choice of law analysis is.

I mean, it could be a purely advisory opinion.

What law applies to this case?

Well, Your Honor, I think that you can decide it under New Hampshire law as did Judge Kissinger.

And if you end up reversing Judge Kissinger, there is no conflict with regard to the analysis that both New Jersey and Massachusetts have announced.

Because they have both found that in this context, the mere presence of the virus does not constitute direct physical loss of or damaged property.

I don't mean to belay the point, but a threshold question for any court applying addressing any conflict is which law applies.

And it seems to me that's a threshold issue for us.

We've got eight policies before us.

The question is whether New Hampshire law applies to all of them in the dispute.

That particular issue has not yet been addressed.

Thank you.

It was reserved.

The insured argues that the mere presence of the virus, regardless of its impact on property, satisfies Mellon.

This court said something very different in Mellon.

This court said that an insured may suffer physical loss from a contaminant or condition only if it causes changes to the property.

But what was the actual holding in Mellon?

I'm having difficulty finding it.

Kind of elusive.

No, Your Honor.

The holding in Mellon was that there must be a distinct and demonstrable change to the property itself as a result of the physical intent in order to trigger coverage.

In this case, it's quite different.

Cat urine can, unlike the coronavirus, can cause a distinct and demonstrable physical change to the property by saturating the property itself.

You also have to remember in Mellon there was-

But wasn't that issue actually remanded once the court in Mellon?

It was remanded because the issue on appeal in Mellon was whether or not an intangible change to property could ever trigger direct physical loss of or damaged property.

That's not the issue in this case.

The issue in this case is whether the molecular presence of it can trigger it.

Aren't we engaging somewhat in metaphysics then at this point between a molecular presence and a sensation of odor?

What's the difference?

It's very different because in Mellon you have the odor persisting for two years.

You had two chances to remediate it, neither worked, and it was remanded to determine whether or not repairs were necessitated to the property.

So is it your position in Mellon that there was a tangible alteration of the property?

It was intangible in terms of being able to see it.

You could perceive it from the smell, but with regard to then whether it rose distinct and demonstrable,

the court down below had to decide whether or not repairs were necessitated in order to cure the smell.

In this case it's undisputed.

No repairs were ever made in order to deal with the coronavirus.

Unlike cat urine, which in that case existed for two years, the coronavirus fortunately survived for a much shorter period of time.

So you don't quibble with anything in Mellon?

Dicta or otherwise?

I do not, Your Honor.

And in fact, one of the cases that this court cited in Mellon with approval in order to come to your standard is extremely relevant to this case.

It's the Columbanet case.

It's a district court case out of Oregon.

In that case the property at issue was damaged by water and some of their molecular spores, some caused odors, some did not.

The insured in that case wanted coverage for everything.

And the Oregon court said no because the garments that were damaged, allegedly damaged by spores that then did nothing, didn't turn into smell, did not constitute physical damage to those garments.

The same is true here with regard to the coronavirus.

To the extent that it can be proved because it's present somewhere, it still hasn't changed the property.

And it also is not requiring repairs.

I'm sorry to derail you.

No, I'm not sorry.

What if it were radiation?

Nuclear radiation from an offsite accident or whatever.

What if radiation permeated the building?

Well, that would probably be excluded under the nuclear exclusion.

But if we assume for the moment-

I didn't read that, I'm sorry.

Okay, assume for the moment there's no other exclusion.

There's a physical event that needs to be repaired or replaced at that plant to fix that leak.

You have the plants offsite.

It's just radiation wafts through the-

I understand that there's still a repair that has to be made to address the root cause of the problem.

And then depending on the degree of uninhabitability of the building, you might have a direct physical loss of or damage.

But we're not talking about loss of use here, correct?

Is there loss of use coverage here?

Well, there are three time element coverages, Your Honor.

And there was no loss of use because, in fact, the hotels continued to operate.

The hotels argue that they did not operate in their intended function.

This court also addressed that in Mellon when you cited to Pentair, which is an 8th Circuit Court,

and you indicated that a loss of intended function is not direct physical loss of

because you haven't lost your property.

You've just been restricted in the manner in which you use it.

Similar to a curfew that might come into place,

suddenly the hotels can't open for certain hours, unrelated to any physical event.

But of course it impacts their business.

So far there hasn't been any direct reference in this discussion to the governor's orders.

So how does that affect our analysis?

Is the loss here completely coincident with the governor's orders?

Or does it extend beyond just as a factual matter?

The new use orders ended, I believe, in June of 2020.

Is the claim here coincident with that period?

Well, that would be a question probably better directed to the hotels

and understand their motion for summary judgment argument.

They're arguing that the virus continues to exist,

that it's everywhere in the air in every community.

And if this court doesn't reverse Judge Kissinger's order,

that means that every business in every city of this state

could conceivably make a claim for property coverage.

So from your perspective, does the presence of the governor's orders

in the three- or four-month period in 2020 matter to our legal analysis?

It would matter with regard to the specific government authority time element coverage,

not so much contingent business interruption or ingress or egress coverage.

But again, the government orders weren't issued because of some physical event.

It's not like a hurricane hits Florida and then there's an evacuation order

because of that physical event.

In this case, there was no physical event that resulted in the government orders.

In fact, the government orders throughout the entire country,

they were geared at stopping the spread of COVID among people,

but not because of a particular physical property or a physical event.

On the exclusion issue, what are we to make of the fact

that the majority of the industry, 80-plus percent adopted virus,

express virus exclusions in the wake of SARS and Zika outbreaks,

and your clients did not?

That, Your Honor, should have no relevance in this case.

In the case I would cite, it's Ross vs. Home, where this court said

what may have been done with regard to another policy

on another day is not relevant to the policy directly in front of you.

But there was a choice in the marketplace,

and the plaintiffs chose your policy without that exclusion, without those exclusions.

I understand that, Your Honor, but without that exclusion, there still has to be coverage.

And in the first instance, in order for there to be coverage,

there has to be direct physical loss of or damaged property, which did not exist.

You're rather dismissive of the plaintiff's arguments

that we should not consider the broad property protective doctrines

that the court has adopted in considering the issues in this case.

I think there's a total of two sentences in your reply brief on that.

Seems to me it is relevant.

Your Honor, this court is obviously protective of property,

but it's also protective of contract rights.

And it has repeatedly said that it will not construe a contract in an unreasonable way,

and it will not rewrite the terms of the contract.

And the contract in this case is a property contract.

And without direct physical loss of or damaged property, there is no coverage.

Both parties, or both a number of parties here have filed

supplemental authority with us in the last couple days.

What should we glean from those materials?

Well, Your Honor, with regard to the supplementals that the carriers filed,

there were a number of additional state Supreme Court decisions.

I believe the Sullivan decision out of South Carolina,

Hill and Strout out of Washington.

And I think obviously those are important because they're from the highest courts

in those particular states.

Is the Vermont case important as well?

All cases are important, but not that court case is distinguishable

for a couple of reasons.

One, it was a three to two, showed a healthy debate among the court.

But also, it was there on a motion to dismiss.

In the Vermont majority states, we disfavor motions to dismiss.

And if there's any plausible argument to be made here,

whether or not the science does or doesn't support it,

we're going to allow that case to proceed.

This case didn't come to you on a motion to dismiss.

It came to you on motions for summary judgment.

Both sides had an opportunity to debrief on that.

And both sides, in fact, said you could decide this case as a matter of law.

I think this court really ought to be guided by the Massachusetts decision

in Vervane and the New Jersey decision in Ocean Walk.

Why wasn't that persuasive to Justice Kissinger?

Those two decisions, Your Honor, were decided after he decided his decision.

Were they brought to his decision on a motion to reconsider it?

They were brought after the case was already on its way up here.

Again, a reason to remand, right?

No, Your Honor, because you can decide it as a matter of law.

Contract interpretation and, in particular,

insurance policy interpretation is a question of law.

And you can certainly look at those decisions and be guided by them,

especially since 19 of the hotels are located in the states of Massachusetts

and New Jersey.

The other thing that I wanted to bring to your attention...

That just goes back to the conflict of the choice of law issue here.

I mean, if Massachusetts is clearly,

wouldn't provide coverage under Massachusetts law,

why aren't the defendants arguing Massachusetts law should apply to those hotels?

It would make no difference, Your Honor,

if, in fact, Mellon is properly applied because then the law is the same.

And we believe this court would consider it in the same way

that the Massachusetts court did in Irvine and the New Jersey courts did.

Seems it makes a difference in terms of judicial economy

because it seems like we're going to have an appeal on the choice of law issue at some point.

Well, that issue was not part of the briefing

because Judge Kissinger decided that he could decide it later,

only if it became ripe.

Okay. Your red light's on.

Thank you.

We have two minutes reserved.

Attorney Golinsky.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Please, the court.

Marshal Golinsky for Slices and Seven Hotels.

I'm happy to take questions at any time.

Could you address the Chief's choice of law question?

Sure.

Why should we offer an advisory opinion?

I think the question that Chief Justice asked,

what law applies here?

The answer is New Hampshire law applies here.

Both parties moved for summary judgment below,

applying Mellon, applying New Hampshire law.

This is an insurance policy that was sold to my client

whose headquarters is in Hooksitt.

It was sold to them with a provision in it

that says it's a jurisdiction and suit provision in the policy.

And it says that the insurance companies will submit to any jurisdiction

in the country where a suit is brought

and that the law and practice of that state will apply to the dispute.

That's what happened here.

You're exactly right, Chief Justice McDonald.

If they wanted to raise a choice of law issue,

the time for them to have done that

was before they moved for summary judgment

based on this court's precedent in Mellon.

That time has passed.

The issue's been waived.

The issue of what choice of law applies is resolved.

They sold an insurance policy to New Hampshire citizen

and they came to court asking for New Hampshire law to apply.

Well, let's talk about the distinct and demonstrable alteration

to the property.

What is it and how do you describe it

and what support do you have for it?

Sure.

Thank you, Your Honor.

The reason why people buy property insurance

is to protect their property and the revenue stream

that is driven by the use of property.

And the usefulness of property is referred to in Mellon.

That was part of the holding in Mellon

when the court set forth the distinct and demonstrable standard.

Does it matter that this is commercial

versus Mellon was residential?

I don't think it matters,

but obviously the business interruption component

is an incredibly valuable component of property insurance.

How is property altered?

We need an alteration, don't we?

Sure, of course.

So the property at issue, and it's not just...

I want to be clear, it's not just property at the hotels.

My client bought a very broad policy

that ensures them the risk of business interruption losses

for loss and damage that happens away from the hotels as well.

So it's very broad.

So for example, the contingent business interruption coverage

is very broad.

Most contingent business interruption provisions

provide coverage where there's damage at a supplier's

or a customer's property

that prevents those suppliers or customers

from doing business with the insured.

Our policy is much broader than that.

It ensures situations where there's loss or damage anywhere,

not just at our property, not just at a customer's property,

but loss or damage anywhere

that prevents our customers from receiving our goods and services.

So back to the very important question,

what's the distinct and demonstrable alteration here?

Where you have a piece of property that's used for business.

It's safe, it's usable, it's fit for its intended purpose.

You take that property and you expose it to a deadly virus.

It's been altered in the most fundamental way.

It's gone from being something that's safe and usable

and fit for its intended purpose

and transformed into something that's unsafe, dangerous,

not fit for its intended purpose.

It could even be deadly.

That is the most significant alteration to property.

Imagine before someone who needs to use that property

for their business.

But that applies to, presumably,

given the ubiquity of the virus,

applies to any establishment.

Hospitals, market basket, this court,

which by the way, never closed.

So what's the distinction?

Why are hotels different than market basket?

Or the hospitals which continue to provide care for patients?

There's a hospital in Texas that got a jury award

of $45 million in a case like this.

The answer to your question is there's not a distinction

in terms of whether there's a distinct

or demonstrable alteration of property.

We have property that has been changed by a deadly virus

from usable to unsafe and unusable.

It's experienced a distinct and demonstrable alteration.

The important distinction...

Is that case on appeal? I can't help.

It is headed up on appeal, yes.

The distinction, of course, is the virus exclusion.

83% of property policies sold in the United States

before the pandemic had a virus exclusion.

That's why every single business across the state

isn't in this court seeking coverage.

There's only three cases in this entire state

where policyholders are seeking coverage

before this state's court.

So you think that the absence of an exclusion,

no matter what it says,

gives rise to affirmative coverage?

No, no, I'm not saying that at all.

It's a risk policy.

It provides coverage for all risks

except those that are specifically excluded.

Does a loss require a physical act,

as Ms. Conner suggests?

Something physical has to happen,

and the virus is physical.

The virus is incredibly small,

but it is indeed physical.

So the infection is a physical act,

a physical event?

Yes.

The question is,

has a property that's experienced

the presence of COVID

undergone a distinct and demonstrable alteration?

Has there been a direct physical loss

or damage to that property?

The answer is yes.

It's physically been transferred,

it's been turned from something that's safe and usable

into something that's unsafe and useful.

Let's focus on this courtroom.

And that's a physical thing.

That has physically happened.

It's no different from...

This courtroom had the virus.

It never closed, as the Chief said

before he got here.

It was used and usable.

So where's the demonstrable alteration?

There would be no claim.

If the courthouse was...

Think of it, it's hard to put in the context

of the property that's used for public good.

But think of it from the perspective of a hotel.

I have a hotel.

I've invested a lot of time, energy and money in this hotel.

I've spent a million dollars a year

to buy property insurance from my hotels.

And now all of a sudden,

I can't use my hotels

because there's deadly virus that's preventing my customers.

The same way we couldn't use this courtroom

because we were having arguments remotely for three months.

The difference is the court was able to carry on

its business and do the thing that it does.

Hotel or not.

Would you be making the same claim

independent of the governor's orders here?

Are they relevant to our consideration?

You haven't even mentioned them yet.

They're certainly relevant, Your Honor.

Yes.

And the claim overlaps.

We've got different types of coverage.

We have coverage, as I mentioned,

for contingent business interruption.

When customers are prevented from receiving our goods and services.

That law started to happen before the orders were entered.

You can see it when you look at the P&L,

the economic results of the hotels,

you can see day-to-day, week-to-week,

what's the hotel's performance look like.

Even before the governor's orders were imposed,

already occupancy revenues had fallen.

As I recall, this claim begins on March 4th

and the governor's orders were later than that.

That's correct.

But then, of course, we also have coverage for civil authority.

That's where there's apparel ensured against

that results in the issuance of an order,

and that order impairs or hinders,

again, another example of how broad our policy is.

Most policies say there's civil authority coverage

where an order prohibits access to a property.

Our policy says where there's an order that impairs

or hinders access to a property,

they cover that too for up to 90 days.

If we accept your argument,

why isn't that a continuing harm that continues today?

There's COVID all around us all the time.

People are getting sick all the time.

So is this an ongoing claim that will go forever?

I would agree that the distinct

and demonstrable alteration of property does continue,

but the claim does not.

The conditions today are entirely different.

Just read the New Hampshire Medical Society's annex brief.

The conditions today, as we all know, thankfully,

are very different from each other.

The only thing that gets drawn then is that exposure.

Where does it end?

The policy in the period of recovery provision

puts a cap of 365 days on our recovery.

So we have the policy specifies

for the period of time during which you do get the coverage.

If we accept your theory,

why can't a similar claim be made

in regard to the seasonal flu every year?

A lot of people get sick,

a lot of people don't travel,

they can't go to restaurants or hotels.

So why wouldn't that get triggered?

The seasonal flu has never caused a business interruption claim.

Never has, never will.

The reality is you have to have a loss.

In order to have an insurance claim,

you need to have lost money because of the damage to the property.

So would you have a claim absent, the governor orders?

Yes.

The claim began before the governor orders.

Make no mistake.

And the insurance company suggests this,

and I find it to be a very disagreeable proposition,

that there's no difference between the common cold and COVID.

COVID shut down the entire tourism industry in this state.

The common cold has never done it.

There's never been a business interruption loss.

It's a matter of degree, not a matter of analysis.

Well, if you never lose $50 because of the common cold,

you never have a business interruption claim

because of the common cold.

If you lose $80 million because COVID shuts down the economy,

then you have a business interruption claim.

They're just such drastically different scenarios.

It's surprising to see the insurance company try to equate the two.

And I was glad to see the New Hampshire Medical Society

decide to put their two cents in

and to contradict that sort of...

Can I go back to Mellon for a moment?

Of course, we said in Mellon that physical loss

should not be interpreted overly broadly.

Don't you think we had, assuming some degree of presence,

don't you think we had this case in mind?

I certainly hope that you did have this case in mind deciding Mellon,

but in establishing that...

In other words, there's limits. That's what that phrase tells me.

Right, and we are clearly within those limits.

The fundamental gist of it is,

if cat urine odor can constitute physical loss or damage

to trigger property insurance coverage,

then a deadly virus that shuts down

the entire hospitality industry certainly does.

That's what these laws are there to protect.

The court set a standard in Mellon.

It said if there's a distinct and demonstrable alteration to property,

then citizens of this state are entitled to insurance coverage

that flows from that sort of disruption.

This disruption from COVID far transcends

the disruption that existed in Mellon.

And the citizens in this state are entitled to rely on that precedent,

have the insurance provisions interpreted consistently,

and have the benefit of the law in this state.

And that goes side-by-side with the protections that existed

for 150 years in this state on the use of property.

How can we square your argument with the period of restoration notion

and the policy?

As I just said, the period of restoration provision

supports what we're saying here.

The insurance companies argue that the period of restoration

is a preconditioned coverage.

That you don't get coverage unless there is a need to repair,

replace or restore property.

That's not right.

That's absolutely not what those provisions do.

They are guides to determining and quantifying

the amount of time during which the loss exists.

They are not prerequisites to coverage.

So they're completely wrong in the way that they analyze that.

Your plan has nothing to do with the grant of coverage at all.

Precisely.

Here's how the period of restoration provision works.

They presented the court a truncated version of that provision,

but it has a multi-step process of determining

how long the coverage goes on for.

The first provision, the point is that you trigger coverage

through direct physical loss of damage

or through an order of civil authority,

and that gets the clock running.

We'll actually take that back.

The orders of civil authority, by the way,

and ingress egress coverage are 90-day coverage provisions.

They aren't governed by the need to repair or restore anything.

If there's an order of civil authority that's imposed,

you have coverage for the loss that flows from that order

of civil authority for a period of up to 90 days.

There's no requirement for repair, restoration.

The period of restoration has nothing to do with that at all.

When the order is on, coverage starts.

When the order is done, coverage ends.

That's how it works.

So right then and there, we can see the period of restoration

is not prerequisite to coverage

because it has nothing to do with the civil authority coverage

or the ingress egress coverage.

But for the contingent business interruption coverage,

for example, it does apply.

And so it starts from the time of the physical loss

or of the loss or damage as relates to the CBI.

It starts from the time of the loss or damage,

and it continues, and I'll read from the provision,

for the time needed to rebuild, repair,

or replace loss or damage or destroy property.

That's the part they quote for the court,

but it goes on to say,

and to make such property ready for operations

under the same or equivalent physical

or operating condition.

Here, that talks about operating conditions

where there is no virus anymore

that's keeping people from using property.

And so it doesn't immediately go away

as soon as COVID is rectified.

You have to actually have it be truly rectified

so that the business is once again ready

with the same operating conditions.

But it doesn't just end there.

There's a whole nother provisions

that we paid for in our very broad policy

that provides for extended period of recovery.

And that gives you an additional length of time,

up to 365 days,

not just to restore property,

the physical property itself,

but to restore the business that is the cash flow,

the revenue stream of the business,

to restore the business to the condition

that it was in prior to the loss.

And so that's a very broad provision.

It supports what we have.

It is not a preconditioned coverage,

and it provides us with broad and extended coverage

for up to 365 days.

There's also a micro-organism exclusion here, right?

It hasn't been discussed.

Why is that not fatal to your position?

Because it's not a virus exclusion, first and foremost.

The requirements under New Hampshire law are clear.

For an insurance company to exclude coverage,

it has to do so in a clear and unambiguous way.

It's the insurance company's burden

to prove that the exclusion applies,

and it has to go further than that

and prove that the policyholder's interpretation

is unreasonable,

that there's only one reasonable interpretation

of the exclusion,

and it's the one proffered by the insurance company.

How do you distinguish Ravain?

Ravain?

First of all, most importantly,

it's not decided under New Hampshire law

and it's not bound by Mellon, right?

The standard was set by this court in Mellon.

The Supreme Judicial Court in Massachusetts

did not apply,

was not bound to apply and did not apply that.

What standard did they apply?

They looked, you know,

the core of the decision in Ravain

was this idea of evanescence,

what the court basically said was

the virus just goes away on its own.

You can clean it up with Lysol in a rag.

Thankfully, this court has heard

from the New Hampshire Medical Society

who has clearly said that's wrong,

that the basis of the Supreme Judicial Court's decision

was wrong, that code is not evanescent.

And it wasn't that they weighed in

on the microorganism exemption, though, did they?

No, they didn't take any position on the insurance issue,

but they were very clear that COVID is not evanescent.

I think they even used that term in their brief,

and that it doesn't just go away.

You can't just clean it up with Lysol in a rag.

If you could, then we would have ended the pandemic, right?

If all the...

I think they sent to a study in their brief,

if I recall correctly, where they said

that a study was done of properties

that did routine cleaning throughout the day

and compared it to properties

that didn't do routine cleaning without today

and that both those properties saw the same rate

of transmission and morbidity.

Basically, the cleaning by the medical society standard

didn't accomplish anything, didn't make properties safe.

So in that sense, I think there's something fundamentally wrong

about the Supreme Judicial Court's decision of revenge.

You directed us to the Vermont Supreme Court's decision

in Huntington, English,

and it seems to me that the analysis there

by the majority was distinct from what we have in Mellon

where droplets, the theory, as I understand that case,

is droplets land on a surface and become proteins,

and that is the physical alteration.

And that seems analytically distinct

from what we were saying in Mellon,

which is that there can be recovery

where there's no tangible change to property.

Are you advocating for us to adopt

an approach that the Vermont Supreme Court

and the majority set forth?

I think that the droplets are just as tangible

or intangible as cat urine odor.

They're microscopic.

They float around in the air.

That's the physical alteration.

I think that's what the Vermont Court was saying,

that that is physically altering the property.

Yeah, and I think that it does physically alter the property.

Something doesn't have to be intangible

in order to meet the requirements of Mellon.

Mellon's expanded what meets the requirements

from the tangible, which we could all agree upon,

to the intangible.

I would submit that physical, deadly viral presence

do cause tangible harm to property.

They take it from something that's safe and usable

and turn it into something that could possibly kill you.

What's more tangible than that?

I would suggest that the court should follow...

I mean, what's interesting, I thought,

and I know I'm out of time,

about the Huntington and Engels decision in Vermont,

is that they cited to Mellon.

They relied on Mellon and they applied,

with respect to what constitutes physical damage to property,

they applied a distinct and demonstrable test.

And we all know, I think we have a sense

to what the different New England states

and where they stand in terms of protecting property rights.

Let me just ask you one of the other authorities

that was provided to us,

or cases that we were asked to look at

was the South Carolina decision that recently came out.

How did you distinguish that?

Or are they just wrong?

Yeah, I think that's just wrong.

All these cases are...

I think the important thing to think about

when looking at the entire field of cases,

and so many of them,

is that so many, especially the early ones,

so many of them were brought by lawyers

looking for coverage under policy

that had virus exclusions.

And in order to do that,

they made allegations in cases

that were avoided saying

that the virus causes physical loss or damage,

because they knew that if they said that,

they're going to run into a virus exclusion.

And so what happened is you see insurance companies

were picking off those cases

and generating some momentum for themselves

and saying, look, we win these cases.

There's no coverage because there's no physical loss or damage.

When what really was driving the loss of those cases

was the failure to allege

that there was physical loss or damage.

The fact that other policies

were purchased by other policyholders

that excluded coverage for virus,

and those policyholders had narrower coverage

and made narrower arguments in favor of coverage,

narrower allegations,

that should not abridge my client's rights here.

My client brought a very broad policy.

My client came to court and addressed and alleged head-on

that the virus is causing physical loss or damage.

And the fact that other people lost with narrower policies

and narrower obligations should not be allowed

to abridge our rights.

Thank you very much. Thank you.

Your Honor, the hotels have not articulated

what is distinct and demonstrable

with regard to their property.

They were asked, and they did not have an answer to it.

And that's because there is no change to the property

as a result of the coronavirus's presence.

And that was decided, addressed both in Mellon

and in Columbanette.

You were asked a little...

asked them about the Massachusetts decision

and there was some suggestion

that Massachusetts applied a different standard.

Massachusetts in Vermont held that direct physical loss

of or damage to property requires some distinct

demonstrable physical alteration of the property.

That standard is virtually identical

to this court's holding in Mellon.

So, Vermont is not some outlier with regard

to how they interpreted this case.

And in the context of the coronavirus,

they found also that it was important

that there was no repairs or replacements

for this.

Also, in this case, there was no

uninhabitability of the hotel.

So, hotels remained open but in a different...

under a different set of rules.

There was a question about

the micro-organism exclusion,

which I didn't get to address in my opening remark.

That is an alternative grounds for reversal.

However, if there's no direct physical loss

of or damage to property as we assert,

that also is the end of the case.

What about the argument that

there's no virus exclusion here?

That that really...

there's this micro-organism exclusion,

but that really doesn't apply.

There would be a virus exclusion,

but there isn't one.

Well, it doesn't have to be a virus exclusion.

And this is exactly what the Seventh Circuit said

in Crescent Plaza.

The exclusion for micro-organism

of any type nature or description,

including but not limited to any substance

whose presence poses an actual

potential threat to human health,

is broader than a virus exclusion.

It's meant to encompass everything.

Did you submit any affidavits

from any of the underwriters

of this policy?

I don't believe that was part of the record below.

No, Your Honor.

Why not?

Wouldn't it be interesting to know

what an underwriter averred in an affidavit?

No, I think it's more important for this court

to decide what the terms meet

the law based on what an ordinary reader would think.

And that's what the Crescent Plaza did,

the court did with regard to micro-organisms,

indicated that dictionary definitions

aren't always the best approach

in deciding what a term means

that you look at it in context.

And this court has taken that approach

in the Bergeron versus State Farm case

where there was a dispute about whether a dam

is a structure.

Same issue with regard to

what a micro-organism is.

And in fact, it's interesting the New Jersey

government or talks about

addressing the COVID virus

with a microbial

disinfectant.

Suggesting that, in fact,

that's what people think of when they think of this.

May I just ask one?

Sure.

Your red light's on. In your brief

you argue that the policy should not be

construed against the

insurers

because plaintiffs are sophisticated

and commercial insurers

in their broke or drafted

policy language. You'll concede

there's no New Hampshire case that supports that.

Actually, there is, Your Honor.

There's a superior decision

steadfast versus

no case from this court.

Well, the

clearest case,

the ambiguity rule started with Trombly

and in Trombly it was assumed

and stated that it would be

construed against the drafter.

It was the

barrier, not the plaintiff insured.

But in several cases

this court has looked to extrinsic evidence.

That would be the Robbins case,

that would be the Epping case,

and that would be the tech-built case.

But the very

purpose behind that ambiguity

rule is because contracts are usually

contracts of adhesion and usually

the insured has no say

in what those contract terms are.

This case is precisely

because the plaintiffs, in fact,

had their broker decide with the policy terms

were going to be. So it shouldn't

necessarily be construed

against the carrier when they didn't write the terms.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Thanks, Your Honor.

We'll now hear on the third question,

which is whether the pollutants and contaminants

exclusion in the access policy

preclude coverage. And we invite

Attorney Gaffer, Attorney Golinski.

May it please the court once again

I'm happy to take questions at any time.

I'm Gaffer, Attorney Golinski for

Slicing and Stebbins.

Before I

lose the trap, the thought,

and I'll just pick up on Your Honor's question

about

the sophisticated policy older concept

because it applies here as well

to the extent that there was any

ambiguity in the access

pollution exclusion.

It's clear that both the prongs

of Trombly apply here.

The court articulated

two reasons why we have

a rule of construction, constructing

ambiguous provisions against the insurance company.

One is because they drafted

the policy language. Two is because

the purpose of the insurance policy is to

protect the policy holder. I would

submit that both with respect to the access

pollution exclusion and with the other

provisions that are at issue here,

both of those rationales apply.

Of course

the insurance contract

is there to protect my client.

That's always true with respect to all of this.

But it's also true that these provisions

at issue are insurance company

provisions. The access pollution

exclusion was drafted by access.

This is a broker manuscript

form conceded.

But the language

in that broker manuscript form

is assembled from standard insurance company

language. And of course

direct physical loss of or damage to property

is not something that SNS's broker

came up with. That's insurance

industry language. Are you getting outside

of the record here?

Yes, I'm afraid I am.

But

in the record, if you look at the footer on the

access pollution exclusion, it has their

corporate logo on it. And you can also

tell from the assembly of the policy that

and the microorganism exclusion

is similar. That is tacked

on to the broker manuscript form and it's

understood to be that form

emanates out of Lloyds in London.

That's the Lloyds

mold, mildew, fungus, microorganism

provision. It's drafted by Lloyds, not

by SNS or its broker.

And obviously the access pollution exclusion, same

thing. It's right there. Their logo is at the

bottom of it. So they drafted it.

So on the merits of the claim

about this exclusion,

given your argument earlier,

isn't COVID

akin to traditional environmental

pollution?

Which was

the concern articulated in the

case in Weaver?

I mean, that's what we're dealing with

here. Sort of an ubiquitous

thing

in the environment.

The key question is

whether the way pollution exclusions

are written, and interestingly the way

pollution coverage is written,

there's hand and glove. There's

pollution exclusions in most policies

and then there's pollution

policies that are designed to cover

pollution, right? All of those

policies and exclusions

use the same sort of preparatory language

that this court

opined on and interpreted both

in Weaver and in Mellon. That is

they called for the discharged

dispersal release or escape

of a pollutant, right?

So something could be a pollutant.

You could call something like COVID a

pollutant, I suppose. It's meant that it's

not, right? But the question is

is there, has there been a discharged

dispersal release or escape of that

thing? The pollutant issue is not really

relevant because they do use the word

virus.

Right, I absolutely agree

with you. The question is, and you

can obviously envision situations where

you could have

the way this court interpreted

those words discharge

dispersal release or escape in Weaver

and in Mellon was correct.

They said those are terms

of art in environmental law.

They relate to and describe

the escape

of some sort of contaminant

from a failure of containment

of some contaminant. And you could have

that with a virus, right?

Biomedical waste is transported

in containers. You can have

an escape from that. You can have

something break. You can have a vial

of anthrax, God forbid,

somehow crack open and

have the anthrax released

from that vial. Well, some argue that

could include, and Justice Linwood

that includes cat urine, right?

No, Kat, it was decided

by the court that, well, I guess

Justice Linwood said that. Yes,

he did say that in his dissent.

But fortunately for the Mellons

the majority of this court

disagreed. And that you don't

have a release of cat urine

odor. And you could

say the same thing, of course, about COVID,

right? That this

pandemic, horrible as it was,

was an organic phenomenon.

It's not, I mean, Judge Kissinger

for everything that he got right

about his application of the distinct

demonstrable standard, I would respectfully

submit went a little too far when he said

that a cough or a sneeze

is a release, right?

I think as this court interpreted

that language, discharged dispersal

release, both in Mellon

and in Weaver, that it is

a term of art in environmental law.

That when someone, a reasonable person

reads this insurance policy,

the pollution exclusion in this

insurance policy, they say to themselves

this is for pollution.

It's for environmental contamination.

That when I read the words

discharged dispersal release or escape

they're thinking of an underground

storage tank. But then how would it

apply to virus? It seems like

your argument was just

logic would dictate it just

doesn't apply to a virus. No, if

there's a container of pathogenic

waste that breaks

open, so let's just say

there's someone staying in a, there's

a medical convention at the hotel

and they put on a demonstration

about the new containment,

there's booths and all of that

and we're the containment company, right?

And they've got containers that they keep pathogenic

waste in, right? But then something

terrible happens and it falls

off the shelf and it breaks and there's a release

of pathogenic waste.

It would be for that, right?

A pandemic

is not that, right?

What happened here is not that.

It was an organic

natural spread of the virus.

And so

this isn't what

the application of the words discharged

dispersal release and escape that access

seeks to impose here

are different from and outside the

precedent set by this court

in Mellon and in Weaver.

It's a different thing.

And think about it

from the other perspective. I mentioned

these pollution policies, right?

Insurance companies sell pollution policies

and they promise to provide coverage,

promise to provide coverage

for the discharged dispersal release

of pollutants.

And there was a case that was in the supplemental

authorities that we sent to the court this week.

There's a case out of California just last week

that was a case under

one of those types of policies.

We had a policy holder who had losses from

COVID that they submit their claim

under the pollution policy.

And they say to the insurance company

there's been a discharged dispersal release

or escape of a pollutant.

And in their policy,

pollution condition

was defined to include infectious

or pathological waste.

And so they said, well, we have coverage.

That's what happened here. There's been a release

of infectious and pathological

waste. COVID fits the definition.

Of course, what is the insurance company

that situation when the shoe's on the other foot?

They say, that's not

that's not a pollution event.

That's not, COVID is not

pollution. This is designed to cover

environmental contamination.

I respectfully submit the insurance companies

can't have it both ways.

They can't have it both ways. They can't

simultaneously come to this court and say

we don't cover COVID because

we have a pollution exclusion for the

discharged dispersal release and escape of pollutants.

And then turn away people

who buy coverage for the discharge

dispersal release of pollutants, where

it's defined to include pathogens

and turn those people away too.

I would submit that under

this precedent,

that it's covered under the standard

policy, that it's not pollution.

You described COVID

as organic. Would it be different if

the virus emanated from a factory

and was man made?

I think we say this in our briefs.

There's been no factual assertion.

But would it be different?

If there were facts to support

the conclusion that

the release, that the pandemic

or the losses suffered by the hotel company

were the result of an escape

of the virus, then

yeah, I think it would be different.

I don't think we have that here.

I'll, unless

the court has further questions, like I'll reserve

my time for a bottle.

Thank you. Attorney Gallagher.

Thank you. Good morning.

This case is not

melon or weaver.

The access

exclusion at issue is not a

pollution exclusion.

And plaintiffs

fail to address

the actual language of the exclusion

which does define pollutants

to include virus.

More importantly,

plaintiffs are improperly trying

to render portions, a lot

portions of the exclusion meaningless.

The exclusion

itself doesn't just use the phrase

release, discharge,

escape or dispersal

as plaintiffs focus on.

The endorsement actually says

this policy

does not cover the following.

Loss or damage caused

by resulting from

contributed to

or made worse

by the actual alleged or threatened

release, discharge, escape

or dispersal of pollutants

and contaminants, however

caused.

Melon used the word caused by.

Weaver used the word arising

out of

and

did not obviously

involve a virus. You say the language however

caused trumps all of that?

I'm saying when

this court reads the exclusion

in total, which

it should do under New Hampshire

law, that

a textual reading

of the exclusion in its entirety

which plaintiffs have wholly

failed to address

clearly precludes plaintiff's claim.

When plaintiffs say

83% of the industry

contained a virus exclusion

in the policies, which is why

there are many cases that

were never wrong.

That number includes

these type of exclusions.

They are, as Ms. Conner aptly said,

broader.

Just because they're broader does not mean

they're applicable.

The fact that

this

exclusion says pollutants or contaminants

are not limited to

materials that can cause

or threaten damage to human health

or human welfare

or cause or threaten damage, deterioration,

loss of value

or loss of use of property.

These types of contaminants include

but are not limited to

bacteria.

How is that traditional environmental?

That's not traditional environmental.

Mold, mildew,

it uses the word virus.

It specifically says

virus.

And all of the case law

that plaintiffs cite to

do not use that word.

The only two exceptions

are completely moot.

One is the exclusion case

overruled by the Oklahoma Supreme Court.

The JGB

case in Nevada

has been stayed so that the Nevada

Supreme Court can hear

these issues related to the Coverage

Grant and the exclusion.

In fact, one case that plaintiffs cite

is none of the others use the word

virus.

The SWB Yankees case says

exclusions for contaminants, pollutants,

wet rot, dry rot and microbes

are operated to bar coronavirus-related

business interruption coverage claims

only when the exclusion at issue

uses the word virus.

Absent the uses

of the word virus within the exclusion,

these exclusions

have been interpreted to not exclude

business interruption coverage.

That's not to say that I

agree that the microbe exclusion doesn't

apply to other exclusions

that are clearly applicable.

However, these are cases that plaintiffs

will cite it.

And setting aside the language

that is clearly different

in the access policy, which plainly

bars coverage for this claim.

Because

plaintiffs want to focus just on

discharge-release dispersal

and make this claim

seem like it has to be a traditional

environmental claim in order to fall

within this exclusion, which is clearly not true.

This briefs submitted

by the New Hampshire Medical Society

doesn't get me clear

that COVID is

transmitted over long distances.

It's dispersed over long

distances. Plaintiffs

don't complain. Their answers to

interrogatories all say

that there's

transmission spread.

The particles are released into the

atmosphere. Then they settle.

They're re-released, re-suspended.

Clearly, there's discharge

release or dispersal. But again, Your Honor,

you don't even need to

get that

narrow in the analysis

because the exclusion

is much, much broader than the claim.

But we however cost

at your point. I'm saying

that in total

the exclusion is broader. Because it includes

the word virus. Because it several

times say it included but not limited to.

Because the preamble

to the phrase that

you're talking about, Your Honor

says

caused by, resulting from

contributed to, or made worse.

That's a lot broader than melanin

weaver. And

says however cost.

So it is not limited to

discharge release, dispersal, or escape.

Now the cases that we

have cited

all do use the word virus.

Plaintiffs have not distinguished

those cases. They just say that they're not

virus exclusions. Just like they're saying

is not a virus exclusion. Titles don't matter.

And as Plaintiffs admitted

their broker, Amwens

who specializes in hospitality

insurance programs

for large commercial

hospitality clients

and place over 30 billion dollars in premium

they're the ones that wrote the main coverage form.

Is that part of the record?

I'm sorry, which part, Your Honor?

Your last decision as

to who wrote the policy. I think Plaintiffs

can see that and they did in their last

argument that the Amwens

wrote the main coverage form.

And they did not

write the manuscript endorsement that is that issue

in the access policy.

Access wrote that endorsement

but

Amwens very

sophisticated broker

that SNS hired

who places 30 billion dollars worth of premiums

a year

and a large part of that is in the

hospitality business. Clearly

they knew

what the policy said.

The insured has the obligation to know what the policy said

and

to get to

the

discussion that we've had

in the previous argument

and how Mr. Galinsky started

about a sophisticated insured and it shouldn't matter, etc.

I would

respectfully submit there, Your Honors, that

not only are you required to apply

the plain unambiguous

language of the policy to this claim

and this claim

falls squarely within this exclusion

but

they're

an insured

that

had the means

along with their very sophisticated broker

to understand

what this policy means

and they cite to Trombly

but in Trombly

insurance contract has to be interpreted

and what

would constitute more than a casual

ring of the policy

so as to reveal to an ordinary intelligent

insured.

SNS

as an ordinary intelligent insured

is not the same thing as the individual in

Mellon. The individual

and even the individual in Trombly

all of their first party

homeowners or medical

policies, healthcare policies.

Excuse me. Is there any dispute that

your law applies to the access

of the policy? We did not dispute it

Your Honor because the standards of contract interpretation

basically in every state in the union

is the same, definitely between

Massachusetts, New Jersey

and New Hampshire.

Thank you.

How

how should we deal with

our observation in Mellon

that release discharge escape

dispersal or dispersal are terms

of environmental law?

Because

Your Honor, the exclusion

in that policy was

akin to a traditional environmental

exclusion.

It

I can give you the language

markedly different

than the exclusion.

The exclusion there

used the word discharge dispersal

seepage, migration

release escape of pollutants

unless the discharge

dispersal seepage

seepage, migration, release

escape is caused by

apparel and pollutants

in that policy was trying to mean

solid liquid gaseous, thermal

irritant, contaminant including

smoke, vapor, soot, fumes

acid, alkali, chemicals

and waste. But we said the

terms used in the pollution exclusion

clause such as discharge dispersal

release and escape are

terms of art in environmental

law which are generally used with

reference to damage or injury caused

by proper disposal or contaminant

of hazardous waste. That's

what we said.

Your Honor, I

understand what you're asking now.

First of all, this policy

the access endorsement at issue

defines pollutants

to include and

encompass viruses.

That exclusion did not.

Secondly, the

access exclusion as I

had already pointed out

is much broader than the

terms that the exclusion

at issue in Mellon clearly

is meant to apply to traditional

environmental pollution

which is as plaintiffs point

out evolved in the 70s

and the 80s and it speaks only

to the migration of soot

and the release

of

contaminants in groundwater, etc.

That's what it applies to.

This policy

this endorsement includes the

term pollutants excuse me

virus in definition of pollutants

and more importantly

as I read your Honor

that section

of this endorsement is much

broader than that Mellon.

It also includes

fungi, mold, mildew

which are hard to sort of conceptualize

as traditional pollutants.

Exactly your Honor

and so red as a whole

it clearly applies to this claim

but more importantly

plaintiffs own allegations

the discovery that they produced

in this action and like I said

the amicus brief submitted

on behalf of plaintiffs by

the New Hampshire Medical Society

all clearly

fall within

that discharge release escape

as broad as it is here

even as limited

as plaintiffs want to explain

they all say that there is

a spread

transmission, a suspension

a resuspension it can be spread

over long distances and on

and on and on and in our briefs

we have cited to extensive

instances

where plaintiffs have alleged

a dispersal

which is why Judge Kissinger said

he could not

say that this exclusion

does not apply to the dispersal

of coronavirus

which clearly can be transmitted

through sneezing, coughing, etc.

May I just go back to Justice Donovan's question

I want to make sure I understand your position

New Hampshire law applies

to all the properties

in this case, all the plaintiffs

in this case.

Your Honor we did not

concede that New Hampshire law applies

Will you now?

That's what the Chief is asking

Will you now?

We don't even need to get there Your Honor

So the answer is no

We never did

a conflict of

a choice of law analysis no one briefed

it because again

when you apply the contract interpretation

laws of New Hampshire

or New Jersey or Massachusetts

it doesn't matter

because

every standard is the same

that is required to apply

the plain and unambiguous

the textual interpretation

of the exclusions at issue

That's slightly different

than what law we are to apply here

whether we apply Mellon or not

is potentially

outcome-determinative

and if New Hampshire law doesn't apply

we're engaged in an exercise

with no meaning

Respectfully Your Honor

maybe I didn't articulate

well

My point is

if New Hampshire law applies

New Hampshire's

rule of contract interpretation

and how the court must read

this policy provision as a whole

rather than cherry picking

I understand the analysis

between the states are the same

but that's not

the question when you pick up

the contract

the threshold issue we have

is which law

applies

If you apply New Hampshire law

this exclusion clearly bars coverage

for the plaintiff's claim

and that applies to all the properties in the case

Yes

So New Hampshire law applies to this case

In the context of

interpreting this

exclusion

as it applies to plaintiff's claim

if you apply New Hampshire law

it applies to all properties

New Hampshire claim is

the same with respect to

everyone of their

at one point or another

they own 54 different properties

I'm not sure what the total number is

now when they buy and sell them

The answer would be the same

If the claim is the same

If we determine the exclusion does not apply

it would apply to all the properties

in the case

Yes

I would concede that

choice of all

because there is no conflict

which is the first question

about whether or not you have to decide

if New Hampshire law applies

or some other state

but because the claim is the same

with respect to everyone of their properties

and because this exclusion

is very broad

and does not

necessarily need to be a narrowly

tailored

entitled

virus exclusion as plaintiffs would want you to believe

it applies to

everyone of their properties

and their claim in total

let me just ask you a question

about one of the supplemental

authorities that was provided to us this week

the California case

vision service plan

what should we glean from that

nothing it is wholly inapplicable

it involves a pollution

liability policy

not a commercial property policy

so it is a totally separate

type of coverage that's not an issue here

and

it's still written in English

it's still written in English

but it does not provide the same type of coverage

and it does not

use the word

virus and that is the

important point that your honors need to take

from this they cannot cite to a single case

that uses the word virus

within an exclusion they say

that other policies have virus exclusions

this exclusion falls

within

virus exclusions that they're taking those percentages

and

and articles

saying how many carriers have virus exclusions

they count

and according to the authorities

that kind of cites to

exclusions that use the word

virus even though they're not

titled a virus exclusion

this is broader it doesn't need

to be a narrow virus exclusion

plaintiff will say

well AXIS knew that this didn't apply

because they put a virus exclusion on

later

four months after they filed suit because the policy

expired

and carriers are entitled

to if they don't

if they're challenging it

carriers are entitled to

change amend policies

obviously with the knowledge

of plaintiff and their very sophisticated

broker but that does not

mean that this exclusion didn't apply

in the first place and that they didn't have the knowledge

that it did bar this

thank you very much

council didn't understand

reserve time

I did reserve a few minutes

I reserve two minutes

I think I can say more but I'll

keep it to two I apologize

go ahead

you know what else doesn't

use the word virus

the mold mildew fungus sport

or organism exclusion

I think the court should consider

that in an even-handed fashion

my respected

colleague says that the pollution

exclusion is broader than a virus exclusion

well how are we

to know that where's the proof of that

I think we mentioned this in our papers

we sought discovery

from the insurance companies in this case

about

exclusions that they use to

want to exclude coverage for things like

virus, pandemic

communicable disease

we got responses from all of them

and Axis' response to that

they do not point to their pollution

exclusion so we have an interrogatory

that says tell us the exclusions that you use

to bar coverage for virus

communicable disease pandemic

the response to that was not

it's in our pollution exclusion that was not the response

they refuse to provide any

information in response to that request

we asked them to turn over their documents

about those types of exclusions

they refuse to turn over any documents

in response to that

but isn't our task just to construe the language here

in the exclusion

yes it is

and I'd suggest that if this court were inclined

to construe in a way that bars coverage

it should wait to have a complete record

to do that

there's a motion to compel pending before

Judge Kissinger asking for these documents

and I would respectfully suggest

that it'd be interesting to know

as Justice Hicks suggested

what do the underwriters say about things like this

what do their documents show

they come to court and they say

there's no coverage because of this pollution exclusion

we've never even seen their documents or heard

what their underwriters meant

when they added the word virus to a pollution exclusion

why did you seek an interrogatory

transfer on that question

there had been no ruling on our motion to compel

that Judge Kissinger

basically put that on pause

while we awaited resolution of this issue

and the interrogatory appeal

basically I think

but it's premature

is I understanding

I think a dismissal of our case against

access is premature yes

we did not seek summary judgment

on the access pollution exclusion

we thought that it made sense to have a record

before the court before it ruled on that issue

we told

Judge Kissinger

that they were disputed issues of fact

to the application of that pollution exclusion

so

we think that

the granting of that exclusion was an error

and we would ask this court to reverse that

and remand it for further proceedings

in front of Judge Kissinger

that's the amount of time

thank you very much

counsel the case is submitted

court in recess
