This is case 2022-0224, petition of textiles, coded, incorporated, DBA, textile, coded, international.

Good morning. First, the court would like to acknowledge the presence of students from Hanover High School and their teacher, Pam Custer. Welcome.

Our arguments this morning will consist of two cases.

The first on petition for original jurisdiction from Hillsborough County Superior Court Northern District, and the second on certified questions of law from the United States District Court for the district of New Hampshire.

We will take a brief break between the two arguments and give an opportunity for counsel in the second case to come up and set up, pursuant to court practice. To hand, you may remain where you are.

In the first case, I understand, Attorney Galvin, that you've reserved one minute for a bottle.

That's correct, Your Honor.

Please proceed.

May it please the court.

My name is John Galvin, and I represent TCI, which is a family-owned New Hampshire business.

In order for this court to decide whether it's wise to recognize a claim or cause of action for medical monitoring without a present physical injury, the court need look no further than the facts in this case.

If plaintiff's argument is accepted here, my client, TCI, would be saddled with $71 million worth of liability, despite the fact that there's not a single person who alleges a personal injury from exposure to PFOA, despite the fact that there's not a single person with a blood test that even shows the presence of PFOA in their system.

Despite the fact that we don't have any evidence of a single person who, in the six years this case has been pending, has sought out the type of medical surveillance that's requested here.

Despite the fact that there's no suggestion that the increased level of risk that's hypothesized here meets the standards for causation that courts across the country have applied.

So you're just saying that this isn't appropriate for a physical injury claim, correct? A tort claim? At least for personal injury. That's what I meant to say.

Absolutely. I mean, without a present physical injury, you can't have a tort claim.

There's no dispute that the water is contaminated, though. Is there?

There's no dispute. There has been testing done on some of the wells by DES, New Hampshire DES, that shows contamination. It is contested at the superior court level what the cause of that contamination was, and the level differs for different people within the class.

But no one here has alleged any type of personal injury. There are all kinds of different things that can cause the injuries alleged in this case.

Are you suggesting that all would be necessary as an amendment to the pleading saying this creates a personal injury or a high risk of personal injury?

If the plaintiff actually had proof of a personal injury, if you have proof of a personal injury.

My point isn't proof for a jury trial.

That's not what this case is. This case, they have clearly disavowed any personal injury. If you have a case where there really is a personal injury, if they have pleaded that here, I don't think on the pleading stage you get here to answer your question.

Thank you.

So the plaintiffs have made the decision not to allege a personal injury?

Yes, Your Honor.

The only relief they're seeking at this point is medical monitoring.

In this case, that's right, Your Honor.

And what they do is they argue, and of course New Hampshire law requires a present physical injury for a tort claim.

Look at the White v. Shane Laban case, the negligently installed lightning rod.

There was negligence. There was breach of duty. There was increased risk.

But this court held there's no claim, no cause of action, until the lightning actually hits.

Here the plaintiffs try to get around that, even though there's no present physical injury.

They say that under the restatement, somehow that there's something against their interest, an invasion of their interest, and that constitutes injury.

A couple of things about the restatement.

First of all, I take issue with the idea that somehow the restatement or ALI decides what New Hampshire law is.

This court is not bound by the restatement. This court has declined to follow the restatement in the past.

This body decides New Hampshire law.

Second, the idea that if you're a restatement state that somehow you're bound to find in favor of medical monitoring is just demonstrably false.

Courts in Alabama, Kentucky, Mississippi, Oregon, Illinois all follow the restatement for different things and all have rejected medical monitoring.

They've joined in with the majority of the states that reject this theory.

The Illinois court just two years ago cited the restatement in Barrie v. City of Chicago as they were rejecting this type of claim.

The Supreme Court of Kentucky in Wood v. Wyeth cited the very section that plaintiffs rely on here.

Restatement 2nd, Section 7, and said that does not rise to the level of an injury.

And that's consistent with New Hampshire law.

Not every invasion of an interest creates an actionable tort injury.

It's clear.

Think about the Siciliano case we've cited in our briefs.

A child dies on an amusement park ride.

The plaintiffs, the parents bring a claim for loss of companionship, loss of society of the child.

This court says, of course, there's an invasion of interest there.

It's enormously sympathetic.

Who can imagine the loss of a child?

Nevertheless, the court holds that's not sufficient to state a claim and tort.

We're not going to recognize that invasion of interest.

Yes, some jurisdictions have recognized it, correct?

Has the sky fallen in those dates?

Well, the sky has not fallen, Your Honor, but there have been real problems from this.

You look at West Virginia after the Bauer case.

They were hit almost immediately with a 270,000-person class in the Blankenship Smoker cases.

Resilient cases had a 5,000 plaintiff classified to legislate.

What's wrong with that?

They tried to pass a bill to outlaw medical monitoring because it got not a hand.

Same happened in Louisiana, correct?

Yes, Your Honor.

But what's wrong with that?

Well, what's wrong with that is this is a really, really bad way to try to solve a public health problem.

Isn't that the same thing that manufacturers said at the time of McPherson v. Buick

and the elimination of fault or tort or negligence in strict liability cases?

Isn't that? Doesn't that sound familiar to you?

Well, a little bit, Your Honor, but the focus on whether a product is defective

rather than the negligence of a manufacturer is a far cry from throwing out,

basically taking a red pen and striking out the essential elements of tort law

like the existence of an injury.

It's one thing to focus on a product defect rather than negligence of a manufacturer.

It's quite another to just say, you know what? You no longer need an injury.

And this has unintended consequences, not just for clients like TCI and businesses in New Hampshire,

not just for a court system that's going to be overwhelmed,

but for people like the plaintiffs in this case.

Think about, and this is different than the McPherson case.

Think about the statute of limitations here.

If plaintiff is right, then the cause of action accrues as soon as there's an increased risk

and some desire for testing.

This court has made clear in the Roe v. John Deere case that when that first injury occurs,

not later when the more serious injury occurs,

that first injury, even if nominal, triggers the statute.

So within three years of learning about this, the statute starts to run.

Everybody in this courtroom probably has PFAS in our system if we were tested at a low enough level.

The statute's running as to all of us.

So if they don't file, they can be barred.

Excuse me, when would physical injury occur given exposure to PFAS or PFOA?

I think at a time that we've traditionally done in tort law,

when there is an observable, diagnosable detriment to one's health.

That is the rule that we have followed for years.

In the normal case, in a car accident case, you know when there's a broken arm.

But in cases like this, and we've seen it in pharmaceutical cases over the year,

there may be some increased risk, but it's only when that person gets a diagnosis of kidney cancer

that a doctor attributes to exposure to this chemical or exposure to that drug,

that's the bright line that makes sense.

That's the way we have always done it.

And nobody in this case is getting shut out of the courtroom.

This court, if you don't expand the law to recognize this,

if someone actually gets sick, Your Honor,

if someone actually develops kidney cancer 10 years from now,

they can still bring that claim.

When you say expansion, I'm troubled by the fact that sometimes courts are too slow

to keep up with the science and that this is a hyperactive developing science

almost to the tune of daily advances in terms of studies.

Why shouldn't we leave the door open to allow the science to develop?

Well, Your Honor, you're absolutely right that this is an emerging area of science.

I think that counsel is against expanding the law to create these whatever,

million-person class actions.

Right now, you look at the science, the plaintiffs in their complaint

haven't even alleged causation here.

The science, the medicine is not out there with regard to PFOS compounds,

with regard to PFOA in particular, that shows actual causation of a disease.

And so the fact that the science is unsettled,

I don't think that means that we should create a new claim or a new cause of action

that allows millions of people to basically go in and try to bankrupt local companies

to get testing.

Part of the problem is, if those people bring a suit now,

there's only two problems, if they lose or if they win.

If they bring a medical monitoring claim and they lose,

then when someone actually gets sick 20 years from now,

somebody gets kidney cancer and they come in,

we will argue that's race judicata.

And the court will say, yeah, you've already had your case.

You've already brought your claim, you're barred.

What if the plaintiffs actually win the medical monitoring case?

Well, maybe they get a few thousand dollars worth of medical testing.

But if someone actually gets sick later on the line,

we raise the single controversy, doctor,

and you can't keep suing the same party over and over again

out of the same incident.

So this is just the wrong type of solution for a public health issue.

Has the class been certified in the Superior Court?

Yes, Your Honor.

And how would certification play out?

How would this play out in the class context?

It seems, if you're concerned about particularized injury,

how does that work in medical monitoring?

Well, Your Honor, I think that actually raises a number of questions

that if this case doesn't go forward, we may be here again.

Because class certification is extraordinarily difficult in a case like this,

where you have multiple causes.

How can you not have individualized issue as to causation?

Well, in theory, you could break them up.

In theory.

Break what up, Your Honor?

Break up the causes, break up the results, break up the injuries.

I mean, these things have been managed before in other jurisdictions.

Well, but not in a case like this.

There's predominant issues here as to causation.

Imagine this.

If you have two people living in the neighborhood,

one of them lived there for 25 years,

all they've done is drink the water at the level of the plaintiff's say.

Another just moved in five years ago.

And they used to live in West Virginia.

And the husband worked at the DuPont plant, making Teflon.

And the family eats out at McDonald's and hamburgers wrapped in PFOS,

and they use makeup and lip balm and all these other things.

Their levels of PFOA and PFOS are up here already.

And they're going to be treated the same under the plaintiff's theory.

That isn't right.

Those are unique individual issues that predominate.

So class action is probably a different argument,

but I would argue that this should not be preceded as a class.

That's part of the danger of this.

Has the Bauer standard, speaking of West Virginia,

has the Bauer standard been refined,

the standard that the Superior Court adopted in West Virginia?

Do you know?

Not to my knowledge, Your Honor.

I think that they're still applying the Bauer standard.

As I said, the West Virginia Senate passed a bill to try to overturn Bauer.

But as far as I know, the Bauer standard still applies.

And it's interesting in this case, the plaintiff say,

on appeal, it's a motion to dismiss.

We should just look at the four corners of the complaint.

The Superior Court adopted Bauer.

Bauer has six elements.

Plaintiffs here failed to plead three of those six elements.

So even if their argument is correct legally,

they don't make a case here.

Are we going to get tangled in the pleadings here?

Because as you know, we have the Barnes case in New Hampshire

that gives you a plaintiff another shot at the recovery

if you can amend your complaint.

Are you coming here two more times instead of just one more time?

I would just observe strictly speaking.

I think the questions before the court

in the two cases are identical, aren't they?

I mean, in your petition for original jurisdiction,

you have asked the same questions that U.S. District Court has.

The legal question, the certified question, absolutely, Your Honor.

I guess I'm talking about the application of that question

to this case.

Right.

Commands a different result.

One other thing quickly is the economic loss doctrine,

which this course recognized in Florida.

New Hampshire applies a very broad application of economic loss.

Here the plaintiffs are claiming they're having to pay for medical tests.

They have that contract,

but they don't want to have to bear the burden of that contract.

Purely economic loss, that's what they've said.

That case bars recovery in a case like this.

The plaintiffs try to distinguish plurid

by saying there was contractual privity

between the plaintiff and defendant.

There was not.

The plurid decision is very clear, unequivocal.

There's no privity there,

and there's no claim for economic loss

in an negligent unintentional court case.

You forgot to say it was exceptionally well written.

It was extraordinarily well written.

But in conclusion, Your Honors,

the court should not expand the law

to recognize this kind of claim.

Our civil justice system is the best in the world.

We're very good when we stay in our lane.

When we have someone who actually has a physical,

diagnosable injury,

and they think someone else wrongfully caused it,

we do a really good job at getting that sorted out,

either by settlement or trial.

When we get outside of our lane

and we start to try to solve public health issues

or we relax standards as we have in the asbestos cases,

we really run into trouble.

Nobody gets shot out of the courthouse

if this court simply adopts our position

and says we're not going to expand the law.

We stick with traditional tort law.

If someone actually gets injured later,

they can try to prove their case.

They're not going to be barred

because of the statute of limitations

or these other issues.

I don't mean to sound like a broken record,

but the vinyl asbestos tile cases went to trial

and the defendants prevailed

on causation or absence of injury.

Why isn't that the better solution here?

Well, absolutely, Your Honor.

In fact, in some of the smoking cases in West Virginia,

there have been defense verdicts.

But going through that process

and more often than not,

when you have a 270,000 member class,

that's an enormous amount of pressure.

I mean, kudos to the company

that's willing to take that on

with the risk involved in that.

That doesn't make it a good solution.

The fact that this was a claim

that never had any merit,

but we've had to spend millions and millions of dollars

transaction costs burdening the court

to get to the point to show it doesn't have merit,

I don't think that justifies creating a new claim

or cause of action in the first place.

The bottom line, Your Honors,

is existing tort law can cover what needs to be done here.

Expanding it simply doesn't make sense.

It's got unintended consequences that are bad

for companies like mine, for New Hampshire business,

bad for the court system,

even bad for the plaintiffs.

Thank you.

Thank you.

You've reserved one minute.

Attorney Hannon.

May it please the court.

Honorable Justice, Chief Justice,

members of the court.

Kevin Hannon, bar number 269896

for plaintiffs who are also here with us today.

We are here to address a critical remedy

for those who've been harmed

by toxic exposure

and for future generations

who may be tautiously exposed

to toxic chemicals.

You're not expanding the law here.

When a person's legally protected interest

has been invaded,

including the interest in avoiding tortuous exposure

to proven hazardous substances

at levels that cause an increased risk of disease

and the legally protected interest

in avoiding the pecuniary loss

that caused a diagnostic testing

necessitated by an increased risk of disease,

it constitutes legal injury.

Common law?

You would agree that if the common law informs us

that physical injury is required,

we would be expanding the law, correct?

Your Honor, if that were the case,

but it's not the case.

And actually, I'm not sure about that

because this court has consistently followed

the restatement.

And the restatement,

Section 7 recognizes injury as pecuniary loss

or harm as...

We followed our cases.

Is there a case that you can point to

where there is no physical injury?

Yes, Your Honor.

So for the in negligence,

Smith B. Cody, Morvey, Robinson, Spherex,

all allowed in negligence,

pecuniary recovery of pecuniary loss,

for negligence.

Required a special relationship

that doesn't exist here, correct?

That's right.

But still, it was negligence

and there was no personal injury.

Are any of those the fear of cancer cases?

For some reason in the back of my mind,

I think there is one.

No, Your Honor.

In those, there are not fear of cancer cases.

And the cases make a distinction

between fear of cancer cases

and medical monitoring cases.

Smith B. Cody is essentially a derivative case

of the injury suffered by the daughter.

There was physical injury in that case

and I think that's beyond dispute.

Well, Your Honor,

in Smith B. Cody and it's very analogous here,

first of all,

the court analyzed it

as not a claim for physical injury.

The court did its analysis

of the interest that was invaded

and the interest in receiving medical advice

about the potential of a harmed child being born.

So that's the first thing.

The court, when it analyzed injury

in Smith B. Cody,

allowed future medical expenses

to be community harm,

even though the interest it analyzed

was not one in personal injury.

You know, a couple other things about Cody.

Cody recognized that the advance of science

is a reason to look at the availability

of this economic loss,

the pecuniary loss.

And it recognized that if it did not hold,

allow the recovery of these losses,

a hole would be left

in the underlying tort of medical negligence.

And that is the same here.

What's the hole?

What's the equivalent hole here?

The equivalent hole, Your Honor,

is that there are underlying torts,

negligence, trespass, and nuisance.

Just like in Cody,

there was an underlying tort of medical negligence.

And the hole here is allowing,

and this is what defendants say,

defendants say we can release toxic substances

for decades here, trespass, nuisance, negligence.

We can expose communities for decades here.

And there's no remedy,

even though there's exposure,

there's increased risk of illness and disease.

But there's no showing of contamination.

We don't have a blood test from any one

single plaintiff, correct?

So we don't know if this substance

is in their system, do we?

We do, Your Honor, because the...

And you have to leave those issues

to the facts of this case.

We've heard a lot about the facts here.

The class definition sets a baseline of exposure

based on consumption for a number of days

and at a certain particular level

of contamination in their well.

And the class definition requires consumption

to be a member of the class.

So we do know that it's in their bodies,

and I think it's Hansen describes exposure

as ingestion, inhalation, consumption.

So we do know that there's exposure here.

The fact that there's not a blood test,

for example, is actually meaningless here

because when we look at TCI

and TCI's pleading, they raise that issue,

but they never say to you,

if you got PFOA in your blood,

that that constitutes a legal injury.

And in fact, St. Cobain says in their pleadings,

that does not constitute a legal injury.

Let's see, you go ahead.

I was going to say, let's assume that all of us

have ingested fluorocarbon, this type of substance.

Are we now all putative class members?

Absolutely not, Your Honor. Absolutely not.

How do we differentiate?

Well, we determine that because the Superior Court here

adopted the Bauer standards.

The Bauer standards require significant exposure,

not just spurious or occasional exposure.

What does that mean?

What's significant exposure?

Significant exposure in this case

is the context of the Bauer standards.

And again, I think it's the Redlands case

says significant exposure, or errors,

says significant exposure means sufficient

to cause an increased risk of disease

that requires medical monitoring.

So it's really, the significance is defined

by three parts of the Bauer test.

And you have to have all, you throw,

you put those together as we've pled that

and you have significant exposure.

So again, going back to why is this not everybody?

It's not a claim for mere exposure.

Again, we have to prove significant exposure.

We have to prove that it's a proven hazardous substance.

Again, under the Superior Court standards,

we have to prove that exposure was caused

by the defendant's tortuous conduct.

So when you ask, is everybody in this courtroom

a plaintiff? Absolutely not.

We have to prove that in this case,

TCI's conduct was the cause of that significant exposure

and the cause of the increased risk and disease

that justifies medical monitoring.

As I understand it, you or your clients

had an opportunity to try all those issues

in the Hillsborough County Superior Court North.

Isn't that correct?

We do. As of right now,

and your Honor, you asked about class certification.

The class has been certified.

All these arguments that you heard

about certification have already occurred

in Hillsborough County.

The judge has heard all the individualized issue arguments

that the defense raised here

and certified this class.

So that's not an issue for the course.

It's not part of the certified questions.

That issue's been decided.

So how do you respond to Mr. Galvin's point

about the statute of limitations?

On the statute of limitations, your Honor,

a couple of comments on that.

There are multiple cases that address that.

Heirs, Petito, Burns, and the Donovan case in Massachusetts.

All of them hold that the single controversy rule

would not apply here.

And the reason for that is because the harm that's involved.

Here, the harm that's involved is the pecuniary loss.

It's a past harm.

The exposure has occurred.

The significant increased risk has occurred.

The need for medical monitoring has already occurred.

And the pecuniary loss has occurred now.

These courts, including Donovan, say,

if and when a personal injury arises,

then that harm occurs.

And actually, yes, your Honor.

Well, I guess that gets to my question,

which relates to what Justice Donovan is asking,

which is, I think, Professors Henderson and Torsky

put it very well that personal injury,

that physical injury, serves as a linchpin in tort,

going back to the recognition of negligence.

And it defines the standard of care.

It defines when the statute of limitations begins.

It is the essence, at least in their informed view,

of what is a tort, and what is the analogous linchpin here?

What can we point to as to when the statute begins,

when the duties of care are defined,

when the exposure has occurred?

It's all completely amorphous.

Your Honor, it's not amorphous,

and I respectfully disagree.

It's not amorphous because of the Bauer standards.

When you have the Bauer standards

and you have exposure,

you know of the increased risk of disease

and the need for medical costs,

then the cause of action arises here.

Well, it's not just exposure.

It's significant exposure.

And to approve and hazard a substance.

Courts are going to need will be in the position

of deciding a public health issue.

What is significant exposure?

What is a hazardous substance?

What is a proven hazardous substance?

Well, Your Honor, that's evidence that occurs

in courts all the time.

And you've addressed those, for example,

in the Moseki case.

You addressed the issue of whether there would be

a standard of causation specified by this court.

And the court said,

we're going to leave that to the evidence at trial.

And the questions you're asking here

about the facts of the case and the proof of the facts.

To go back to your question about statute of limitations

and when does the harm apply,

then we go back to restatement section 7.

We also go back to restatement section 919

that the courts followed in Kelleher.

So here, the plaintiffs have the present need

and the pecuniary loss of the need to incur medical monitoring.

So I understand your position.

The lynchpin here is defined by Bauer.

The lynchpin is defined by Bauer.

But just so all of the thought there,

I understand you take issue with the increased risk

of disease element of Bauer.

At least that's the way I understood your pleading

in the certified question case,

as it may be under-inclusive.

Is that correct?

I probably don't understand the question, Your Honor.

In Bauer.

It can be misapplied to deprive,

expose persons of justifiable medical monitoring.

There are cases where you hear fact argument here

about whether the increased risk is calculable or quantifiable.

And this court has said you don't need quantification

and increased risk.

We accept the Bauer standards

and ask you here to uphold the Bauer standards

because they are provable.

And again, that proof is a matter.

You're facing a question of law here

and that proof is a matter that it's in the evidence

before the court, as it was just months before trial.

Why shouldn't we wait for the science to develop?

Well, Your Honor, the science has already developed.

And absolutely.

You saw that I'm a little quizzical about that.

I understand.

I saw that you were quizzical about that.

The reason is, Your Honor, that we have submitted expert reports

supporting the elements of the Bauer standard here

based on the science.

So if this were a fact issue

and we were arguing the facts here,

you would look at those expert reports

and find the science that has developed this far.

The medical monitoring program,

which neither defendant put into the record,

but it doesn't claim everything in the world.

That doesn't meet the Bauer standards.

The Bauer standards limit the issue

of whether there are spurious or frivolous

or mere exposure claims.

Not every community is going to meet those standards.

It's going to take the record that you see

from the partial record that's submitted here

that the case has gone on six years.

There's been substantial expanse.

There's been expert reports.

Not every case.

Nobody just walking in this room

is going to be able to survive that standard.

And so Bauer is the linchpin.

Bauer is the differentiating factor

in the Superior Court's adoption of Bauer,

the differentiating factor

between spurious exposure or random exposure

or mere exposure, as defendant says,

and cases where there's harm,

significant exposure, increased risk of disease

with the medical necessity

and the testimony about the medical necessity

for early diagnostics.

Just causing apicunary loss,

which Section 7 and this Court

in its decisions for years

has protected apicunary loss,

including in tort cases

and including in tort cases

where there's not physical injury.

Physical injury wasn't required

in the insurance-bad faith cases

and the defect cases.

So the linchpin,

it's Bauer is the linchpin.

Thank you.

Attorney Gall, sorry.

Thank you, Your Honor.

I'm sorry.

Attorney Hannon.

Attorney Gall.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Just three quick points.

On this question of what the guardrails are,

Mr. Chief Justice, you asked questions

just as Hicks did about all these different issues.

Plain answer to everything seems to be

we're going to get an expert to testify about that.

I've been doing this kind of work for over 30 years.

One thing I know as a good lawyer

is that you can find an expert witness

who will testify about anything.

That's not an appropriate guardrail.

The U.S. Supreme Court, Justice Breyer and Buckley said

even courts who have recognized this

have to have guardrails.

There are a dozen courts, since the Bauer case,

he relies on that have declined to follow Bauer.

They've gone in the exact opposite direction.

On the statute of limitations argument,

Plain have talked about like one part of that,

the subsequent, the single controversy doctrine,

which under Roe v. John Deere,

this court held that when you had that first injury

you cannot come back and sue again

for a more serious injury.

Plain have did not address the fact,

and I think even his argument makes clear

that the statute of limitations is running for people.

You only have three years to file.

Afterwards, and he mentioned nothing

about the race judicata issue.

What if they win? What if they lose?

They're going to be barred either way.

And finally, Plain have's argument

really comes down over and over again

in section 7 of the restatement,

which Plain is frankly a misreading.

When you look at it, they're conflating harm and injury.

The restatement says that an injury

is a harm that gives rise to a tort action.

That's consistent with New Hampshire law.

The Siciliano case I mentioned before,

yes, you have an invasion of interest.

Your child died. The Clark case,

you got demoted as you were a whistleblower

against your company.

That's an interest.

They aren't actionable torts, neither is this.

Thank you, Attorney Galvin.

Thank you.

Petition is submitted.

Stand in. Just brief recess.

Court will stay out here.
