It's this case, 2020-058-3, Patricia Morris at all versus Town of Barnstead.

Good morning.

I understand you reserved two minutes.

You reserved two minutes for the bottom.

Yes, sir.

Please proceed.

Good morning.

I should please the court.

Eric Mayer, Donahue Tucker, and Chindella here on behalf of the appellants, Patricia Morris, and Jared Davis.

This case is involving a planning board approval for

authorizing the construction of a 195 foot cell tower in the town of Barnstead.

The appellants are the immediate butters to the cell to the proposed tower.

There's two general issues on appeal, although there are several arguments related to each.

The first has to do with whether or not section eight

of the town's zoning ordinance which relates to regulations of businesses,

applies to the proposed tower.

The second relates to the application of section 4.4 related to landscaping and

screening under the town's site plan review regulations to the project,

the way it was applied by both the planning board and the superior court.

Turning to the first issue, whether or not article eight of the zoning ordinance applies

has to do with the definition of business under the town's zoning ordinance.

But business is a defined term.

It includes activities of buying and selling, trade, commercial deals,

commercial enterprise, and industrial establishments.

Our claim of error with regard to the superior court was that in its interpretation of those phrases,

it deviated from the established canons of statutory construction and

adopted a duly narrow definition and interpretation of those phrases by requiring a business to have a quote, unquote, and presence.

We believe that construction and interpretation is not in accordance with the plan in ordinary meaning,

nor is it in accordance with the spirit and intent of the zoning ordinance as enumerated in section 1-2 of the zoning ordinance.

Our review of that issue is de novo, right?

That is correct.

And you'll see that there are ancillary issues raised associated with administrative gloss in the level of deference that the trial court applied,

which are raised as claims of error, but presumably this court in

conducting a de novo interpretation of the zoning ordinance may be able to bypass those.

So-

And your argument on administrative gloss is that the trial court applied it sort of in reverse.

To the way it's normally applied.

Our claim of error with regard to the superior court is that it acknowledged that the ZBA may have applied administrative gloss,

but declined to consider our arguments as to why that would be error on the part of the ZBA.

Is gloss given the inapplicability to prior applications for self-cowards?

Section 8.1.

It would be dependent on who's talking to you, Justice March 20, but it comes down to whether the failure to apply section 8-1

in four prior instances, two of which involved improvements to water infrastructure,

another related to a solar facility, and one other related to a cell tower,

established an administrative gloss and or an interpretation-

Do you contend the zoning ordinance or section 8.1 or the definition of sections are ambiguous?

I do not.

I don't think-

So administrative gloss doesn't apply?

Exactly, and that was our claim of error is that the consideration of these prior failures to apply section 8-1 is irrelevant

because this is not an ambiguous provision of the zoning ordinance.

I don't think at any point in time, either the Trial Court, the ZBA, or even the interveners or the town have alleged that the provision at issue-

We're not found by that anyway. It's de novo review.

That is correct, and that's why I'd said in the court engaging in that de novo review can bypass that issue

because presumably we assert that it's not an ambiguous provision and therefore the plain and ordinary meaning should be applied here

without consideration to the four limited instances in which the planning board failed to apply it when Article 8-1 wasn't-

And that's really the analysis the Trial Court undertook anyway.

It did an analysis of the words and the fact that there were definitions for commercial tower and business.

It went through a very thorough analysis.

Well, I would contest that analysis while it addresses the points that were raised by the appellants contained various legal errors.

And the first in that regard is its plain meaning analysis is unduly selective.

It doesn't give full effect to the entirety of the definition as those definitions apply in this context.

For example, the Trial Court emphasized that trade is defined as the business of buying and selling,

but fails to give emphasis to the fact that trade also includes commerce, which this is a commercial tower,

it's identified as engaging in commerce, or that it includes an exchange of goods for commerce or profit,

which this is exactly what that is.

This is a tower that's going to go up.

It is going to be leased to wireless providers forward in remuneration to provide wireless access to residents in the community.

That is quintessentially articles of commerce.

The Court, in defining the phrase enterprise, emphasized the phrase a unit of economic organization or activity,

such as a factory, farm, or mine, but also ignored and did not emphasize the fact that it can also mean a venture or undertaking,

a project, especially an undertaking that is difficult, complicated, or has a strong element of risk.

Why was the Court wrong to put emphasis on the fact that the term business is there

and then there's the wireless telecommunication facility commercial tower?

It said the ordinance uses different terms to describe different things and I'm not going to combine them.

I believe that the reference to commercial tower, the fact that it does not reference

or invoke article 8-1 is consistent with how the ordinance identifies other commercial uses in the community.

You will find in that zoning ordinance any reference to any specific business being subject to article 8-1.

For example, if you were to go to table 14 in the zoning ordinance,

you'll see references to beds and breakfasts, retail establishments, service businesses, automotive garages.

Not one of them reference 8-1, but there can be no serious contention that those uses don't constitute businesses

that would not be subject to section 8-1.

And so too should it be here.

The fact that it's not expressly invoked in the definition of 8-1 doesn't mean it doesn't apply.

Section 8-1 is the provision of general applicability that applies to all businesses

and therefore it subsumed that a commercial tower, which is a subset of business, would be subject to 8-1.

And beyond that, and there's reference to, well, the commercial tower definition only references

section 14 and requirement for site plan review regulation.

However, there can be no serious assertion that the other provisions of the zoning ordinance regarding placement,

setbacks, or other provisions of general applicability, there's been no suggestion of that.

But they're not expressly invoked.

So, reading the zoning ordinance in its entirety and in context, the conclusion is that it was that

Freya's business is intended to have a broad, and that's also consistent with the underlying purposes of the zoning ordinance.

Our brief cites the case of Shanard v. Town of Lincoln.

Now, we don't cite to that case the proposition that the definition of business adopted in that case should be utilized here.

We're conscious of the fact that here we do have a specific definition of business.

But we do cite that case for its proposition that in the court engages in a statutory analysis or an analysis of the zoning ordinance,

it must give consideration to the meaning and the purposes articulated in that regulatory regime.

But we were also careful to point out that examining purpose does not include rewriting the text or supplementing it.

And that is correct.

But in this case, that does not require a rewrite in any way, shape, or form.

There's no reference to manned facilities in the definition of commercial power or in the definition of business.

It simply references business and provides a scope of activities.

Now, the dictionary definition of those activities is broad.

And looking at this purpose and intent of the zoning ordinance, which is to protect property values,

which is to ensure the proper appropriate use of land, which is to ensure that the town's character is maintained.

All of those are served by a broad application here.

And absent an application error result, it brings about an absurd result.

For example, commercial towers don't include just cell towers.

They also include wind turbines.

Now, the appeal of Allen case, which is court decided, is involved 500-495-feet wind turbines.

These are structures.

In other words, 185-foot cell tower, 495-foot wind turbines are some of the largest pieces of infrastructure

that would be allowed under the town's zoning ordinance.

However, the specific provision that is meant to require a consideration of property values

and adverse impacts of the town under the court's rationale would not apply.

However, that structure would apply to much less extensive uses such as daycares,

bed and breakfasts and ends.

That about brings about an absurd result.

But isn't there a distinction between beds and breakfasts and daycare

with people coming in and out of traffic and an inanimate structure,

which could be regulated, wind turbines regulated, utility poles regulated,

but differently than a business, different considerations?

They could be regulated differently, but in the town of Barnstead, they are not.

So if you are under the threshold for jurisdiction of the SEC

and you are coming to Barnstead with a small wind turbine facility,

there is no other provisions other than section 8-1

that allow for the consideration of these criteria

that are specifically there to protect the public and protect the butters.

Or there would be an argument that section 8-1 doesn't apply

and only other aspects of the zoning ordinance setbacks, et cetera, would apply.

That's the result from the Superior Court's determination,

but I believe that's inconsistent with the underlying spirit and purposes

in section 1-2 of the zoning ordinance itself.

By adopting an unduly narrow interpretation of business,

you are cutting out the applicability of infrastructure that can be remarkably impactful.

Or new infrastructure.

Again, cell towers are new.

Sometimes zoning ordinances don't catch up.

So now we're trying to fit a new use into an existing ordinance.

Well, it very well could be that the reason why the zoning ordinance,

which allows for commercial powers, does not have more specific provisions

as the criteria for its application is because 8-1 already exists.

You also challenged Judge Leonard's decision regarding the SEC plan review.

Why wasn't the treatment of screening adequate?

Well, it's because the evidence and the record was inadequate to satisfy the standard.

So Judge Leonard focuses largely on two aspects of the record.

One is the proposed mitigation from ITW,

which is relying upon existing tree cover,

as well as the fencing at the base of the structure and grading that she identified.

The plans don't identify any grading that I could see from the site plan

looking at different changes in the topography,

at least not in any meaningful capacity.

The proposed site is relatively flat,

changing only four feet of elevation over a total of 100 feet.

So there's no plans submitted that show any extensive grading

to lower that topography to reduce the extent of the impact.

The fencing at the base,

so we have 67% of the structure is going to be above the tree line.

And the other aspect, I'll wrap up with that,

the other aspect, your honor, is that the court said,

well, the record shows the planning board considered

that the impact to other points of concern.

However, that record when read meeting minutes,

the points of concern were not adjacent properties.

They were the church and the pond located further away.

There's no consideration of the effective screening

as relates to the adjacent property.

That's what section 4.4 reports.

Thank you, Tony Mayor. Tony Grillo.

Here on behalf of the Cross Appellant,

we find ourselves in an unusual position

of feeling confident that the decision below is correct

with respect to the two points that have been appealed

by the abutters,

and yet we are challenging the jurisdiction

as found by the Superior Court.

The basis for jurisdiction has to be

that a determination was made

within the meaning of 676, 5 sub 3,

which authorizes the zoning board

to hear a limited class of questions

from the planning board without,

if that section was not properly invoked,

then the appeal was untimely

and therefore jurisdictionally defective.

The language of 676, 5

is phrased as an if, then clause.

In other words, if there is a decision

or determination by a planning board

during site plan review,

which interprets the ordinance

and I'm paraphrasing a little bit,

then that must be,

it must be appealed to the zoning board

in order to preserve Superior Court jurisdiction.

Well, your argument essentially is

that it has to be explicit,

it can't be implicit.

That's correct.

And what's the basis for that?

The basis is the context of the statute

and the purpose for changing 677, 15

by adding subsection 1a

to authorize appeals

and to consolidate them

to one judicial proceeding.

There is no indication

that it would apply to implied decisions

or that there's no precedent

for finding an implied decision

from a planning board.

What's the butter to do?

Here we've got this letter of May 7, 2020

where the specific zoning issue is raised

and then if the planning board

just blows it off and doesn't mention it

and just proceeds to go ahead

and do the analysis,

they've implicitly rejected that argument

and why can't,

why isn't that a sufficient basis?

Because I don't know how we as applicants

and the reason we've pressed forward

even though we feel the decisions blow

were correct on the other points

is as applicants

and we do a fair amount of development work,

how are we to know we didn't get a copy

of the May 7 letter?

We were not.

It was not brought up during either

the May 7 planning board hearing

or the subsequent hearing on May 21

and we had no opportunity to address

those points.

We don't know what the planning board decided.

We don't know if the planning board

even spotted the issue.

They were given over 100 pages

on the morning of the May 7 hearing.

The court, I'm sorry,

the board looked at it and said

there's a lot of material here

about another tower in a different town.

We'll put this in the public record

and that is the extent of discussion

on that point.

So you and your client weren't aware of this letter?

We were not aware of the letter

or that the Section 8.1 was an issue

or brought up at all?

Correct.

We knew that the letter had been received

because it was mentioned by the chair

of the planning board

and she said there's a lot of material here

about another tower and then filed it

and that was the extent of it.

So we proceeded.

We were not asked questions about it.

We were not given any notice whatsoever.

We've never been asked by anyone in the town,

government or boards or anything of that nature.

Did you look at the 100 pages

between the two hearings?

I was not involved in the case

and I don't know that we would have done that.

I'm not aware that we saw that

until the appeal to the zoning board

was filed on I believe it was June 23

as the file stamp.

So once that was filed

and I believe it included the filing

with the zoning board

was something like 60 pages

and it also didn't identify a determination

or decision.

The exact language used was that

the planning board ignored Section 8.1.

Ignored was the word.

It's difficult to find

the word ignored being the same as

made a decision or made a determination.

So this is not a situation

where at the meeting someone set up

and said what about 8.1?

Correct.

And the planning board said

yeah no we're not doing that

or just ignored the public testimony.

That's right.

There's no mention anywhere in the minutes

of 8.1 whatsoever

nor were we ever asked

if the planning board had wanted to

alert us to that

or condition their approval

on you know your tower approved

however before you can pull a building permit

you must apply pursuant to Section 8.1.

That would be obviously a very different matter

and as a footnote

not really a subject for appeal

because it's not right

and we haven't had that opportunity.

If we were to be required to proceed

under Article 8

we would certainly challenge the lawfulness

of that provision because it grants

the selective power to determine use

without any basis in the statute.

There's no appeal route.

There's no time limits.

It simply says application

must be made to the planning board

selectmen and health officer.

I don't think that's allowed by zoning

but we've never had that opportunity.

I know the balance in their briefs

and all kind of sprinkled references

to facts that they say established

we can't meet those criteria.

We never had the chance

so that's that's a kind of

an argument at this point.

So all of that was

was never part of this case

and properly so because

8-1 if I can get to that

and go past the jurisdictional problem

presented by the case

8-1 was correctly interpreted

by the ZBA on remand

and then correctly interpreted

by Judge Horan in the Superior Court

and Judge Horan did not find

that all unmanned structures

are excluded from the definition of business.

He didn't have to.

He found commercial towers

are excluded from the definition of business

and there was a very good reason for that

and I think I won't do as good a job

as he did in explaining those reasons

but for one thing

when the site plan review requirement

was made express

in 2012 I believe it was

yeah it was 2012

the ordinance was amended

Section 2 to require commercial towers

to submit to site plan review

which I think was implicit before then

but it was made express

the ordinance could have easily been amended

to say commercial towers

shall be required to submit to site plan review

and to business review under Article 8

the failure to do that

when the ordinance was amended in 2012

only two years after another tower

had been approved

is I think very compelling

not binding but very compelling evidence

that the intention of the local legislation

was not to require business review

because why add an express review

for the planning board

but not also pick up on this other review

that has not occurred

and that indicates a legislative intent

not to impose business permitting requirements

such as it is on commercial towers

Is it your position that the provisions

at issue 8.1 that that's ambiguous

I don't think it's

I think Section 8

without the addition of the definition section

in Article 2 is somewhat ambiguous

but not I don't think the term business is ambiguous

even when you get right down to

I think it can be defined in different ways

as we saw in the Shanard case

depending on the context

but once it was clarified by the 2008 amendment

which added the definition of business

I don't think that's ambiguous

So how does the Doctrine of Administrative Gloss apply?

Well I don't think there's

I'm not sure it's administrative gloss

I think there are declarations

in a number of cases

and although not cited in my briefing

in Peter Laughlin's book in Chapter 22

that talk about

given the burden of proof on the appellant

in under 677-6

when there's a certain amount of deference

to the interpretation

given by the local body

particularly when amendments have been made

that do not change that history

in that interpretation

I'm not sure that's the same thing

of administrative gloss

as I understand it is binding

on reviewing bodies

as opposed to this notion of deference

implicit in the history

and the amendment

but honestly I'm not

because some of the cases that

use that doctrine

don't mention administrative gloss

they simply say the statute

or an ordinance that has been interpreted

and then the legislation has changed

without addressing that interpretation

it should be construed

the way it's historically been construed

and in this case that means not applied

in Barnstead to unmanned structures

but even without that

the definition in article 2

each one of the separate definitions

of the activities of buying and selling

plainly there are no activities

of buying and selling

no member of the public

and no business partner

of my client is showing up

on this farm

in the middle of the woods in Barnstead

but why doesn't it fall

within either commercial enterprise

it's a commercial enterprise isn't it

it's not a commercial enterprise

it's making money off of it

my client is a commercial enterprise

and we can quote it

as far as statutes like Rigo

that use the word enterprise

but enterprise the connotation means

an enterprise of people

it doesn't mean every asset

or every piece of property

that's embodied in the enterprise

well what about industrial establishment

why isn't that industrial establishment

I would say the same thing

that it's a commercial structure

but it is not a commercial or industrial enterprise

it is something for establishment

it is something that is used by the establishment

if we had been locating in Barnstead

moving our headquarters there

I think it would be a much much different case

but the fact that we chose to erect

a single man structure in that town

does not turn us

does not turn structure into a business

nor does I think

a contrary interpretation would be adding

a word that is not found

in the article 2 definition of business

it would be adding a word structure

and the word structure does not appear

so I don't think you can create

establishment or enterprise with the word structure

the town could have easily done so

had it wanted to be that broad

and as Justice Horan pointed out

in his decision

the fact that there is a separate definition

of commercial power

I believe it's the very next one

in the ordinance

also

facilitates against

incorporating the two terms

let me ask you in regard to the site plan review

why was the treatment of the screening issue

satisfactory

well I'm

still confused about the

butters position because

the

um

they

explicitly say in their reply brief

we are not claiming invisibility as a standard

but they also say

we think the concealment

wasn't enough

um

if they're saying something less than

complete concealment

is okay

but this particular concealment

just wasn't enough

that's plainly a matter

within the discretion of the planning board

based on the evidence

pardon me

in this regard

there was a balloon test

contrary to the argument

that Attorney Mar made

um

the balloon test

had three photos

from the edge of the butters property

so the planning board could plainly

gauge the impact

on the butters as well as from these

points of interest that they were more

concerned about

and frankly that's their job

their job is not to

elevate the interest of one property owner

over another

but simply to find whether the plan

as a whole meets the spirit

and intent

and the specific requirements

of the site plan regulations

thank you

very briefly

I believe that this court has already

decided when a planning board

makes an implied decision

the accurate v town of dairy

is quite clear on that

um in the next of that case

were a code enforcement officer

during a technical review committee

said made an interpretation

that this was not a proposed use

there was some consideration

but no formal vote taken by the planning board

on it

and then at the end of the hearing

the board voted to approve the project

the court in that case

found that when the

when the planning board approved the project

they made an appealable determination

that the project was in accordance

with the zoning ordinance

it is implied there's numerous cases

that exist in this state

so your argument would be

anytime the planning board makes a decision

uh

to approve the project

that implicitly

is making a zoning determination

unless it makes it explicitly

at an earlier point in time

um this says already

says exactly that your honor

but there are instances where a planning board

which is in the Crawford case

um cited by ITW

where the planning board will make

an explicit interpretation

early on in the case

that becomes an appealable then

is an express determination

that becomes appealable

is an implied determination made at the time of approval

on the issues

and there are cases that actually allow a challenge

post approval

if it turns out it was an error made

by the planning board

in terms of

zoning allowing something to go forward

or not

in some circumstances yes

and how many cases did the ZPA

determine that they didn't have jurisdiction

this is sort of

unique isn't it

I don't think it's unique

it does happen

where a board will just not

make a determination explicitly

a lot of the times it is done

at the time of acceptance because

if you need variance relief you're not going to

waste the planning board's time with numerous hearings

proceeding and perceiving that

and in this notion

also about my time is up

thank you very much council

thank you very much

thank you
