This is case 2020-0414, state of New Hampshire, versus Jonathan A. Perfetto.

Good afternoon, Attorney Woodcock.

Thank you, Your Honor. May it please the court, Elizabeth Woodcock for the state of New Hampshire, with me at counsel table is senior

Assistant Attorney General Samuel Garland. He filed the amicus brief for the Department of Corrections.

I want to point out to the court that I think that the trial court made two fundamental errors in this case.

And the first was in finding Mr. Perfetto insane. The court did that on the erroneous, I think, assumption that the

Assistant County Attorney had stipulated to that. And I think that the record is clear that the Assistant County did not.

But even if the Assistant County Attorney had made that error, the court was under an obligation to determine for itself whether Mr.

Perfetto could not be held civilly or criminally responsible. And the court really did not do that. It didn't have a real hearing in

which it examined the evidence before and tried to come to a conclusion that Mr. Perfetto would be a good candidate.

Did things go so awry? Doesn't the state bear some responsibility for that?

The state does not bear responsibility for it, Your Honor, because we were never notified that the court was going to hold a hearing.

We knew that there would be some kind of preliminary hearing, but the Department of Corrections was never notified that the court was

going to hold an evidentiary hearing. We did not have-

What's in the department in Minnesota notified?

Montana.

Excuse me, Montana.

The Montana State Prison was notified, Your Honor, but I think that that was really sort of more as a matter of logistics.

Mr. Perfetto had to be able to appear via video, and without any notice to the State of Montana, the State Prison in Montana,

that would not have been possible.

So did the County Attorney object to having a hearing?

No, the County Attorney did not object to having a hearing, but he also did not stipulate that Mr. Perfetto

was insane, which was an error that the trial court made, and it's a serious one.

Right. The County Attorney was making that argument that he had to be found not competent by reason of insanity in a case, in a case brought.

That was the distinction the County Attorney was trying to make.

Correct.

Well, I think that it was actually a little bit less narrow than that, but yes, that is part of what the Assistant County Attorney was arguing,

Justice Hans Marconi, and I think that that comes from the standpoint of not really understanding,

and the record is clear that the Assistant County Attorney did not really understand that this statute is meant to address more than

or a different circumstance in someone who was found not guilty by reason of insanity.

It's a person whose mental health has changed over the course of time and now may be suitable for placement in a secure psychiatric unit,

but we don't have the evidence that we need to draw that conclusion, and neither did the Superior Court.

There was evidence from the expert's report that Mr. Perfetto suffered from a mental defect.

I mean, there were diagnoses that were made, and so he definitely satisfies that element of the definition of insanity.

I think, yes, you're right, Chief Justice, that Mr. Perfetto suffers from mental illness,

and nobody would question that. He has been found to have bipolar disorder, he suffers from depression, antisocial syndrome,

for lack of the correct word, but that is not following the New Hampshire Supreme Court's definition of insanity,

which is that you cannot be held criminally or civilly responsible for your actions.

How do we know that's the definition that applies here?

Well, I don't think that there is any other definition that this Court has applied.

And it's in the context of a criminal prosecution. This is quite different, seeking prospective relief based on something that may have happened, you know, recently.

Well, what may have happened recently, this case is now, the order is what, June of 2022.

So I'm not certain that we have a very good picture of Mr. Perfetto's mental health right now.

But Mr. Perfetto does not demonstrate this lack of responsibility for his criminal or civil actions.

In fact, Mr. Perfetto litigated this case. He's not fitting into a definition of insanity, which brings me to a second point.

And that is what should concern this Court, and certainly concerns me, is that Mr. Perfetto is now ordered by the Superior Court,

without very much of a record, to return to New Hampshire.

He's supposed to return to New Hampshire in a situation in which, according to the amicus brief, he has been designated as a prisoner who should be kept separate from other prisoners.

And that is throughout the prison system. So we don't know...

By being assigned to the SBU.

Well, that he would be assigned to the Secure Psychiatric Union.

That actually gets to the question, how practically will the warden implement the order that the Superior Court has made?

And what I'm really concerned about is, if the clinicians at the SBU determine this is not a clinically appropriate setting for Mr. Perfetto, given his illness, what happens?

Well, I think that that is the $64,000 question, and we don't have an answer to that, because the Department of Corrections was never asked to come to the hearing.

And it's a...

With respect, I mean, the state of New Hampshire knew that Mr. Perfetto had filed this petition and was seeking admission to the SBU.

So the state was clearly on notice. I mean, the state is divided into subparts. We all understand that.

But I think it's a little unfair to the spirit court judge to say, well, this part of the state didn't know or wasn't informed when, in fact, it was.

And the warden could have made his position known at the time of that hearing.

I don't think... I think that that would have been very difficult. The state of New Hampshire, as represented by the Attorney General's Office, knew that there would be a hearing of some sort on June 21st.

The state of New Hampshire did not have a copy of the expert's analysis of the defendant. The state of New Hampshire did not know that the court intended to take testimony.

The state of New Hampshire, I think, fairly assumed that this would be a preliminary proceeding in which the court would try to determine who the relevant parties were.

So the County Attorney's Office didn't have a copy of the expert's report?

The County Attorney's Office had a copy of the expert report, but the Attorney General's Office did not.

Well, it wasn't the state, the state, the state, although there are parts as the Chief has mentioned, but...

The County Attorney's Office does not represent the Department of Corrections. So in this instance, I think, Justice Donovan, the state is not the state is the state is the state.

There are certain circumstances in which you could assume that. I think that this is not one of them.

This is a little bit different proceeding, because it is a criminal proceeding, certainly, and the County Attorney would have an interest if the conditions of Mr. Perfetto's confinement were going to be changed,

and obviously you would want to notify any victims or anything like that. But the County Attorney's interest is separate and distinct from the interests of the Department of Corrections.

The County Attorney knows how to reach the Attorney General's Office. I mean, there's an obvious concern about whether this individual should be where he should be, where that's appropriate.

In fact, that's what the statute is asking the Court to decide. What is in the best interest of its health and comfort?

And that is why, Your Honor, the Court should have followed Rule 29J and informed all the interested parties. This is not just sending someone off to summer camp.

This is transporting somebody halfway across the country to be placed in a situation in which it is not clear he is qualified for the Secure Psychiatric Unit.

And we know from the amicus brief that he is supposed to be kept separate. This is a serious situation, and the Superior Court went forward.

Ordering the Department of Corrections to move him would not even give the Department of Corrections a stay.

Is your understanding of the record, I mean, the concern, the clinical concern that I read in the Experts Report is the lack of group therapy available to Mr. Perfetto in Montana?

That's the same.

Is there anything in the record, or was there anything in the record before the Court that says one way or another whether the SBU has group therapies available to it?

There is nothing on the record that explains what the Secure Psychiatric Unit could or could not provide. And that is another aspect of this that causes me grave concern.

I think that this is a serious situation. I think that the Court should have conducted a full hearing, particularly in light of the fact that this situation might not end here, Your Honor.

Mr. Perfetto has other rights. He can pursue petitions for Ritz of habeas corpus after this, and we have no record on which to assess the trial court's ruling.

So this gets back to my question too, and I just want to make sure I understand the answer. If the state is not successful on its appeal and the court orders, the Superior Court's order stands, what happens in terms of Mr. Perfetto

and admission to the Secure Psychiatric Unit?

I don't know the answer to that, Your Honor, but I can tell you, I have had other cases involving Mr. Perfetto. He is not insane, and it concerns me that he would return to New Hampshire, be ultimately rejected from the Secure Psychiatric Unit,

and then because he is under this keep separate condition, that he will be sent off to some other prison in some other part of the country.

Ms. Woodcock, you said at the beginning that it was clear looking at the record that the state did not stipulate that Mr. Perfetto was insane.

I think, I don't know if there is anything clear about that record having looked at it, but putting that aside, if it was clear, your position also is that the trial court is not empowered to accept that stipulation? Is that right?

I think that the trial court is obligated to make its own findings, Your Honor. This is a very, very serious situation. This is not stipulating that, for example, if you have a felon in possession of a firearm and you stipulate that the person has a felony conviction,

because you don't want that conviction presented to the jury. This is a situation in which the lives of a number of different people are affected.

Mr. Perfetto is one of them, but think about the other people who are waiting for admission into the Secure Psychiatric Unit.

So it's sort of like a stipulation in the case of an involuntary emergency admission or the case of where a ward needs a public guardian, and stipulations like that occur all the time in those proceedings?

Well, that may be true, but in this circumstance you're talking about transferring a prisoner across the country to a situation which may or may not be appropriate for him. My experience would suggest it is not.

The problem also is that the Assistant County Attorney does not represent the Department of Corrections, and so that stipulation may be binding on the Assistant County Attorney, but it cannot bind the Department of Corrections.

I see my red light is on. I will yield the floor to Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Your Honor.

May it please the Court. Christopher Johnson on behalf of Jonathan Perfetto. My plan this afternoon is first to make a point about the context, second about Rule 29J, and third get to RSA 65110, but I'm happy to take questions at any point as well.

Beginning with the context, proffers, stipulations, and waivers are invaluable and appropriate tools on which judges rely to justly and efficiently decide cases. Here, the State is seeking a second chance to which it's not entitled that is having the effect of delaying the relief to which Mr. Perfetto is entitled.

And that relief, and this maybe gets to your question, Chief Justice McDonald, that relief is not perpetual. What we're asking for, or what I think the law entitles him to, is that he would remain at spew unless and until new or further information it develops, which suggests that he should be transferred.

But on that point, Attorney Johnson, you appropriately note that there are two conditions that are identified in the statute. And I think we're talking about the stipulation that goes to the insane condition.

Yes.

I'm really having trouble finding specific factual findings in the court's order that transferred to the SBU is appropriate for Mr. Perfetto's health and comfort, the health and comfort of the person and the welfare of the public.

I just don't find that. And that gets to the concern that you think you probably heard me express, which is how do we know that this is the right place for him clinically? And what is in the record to support that?

Okay. So I think the thing on which I would principally rely, and you did refer to it in questioning of Ms. Woodcock, is that the psychiatrist found that group therapies are particularly suited to the kinds of mental illnesses he has.

He's not getting them in Montana. He used to get them in spew. And moreover, in the amicus brief, which does present a lot of information that was not in the record, there's no assertion in the amicus brief that spew does not do those therapies anymore.

But we have nothing in the record that says that the one thing that the expert says is failing in his current care is available at the SBU. Don't we need that in order to make an appropriate determination under this statute?

I don't think so. And this gets to another point I think I would want to make about this, is that this is an adversary system of justice. The state had its chance. Mr. Perfetto proffered evidence that in the past...

Did the state really have its chance if the Department of Corrections was not at the table?

Yes. Yes. The Attorney General's office knew that this hearing was going to happen. They knew what the hearing was going to be about. They had access to the Dock at Summary Sheet. They provided this court with the Dock at Summary Sheet before the hearing.

The only thing they wouldn't have had access to would be Dr. Lampignano's report, because that was under seal. The rest of it is wide open and available for anybody could call the court center and say, what is he's pleading say?

So assume everything that you say is true. The Department of Corrections was not there for whatever reason. Right. Are you saying that that's kind of collateralist doppel or double jeopardy?

I'm saying that if the state... This is the state's fault. If the state gets a second chance here, Mr. Perfetto is the relief to which he is at least arguably entitled. He did his part. He got a psychiatrist. They presented the information.

They made the psychiatrist available for cross-examination and the state turned it down and he's staying in Montana waiting for what he's entitled to.

And this is why I think it's so important that... And we're not saying once he comes back he has to stay here forever again. I take your point that there are some things that neither Mr. Perfetto nor his psychiatrist who is not working at SPEW is in a position necessarily to know firsthand.

So why isn't the proper remedy remand to fill in the holes that have been articulated by the chief?

Because I think the lesson that sends about the significance of proffers and stipulations and waivers, this is not just a stipulation. They waived the argument that there was any problem with this.

But if the amicus is correct that there's a requirement that Mr. Perfetto is to be kept separate. And clearly, group therapy isn't going to work here in New Hampshire, right?

Right.

So does it make any sense to bring them back across the country? Does this ship them off somewhere else?

Well, that's what Mr. Perfetto wants. He is more eager to be back in SPEW than he is to be where he is now.

What I read in that amicus brief is that there's some inmate, apparently a fairly powerful figure within the New Hampshire Department of Corrections who doesn't like Mr. Perfetto.

And we are grateful that they're concerned about the influence that person might have over his placement.

But that can't be a reason that Mr. Perfetto doesn't get the treatment he needs.

And I have every expectation that the professionals employed at the SPEW will perform their jobs in good faith and competently.

And they have single-cell housing units in SPEW so people can be kept separate from other inmates.

I guess the principal problem is to give the state the second chance that it shouldn't have had.

Why is it that who bears the burden on establishing that it's in the health and comfort of the person?

I don't think that's the state's burden, but Mr. Perfetto is the petitioner.

That's right, but he proffered it. He pleaded and he proffered it, and they didn't contest it.

He proffered evidence that says he needs a certain kind of therapy.

He did not proffer evidence that that therapy is available at SPEW.

It's in everyone's best interest to get the right decision here and to get him where he needs to be in terms of his health.

What is the downside of doing as Justice Hicks suggests?

Well, one is delay. It'll take that much more time.

And secondly, there is absolutely no reason to think that the SPEW has jettisoned a successful and inexpensive treatment like group therapy.

And we read in the amicus brief a bunch of things the Department of Correction has come forward and said that are important.

It's pure speculation. We're being asked to make a decision about what's best for this individual. We need facts.

Well, the second thing I would say is that we know for facts because it is in the proffer.

And it's all that Mr. Perfetto can proffer as recently as the last time he was in SPEW, they had group therapy.

Where's the reason to think they don't do it anymore?

Past practice is some evidence of current practice, so I say that could satisfy it.

Or group therapy that can be managed given the no contact provision.

Do we know? I mean, do we know his prior experience had that same limitation?

I don't know for sure, but maybe Attorney Garland can help us.

Possibly.

I guess my biggest concern is going through the motions.

And to the extent Mr. Perfetto made his case and he comes back here and he's no longer eligible and now he's shipped off back to Montana or somewhere else.

Does that really accomplish the purpose of this statute?

Because we don't believe that's what's going to happen because he has pled insanity.

He has pled and he did receive previously, the last time he was there, the services in SPEW that were conducive to his health and comfort.

He's always been the same person that he is now.

And he still had to be relocated after that treatment, right?

Right. Well, they chose to relocate him.

Right.

In his own interest they said.

Because he was discharged and couldn't go back into general population.

Right.

But nevertheless, I mean, I hope the court can perceive the frustration that it's because there's some other inmate who hates him.

And because they had a chance to contest these facts, we pled them for every information we could have because the assistant attorney declined to answer questions.

Mr. Perfetto waits and he waits and he waits for the relief he should have already had.

With respect to the insanity prong, New Hampshire law, I think, famously does not define insanity.

We don't have them not in test.

What we have is mental disease and defect.

There's no preserved objection to that definition.

The state suggests that insanity implies a lack of criminal and civil responsibility.

I think that's the legal effect of a finding of insanity is that you are not responsible.

It's not the symptom of insanity.

New Hampshire's test, as it's been referred to, its mental disease or defect, he has that.

And again, with respect to the health and comfort prong, you know, it's also asserted and currently true.

He's certainly not getting it in Montana.

And that was part of the proffer.

And so whether he also won't get it here, the place he used to get it, we would say, is a sufficient proffer.

Where did the Superior Court make a finding on health and comfort?

Well, what happened is, I mean, the Superior Court...

In its order, where did...

I mean, what happened, my understanding of what happened is the Superior Court didn't address a lot of this on the merits

because the state stipulated and waived.

And so I think that the real question is, under what circumstances does a court have an obligation to go beyond a represented litigants waiver?

I mean, what is the trial judge to do when he's begging for a coherent explanation of the state's argument?

And are you sure you don't want to ask questions of this witness?

And what comes out...

And he writes in the order, my understanding is you agree that if the statute applies at all, he's entitled to the relief.

I don't think in an adversary system, the court has a duty to look beyond that,

and despite the fact that the party is agreeing...

The adverse party is agreeing to the facts, that there's some further duty to go beyond that.

And so I don't think it matters that it's not in the order.

Well, it happens all the time in the criminal context, doesn't it?

That the court goes beyond by way of a call with the defendant?

The defendant is waiving rights?

I think that's part of establishing that there is a waiver.

Sort of at the end of the plea colloquy, it's now we know there's a waiver.

I mean, certainly the state proffers, these are the facts on which we would rely,

but I think that all goes in important part to whether the waiver is knowing.

I'm sorry, go ahead, Gene.

I know I'm belaboring this, but the...

I was trying to help you.

I think the best characterization that I could find is in the transcript is the county attorney said,

I stipulate to the findings in the report.

And then with respect to whether spew set aside insanity,

but whether spew is the right place for Mr. Perfetto, the expert...

All I could find is it is my opinion with reasonable medical certainty

that Mr. Perfetto would benefit from additional psychiatric services

and is unlikely he will experience similar bad habits

should he be limited to the services currently available at Montana State Prison.

That is quite different than saying he should be at the secure psychiatric unit.

But what the expert Lampagnano had before him was a recitation of the services

Mr. Perfetto had received there in the relatively recent past.

And I think the expert said, I assume that those services are still available.

And when the state and even in the amicus brief, it doesn't come forward and say

those services are not still available.

There's a lot about Perfetto's enemies, but there's nothing that says,

by the way, also we don't do group therapy anymore.

Are you completely dismissive of any separation of powers notions here?

I don't think it's developed for one thing.

But secondly, this is a statute that says it.

It says that the governor and council or the superior court has this power.

Yeah. I mean, I think when my recollection of separation of powers law

is when the legislature speaks clearly, I mean, there can be times where

a legislatures takes power from one branch that it can't take.

But the legislature has spoken clearly that this is something that it wants

and there's not a developed argument that they can't do that.

If Mr. Perfetto gets back here, the court order says you need to get back here

and be admitted to SBU and it's clinically determined by the medical director

there that he does not belong there.

So I think they would, I mean, the SBU can't turn him away at the door

because that would be, what's the point of the statute then?

What SBU would have to do is accept him, enroll him, evaluate him,

assess him, who is he now?

And if after that process of developing new information, they say,

you know what, he doesn't belong here anymore, fine.

We're not saying they have some duty to keep him for X amount of time,

but they do have a duty to act in good faith and receive him and look at him now.

They can't just say, based on old information about him, we disagree with the superior court.

But beyond that, no, I quite agree.

I mean, it's in good faith they would assess where he is now

and determine whether that placement's appropriate.

Thank you.

Thank you, Tony Todd.

Tony Woodcock.

Thank you, Your Honor.

I would just point out, when the court is asking about these group therapy sessions

at the Secure Psychiatric Unit, we know that they existed in 2017.

That's when Mr. Perfetto was moved to Montana.

We don't have anything on the record that suggests that they exist today.

The concern that the court has expressed in some of its questions,

I think really hit the point.

It is in everyone's best interest to have the record developed in this case.

And there are a couple of reasons for that.

The first is, obviously, it's important for any subsequent review

of Mr. Perfetto's situation that the record be clear,

that if for at some point he wants to challenge something as part of a petition

for a writ of habeas corpus or something like that,

it's important to have a clear record on this particular point.

The second thing is, it's important from the standpoint of other inmates

who may be qualified for spew but can't get in because now a bed is being held.

So I think that the court had an obligation that went beyond its questioning

of the assistant county attorney who was clearly from the hearing transcript

was the wrong person to be presenting the state's position.

He was not informed enough to do it, he didn't understand the statute,

and he didn't represent the Department of Corrections.

The last thing that I would say is that Mr. Johnson was talking about how

spew has single-cell housing units and they can keep Mr. Perfetto safe.

That's not on the record.

We don't know that.

We don't know what provisions the Secure Psychiatric Unit could be able to provide him.

But we do know from the amicus brief that there is a keep separate provision

and that should concern everyone.

Thank you, Your Honor.

I would ask the case to be submitted.

Your Honor.
