This is case 220067, state of New Hampshire versus Odessa Lemieux.

Good morning, attorney Gordon.

You're staying here reserved two minutes.

I am.

I'm Joshua Gordon.

I represent the defendant, Odessa Lemieux, who was here on court from this morning.

The state had to prove in the totality of the circumstances that Odessa knowingly

endangered children by purposely violating their duty of care.

Odessa was not endangering children.

She was trying to fix a problem with her children, urinating.

She had tried everything before diet, medication, pull-ups.

She'd been told it was a behavioral problem.

So she tried timeouts and scheduled bathroom breaks.

Odessa brought the kids to the doctor in an effort to solve the problem.

That's not child endangerment.

That's a trouble mother seeking solutions.

And Odessa didn't violate her duty of care.

She was discharging, trying to be a good mother.

Perhaps not particularly effective or exemplary parenting, but not like the other

cases that have been cited by the state where kids were locked away for days or

months or even years in appalling conditions.

If Odessa had not gone to the doctor, we wouldn't be here.

That's the action not of a criminal, but of a concerned mother.

I also want to address preservation.

This case presents perhaps the most terse example of emotion to dismiss,

most of her directed verdict that one can imagine.

But it was enough to preserve Odessa's sufficiency arguments.

This case is controlled by State v. Gordon.

There, this court said in 2011, the defendant moved to dismiss the state's case on the ground that the evidence was insufficient.

Nothing more was required to preserve.

So in this case, Attorney Barnes, did he move to dismiss both charges?

Is that clear from the record?

Or can it be said that they were just looking to dismiss the witness tampering charge?

He didn't specify, he just said, in fact, he didn't even say the word to dismiss.

The judge said, can I hear the motion now when he said yes?

And I cited to McNamara, where judges essentially do that all the time.

McNamara's book, it's miscited, it's chapter 32, pardon my brief.

But the state admits that the defendant argued in her opening closing that she was trying to parent well, and she did.

And requiring an overly specific motion for directed verdict would just create an effect of assistance.

Council claims whenever a trial attorney failed to specify a hole in the state's evidence,

that some clever appellate attorney with the luxury of a transcript might later uncover.

But even if that motion was enough to preserve a sufficiency claim,

how does that allow this good parenting argument to go forward?

Well, she argued sufficiency, and I'm arguing with sufficiency now.

So those, they're too far.

But good parenting is not an element.

Good parenting isn't, but the knowingly endangering children and

by purposely violating a duty of care is a sufficiency issue, so sufficiency is preserved.

So if she had the best of intentions, that's not a Trump card here, is it?

Well, it's hard to imagine one having the best of intentions and

doing things that endangerment cases have, the babysitter getting drunk,

or the terrible cases of Maine that have been cited.

Those are not good intentions.

Odessa here had good intentions.

She didn't knowingly endanger the children.

She was trying to do exactly the opposite.

And she didn't purposely violate her duty of care.

She was purposely trying to discharge her duty of care.

I think what happened in this case is that there was a felony

tried alongside this for witness tampering.

And I suspect that neither the State nor the Defense Council

gave too much attention to the misdemeanor that was sort of stuck onto the back of it.

And so things like the photographs were not even authenticated in any way.

I'm not suggesting that's an error here because it's not preserved.

But those sorts of things happen, and Ted Barnes, the attorney Barnes,

just said yes to the preservation solicitation by the judge.

He answered yes, and that preserves the issue.

So would you agree that at some point locking a child in the room would endanger the child?

You say that this doesn't, 12 hours isn't enough, but at some point that's going to be enough, isn't it?

Well, at some point, and at least the reporting cases, are in conjunction that the locking

in the room seems almost ancillary to the other terrible things that the parent did.

Is there some amount of time?

Of course, if the parent locks the child in the room for a year, that's going to be child endangerment.

At some point is withholding food, child endangerment?

Pardon me?

At some point is withholding food, child endangerment.

Well, of course it is, but that's not an issue here.

There's several issues in the state's brief that just are not here.

The trial judge specifically set aside any food problems.

The state tried this at trial, and Ted Barnes objected and the judge granted that.

So the endangerment charges strictly based on locking the children in their bedrooms on occasion?

That's what it appears to be.

The information says by tying the children in the rooms at night.

So is it your argument that the state needed to prove the specific mechanism by which the

doors were locked as alleged in the complaint?

Well, I think they did.

I think they had to prove that, and they did not prove it.

There's no proof that the doors were tied.

They may have been closed in some other fashion, but there's no proof that they were tied.

Well, didn't Ms. testify that the doors were tied and she couldn't open them?

Yes, but how did she know?

She was inside.

So she might have tried to open them from something.

She might have tried to open the door.

That would be some evidence that there was an impediment.

Yeah.

Right.

Maybe.

But there's no connection between those alleged ties or black fabric and the closing

of the door.

That's true.

And the misdemeanor complaint was very specific.

It said by tying around the doorknob and wrapped around nails, it didn't just say by barricading

the door.

If it said just by barricading the door, the state would not have erected that, their own

barrier to themselves.

There was evidence of nail holes too, correct?

There was evidence of nail holes.

But this was a seasonal rental.

This occurred on May 28th and 29th and 30th.

The seasonal rental was ending and these people were moving out of the house to make

way for the summer rentals.

And we don't know if those nail holes pre-existed their occupancy or not.

We know nothing about the nail holes other than they were there.

And your argument is that children circumvented any endangerment by urinating in their

bed?

They circumvented by urinating in their bed.

You know, it's not, like I said, exemplary parenting, but it's not endangering in

the way that the cases that we see where these appalling conditions are obviously

endangering.

This is not that.

This was a mother trying to do the right thing.

You know, she tried four, five, or six solutions and they didn't seem to work and she tried

this.

That's not right.

Mr. Gordon, would you agree that even though the adequacy of the food in and of

itself is not a stand-alone basis for this charge, that the fact that the children were

told that if they left the room they would not be fed, that can be taken into account,

can it be?

Well, it can't because it's not charged conduct.

It's just it's not relevant.

Well, but if the children were told that if you have an accident in your bed,

you don't get dinner, that seems to, which is what the testimony is.

It seems to me that that is relevant to the jury's assessment of the situation here.

Whether or not food was actually withheld if that's what they were told, that's relevant,

isn't it?

I don't see how it's relevant.

The charge is barricading the door with a tie.

That's the charge.

But the defense is it was part of parenting and if the parenting, as you responded to the

chief, was that they weren't endangered because they could urinate in their room.

But then if that brought on this consequence, they really didn't have a choice.

So doesn't that make it relevant to the restraint claim?

No, I don't think it does.

If the charge is locking the door in a certain fashion, and she, they're a constitute endangerment

or it does not, and the other things that the family did for discipline are just not part

of the case.

Well, I would testify that they were locked in their rooms because sometimes they stole

food at night.

So why wouldn't the food deprivation be relevant then if that was the reason

why the children were being locked because they were stealing food that they weren't entitled

to?

Isn't that relevant?

Oh, I suppose maybe it may as a motive, but I don't think that's the reason that the

children were locked in the room.

And I don't think that's what the state set out to prove and I don't think that's

what the evidence shows.

They were locked in the room because they were urinating.

That was, you know, I don't pretend to condone that as excellent parenting,

but that was the testimony and that's what the record suggests.

If I see no more questions, thank you very much.

Tony Woodcock.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Please support Elizabeth Woodcock for the State of New Hampshire.

I'd just like to address three different points quickly in the Defendants'

Library.

The first is that the defendant says that the state misrepresented the record

in respect to weight loss.

The second is on this food deprivation issue.

And the third is on this innuendo of prosecutorial misconduct.

With respect to weight loss, the defendant writes in her reply brief,

there is no evidence of weight loss.

There is evidence of weight loss.

The pediatric nurse practitioner on page 27 of the transfer referred twice

to weight loss.

She said that she looked for other causes of weight loss and said,

I thought for the amount of weight loss and then she began to try to eliminate

other causes.

On page 30 of the trial transcript, the nurse did say that she did not

know the number of the little boy, Dee's, weight loss.

And it's not clear to me that she had the medical records with her.

But she did refer to a drop from the 40th percentile in weight to the fourth.

The objection to the nurse's testimony referred to in the Defendants'

reply brief appears on page 24, three pages before the twice referred

to weight loss.

And the objection didn't address weight loss.

The defendant was objecting to was a confusion over which of the

children the nurse practitioner was testifying about.

So they approached the objection was to try to straighten out

whether they were talking about all four of the children or just

two of the children.

The testimony on page 27 that the two children had lost weight

drew no objection.

With respect to food deprivation, on page 8 the defendant writes,

food deprivation is not an issue.

She then quotes the court's ruling based on a hearsay objection on

page 104, which the trial court sustained.

The objection, the question, and the answer are not quoted by the

defendant.

The question was, were you able to look in the kitchen?

The answer was yes.

Based on what the children told the reporter and told myself,

there were some things that I needed to look further into.

And in the home, I went into the kitchen and there was

adequate.

At that point the defense objected.

And there was a short sideburn.

The court then sustained the objection based on the hearsay

basis and the court told the jury that looking for adequate

food on this hearsay basis was not an issue for them to

consider.

It struck none of the little girls testimony that the

children were being systematically starved because they

were urinating in the house.

It struck none of the child's testimony that punishment

was imposed because they were being deprived of the ordinary

access to a place to go and relieve themselves.

Food deprivation is not only an issue.

It is part of the torture visited on these four

children because they were being punished for something

beyond their control.

Now finally, there have been two innuendos about

prosecutorial misconduct.

On page 19 and 20 of the defendant's brief and again on

page 10 of the reply brief, the defendant suggests that the

prosecution in this case was unethical.

There is no evidence that the prosecutor wrote the note on

the photograph about the two black ties found in the

parent's bedroom.

And in fact, if this court considers it, there is a very

good reason to conclude that the prosecutor did not write

these things and that there was no interest in trying to

improperly influence the jury as it suggested in the

defendant's brief.

Prosecutors do not want to remain witnesses in their

own cases.

Writing a note on a piece of evidence that a prosecutor

intends to introduce makes the prosecutor a witness

in the case.

All a defense attorney would have to do is to ask the fact

witness whose handwriting is that and now the evidence

either gets excluded or there is a mistrust because the

prosecutor is now a witness in the case.

Absent evidence to the contrary, this court should

conclude that the prosecutor in this case was

neither unethical nor so foolhardy as to sabotage

the state's case.

I would now entertain the court's questions.

Ms. Woodcock, what's the state's response to Mr.

Gordon's argument that the mother had the best of

intentions here?

She was just trying to be a good parent.

She tried many other things and only got to this point

because of frustration and the fact that other

approaches hadn't worked.

State's closing address the testimony of the blue

girl M, her testimony is inconsistent with good

intentions.

And when Justice Hans Marconi mentioned the fact that

we didn't know who was trying to repair the doors,

we don't know that.

We do know, however, that there was spackle and

repairing tools to repair the doors and it seems

inconsistent with renting an apartment or a house.

If you move into the house and the damage is already

done, you don't have any obligation to try to repair it.

You only have the obligation to repair it if you've

done the damage.

I would also point out that the children were

brought in at the end of May and the search warrant

was not executed for two weeks after that.

So the defendant and her husband were on notice

that they were under investigation and she certainly

knew what the allegations were because she stood there

and listened to the children tell the nurse practitioner

what had been going on in their house.

How much more was the defense counsel required to

say when making the sufficiency motion at the

end of the case?

I think that you have to say when the court says

do you have a motion?

I guess I should and I think that you have to say

something more than that.

I think you need to explain to the court why you

think that the evidence is insufficient.

And granted the court did say your motion is

denied but I have heard many lawyers stand

aside from it.

And when the court, the defense attorney gets up

and says I'd like the micromotion to dismiss

and the court says denied.

The lawyer then says to the court for the record

you're on I'd like to make it clear what my

objections are, where I find the evidence

insufficient.

The court always lasts the defense attorney to do

that and that wasn't done in this case.

So the notion that somehow this sufficiency

argument that you can create a new sufficiency

argument on appeal that you did not present in

the trial court is simply at odds with this.

But the trial court clearly knew that this was

a sufficiency challenge.

It says that the state has met its burden

throughout each of the elements.

So everybody knew what was going on.

Well the trial court made that decision that

ruling your honor but the defense attorney never

said to the court, no your honor this is why

it is insufficient.

This is good parenting or this is good intentions

or this is good anything.

He just simply said mm-hmm.

We could still review it for plain error, correct?

You could review it for plain error but the

defense isn't asking you to do that.

Well we get to do it all on our own.

Well you certainly could but I would suggest to

you that the plain error test is not met here.

The part of the plain error test is that the

result undermines confidence in judicial proceedings.

I don't think that anybody looking at the fact

pattern in this case would have a lack of

confidence in the outcome of this verdict.

Those children were being damaged by

But this is not a neglect proceeding or an

abuse proceeding.

This is a misdemeanor criminal proceeding and

don't we require the state to prove the

elements as outlined in the complaint?

Which was very specific here.

It wasn't generic.

It was very specific by restraining the

children in their bedrooms for multiple hours

at night by using a tether implement around

the doorknob and wrapped around nails so

they were restrained in their rooms with no

means of a safe escape.

Isn't that what needed to be proven?

And I guess what I'm hearing is it was

proven circumstantially but not all the

specific elements.

Well I think that that might have been a

very good argument for the defense attorney

today to the trial court but he didn't make it.

Bear in mind that the little girl who

testified testified that she knew that there

were tethers.

People didn't ask her how she knew it.

She said she knew it.

Unchallenged.

That's the court's record.

There are a number of different ways that

she could have known it.

She kept saying as she was talking about

it that there were different times that

the children were constrained at different

points.

They were all being homeschooled and so

there is a high likelihood that the little

girl saw the tethers.

The nail holes and the spackle goes to

support them.

But the other thing is bear in mind that as

the children were, I mean it was just

sort of like an avalanche of words as I

understand it to the nurse practitioner

the defendant stood there and said

none.

She didn't.

So this idea of knowingly how do you

respond to if the defendant's thinking

she's doing something for their benefit

how does the state get to the knowing

aspect?

Well I don't think that the evidence is

clear that she really thought that she

was doing it for children's benefit.

Your Honor, she denied the children's

allegations in her interview that was

and what standard do we apply a reasonable

parent or do we need to know that this

particular individual had that knowledge

that this was endangering her children?

I think that you deferred to the

jury's verdict.

The situation is one in which the

year nation was punished by a severe

deprivation of food and all you have to

do is read Ms. Desmoni and then read

what the nurse practitioner says.

She doesn't say for example the children

weren't simply maintaining their weight.

She said that they were losing weight

and a child if the 40th percentile was

two or possibly three years before

and it had now dropped to the fourth percentile.

Yet the charge isn't depriving

deprivation of food.

It is restraint in their rooms.

The deprivation of food is a direct

result of the restraint in their rooms.

They cannot leave their rooms and when

they are when they urinate they are

punished for doing it by depriving

them of food.

That's what the case was and that's

what the state proved and that is

enough for this criminal conviction

to be upheld.

If there are no further questions

I see my yellow light is on and I will

yield the podium.

Thank you.

Okay.

Case is submitted.
