This is case 2022-0145, In Ray Robert T. Keeler maintenance fund for the Hanover Country Club at Dartmouth College.

Yes, thank you, Claire. The record will reflect that Justice MacDonald and Bassett are disqualified on this case.

Mr. LeBeau, you have saved two minutes for rebuttal, and Mr. Holmes, you have split your time with Mr. Haley, 10-5.

Correct? Thank you.

Go ahead, Mr. LeBeau.

May it please the court, my name is John LeBeau. I represent the estate of Robert T. Keeler, and a charitable foundation formed by Mr. Keeler, known as the Robert T. Keeler Foundation.

The central issue here in this matter is our right to standing in a CyPray proceeding.

We stand here before you today because of two things. First, Dartmouth College has determined to completely terminate the existence of its golf course.

It was this golf course, the preservation of which was the sole and exclusive purpose of Robert Keeler's charitable gift.

Speaking of preservation, before we get to that, can you tell me why this case is timely?

Are you appealing the decision of Judge Rappa regarding your intervention?

Yes, we are.

Okay, and that decision was made when?

Okay, so we made the decision to appeal this after the denial of our motion for interlocutory appeal and the simultaneous final order of this case.

But the motion to intervene was denied in December, I believe, right?

The motion, the denial of the motion to intervene was denied on February 18th.

So Judge Rappa's order that's part of your notice of appeal, which is dated December 23rd, 2021. That's not an issue here?

That is an issue, but that's the denial of our motion to intervene.

Alright, so under Rule Supreme Court Rule 3, it says a trial court order denying a motion by a non-party to intervene in a trial court proceeding is treated as a final decision on the merit for purposes of appeal.

So how do you get around that?

We filed a motion to reconsider on the 7th of January. That motion to reconsider was denied on January 20th.

This went out on the 21st. We filed a motion for interlocutory appeal on February 4th, and we kept our right to timely appeal alive by post-judgment motions, and they were in succession, and each one and each step was timely.

Can you point to me to a case where we've ever decided something like that?

Well, I cannot point to a case right now where we're relying on the rules. The rules are crystal clear on this. As long as they are timely post-judgment motions, which they were in succession, the timeliness of our appeal was preserved.

Again, I'll point you to the comment to Rule 3, which says an order is immediately appealable to the Supreme Court. But so into this rule, such an appeal is not a mandatory appeal. It's a discretionary appeal.

Right.

When that motion was denied, you should have appealed it within 30 days.

We did.

When our motion to, if you're talking about the motion for interlocutory appeal, our motion for interlocutory appeal was timely, and our appeal from the denial of that motion was timely thereafter.

When our motion to intervene was denied, the case was not final per se. It was still open.

But under our rules, you're supposed to appeal that immediately.

Well, we were given the right to file an amicus brief.

How's that changing?

Well, I believe that the fact that we kept open, we had appeal immediately unless you have a timely post-judgment order.

And so I believe the rules in this regard are crystal clear that the need to appeal the denial of our motion for reconsideration was extended by another timely post-judgment motion.

And then when that was denied, we appealed timely therefrom.

And we didn't, I don't have authority on the point because the rule seems to be totally clear on this.

I agree with you that they're clear, but I don't think they're clear in your favor.

Can we talk about the standard for intervention?

Yes, we can talk about the standard for intervention.

What we have here is probably our single most important piece is that I'll start with the fact that my clients, the estate of Robert Keeler and the Robert T. Keeler Foundation,

would be beneficiaries to a situation in which if the application of CyPray was not an available remedy because of any of the key elements of proving CyPray,

which in this case is there would have had to have been an impracticality or impossibility to the donor's purpose,

that purpose could not have been rendered unavailing because of the Donys own voluntary act.

And then finally there had to be a finding that in the gift instrument there was a general intent beyond and separate from the specific purpose that was being claimed to be unavailing anymore.

None of those things happened.

You don't agree then that this was a completed gift?

Totally agree that this is a completed gift.

Your Honor, when you look at the category cases from which this is dealt with, third-party special understanding, one of the things that all of these cases have in common is that there have been completed gifts.

The fact that there is a completed gift does not in any way, shape or form, remove the obligation to follow the donor's directions.

Then what special interest do you have that's not protected by the Attorney General's office in this case?

So what we have is this concept that appears honored in the opinion of the Justices, a case in 1957, which says that when the doctrine of CyPray does not avail,

there is a resulting trust back to the donor's estate or the donor's heirs.

So we have the concept that-

So why isn't CyPray an adequate remedy here? I guess that's where we're going.

Well, were the CyPray conditions followed here? CyPray would not have availed for all three of the reasons that I mentioned here.

There was no inquiry. There was absolutely no inquiry into whether or not Dartmouth's situation was of its own making or whether it was impractical.

What you're saying that nobody looked into that?

They didn't look into it. In fact, when you look at the appendix at pages 150 to 162, this catalogs in detail what the Director of Charitable Trust did.

What they did, they spent a great deal of energy, but they did not spend it on determining whether or not there was an impracticality.

If they had, they would have discovered that Dartmouth alumni had mobilized $22 million of liquid cash unrestricted to the college if they would keep the golf course open.

And the Friends of Dartmouth golf had mobilized another 15 years of subsidy for both of the golf teams so that the idea that the golf course was some kind of economic albatross around their neck was simply not true.

And had there been any inquiry by the Director of Charitable Trust into the actual circumstances of this supposed impracticality.

Also referenced in our library, the Valley News reports back in 2019 that the college was planning to quite possibly repurpose the golf course for something else.

This had nothing to do, had nothing to do with COVID.

None of this was inquired into. The Director of Charitable Trust spent its entire time on figuring out, okay, what are we going to change it to?

There was no inquiry into the general charitable intent. CyPray will not lie unless, in addition to and beyond the specific and narrow purpose stated in the gift instrument, that there was a general charitable intent.

In this case, we have a very unique situation. It is unique when a donate seeks to completely terminate the facility that's being funded by the donor.

The other thing that's unique is that this gift, the gift instrument included something that's called the Statement of Understanding.

And that particular statement of understanding was like a negotiated contract. We say that it is a contract.

But whether it's a contract or not, it makes absolutely crystal clear one thing.

What the donor said is, if you're not going to use this funds for the physical plant of the golf course, then give it back to my foundation.

Absolutely crystal clear, absolutely agreed to.

You're referring to the language involving the excess funds, is that correct?

That's correct. And of course we do circle back to the reality that it was a completed gift.

Yes, it was a completed gift. But again, what we have here is, there should have been a defense of the donor's intention and the CyPray doctrine should have been applied.

Why can't you file a breach of contract action against the college and raise these claims in that fashion?

That is a possibility that we have. Yes, it is.

But I would say that what we have here, I mean, perhaps our single most important claim here is that the Director of Charitable Trust was ineffective here.

So we have a situation where when you look at the application, nowhere in the application from Dartmouth College does it claim that the donor's purpose has been rendered unlawful, impractical,

or impossible to achieve, or wasteful. It's not even alleged. There was no adjudicatory hearing whatsoever.

When our motion for interlocutory appeal was denied, the court summarily granted the application, there having been no adjudication whatsoever.

No adjudication whatsoever. And what has gone on here is that...

What do you call Judge Rappas' order? Something other than an adjudication? It's rather thorough.

Well, there was no merits hearing. There was no submission of evidence.

Even in our hearing on the motion to intervene, the court's order is erroneous because it says there was a full evidentiary hearing.

No witnesses testified. There were no offers of proof with regard to witnesses.

There wasn't a single document introduced into evidence. Not a single document.

There was a three-ring binder that was placed into the record that was shown to counsel from my office that was representing the interveners at the time.

And that attorney from my office had not seen any of those documents until the moment that hearing started.

They were never tendered or introduced as an exhibit. They were never offered as an exhibit.

Is there any reason to think that the court didn't review them?

There's every reason to believe that the court did review them after the fact because the trial court refers extensively to them as if they were tendered as exhibits and accepted.

We did not see these documents and were not asked to accept them into evidence. They weren't even tendered into evidence.

And so you have a situation where the record would reflect if you look at the transcript that counsel for Dartmouth College attorney Holmes seems to have anticipated that there would be a merits hearing,

an adjudicatory merits hearing on the application. There was none. There was none.

Can you discuss before your time runs out the distinction between the executor being involved and the foundation? Does that make a difference?

Well, so what we do is that what we look at is the language in the opinion of the justices in the 1957 case and the related case law.

It indicates that when the donor's purpose has been completely frustrated and the funds can't be used and the doctrine of Cyprate does not lie,

that those funds revert back either to the estate of the donor or the donor's heirs.

And so we have the estate but the actual intended heir quite clearly in the statement of understanding is going to be the Robert T. Keeler foundation because you have unique circumstances here.

If I could just address this which is the doctrine of Cyprate according to the comments in the Uniform Act clearly say that the Cyprate full application was supposed to happen.

No such thing happened. I see my time is up.

Please.

You may finish your point though.

Okay.

In that, pick up my train here and in addition to that.

The Uniform Code.

Sorry?

You were speaking about the Uniform Code.

Oh yeah, Uniform Code.

So this was supposed to be beneficial to charitable donors. The outcome in this case if it stands is extremely bad for charitable donors.

If this is all it takes to frustrate the purposes of a charitable donor under these circumstances, an application to the probate court has been converted to an application to the director of charitable trust.

The only approval that was needed here was that of the director of charitable trust.

There was no adjudication. There was no acceptance of a merits hearing on the part of the judge.

The judge jumped right to a final order just on the strength of the assent from the director.

Thank you.

Yep.

You preserved two minutes.

Mr. Holmes.

Good morning.

I'm here for Dartmouth College.

My colleague from the Attorney General's Office will speak to the issues of the timeliness of the appeal.

I'm going to direct my comments to whether the appellants had standing below.

The issue is whether the probate court correctly ruled that appellants lacked standing to participate in this charitable fund modification proceeding the college brought under RSA 292B63.

I'm happy to address questions at any time.

There are three reasons that the court's ruling was correct.

One, appellants have no retained interest in the fund under either the last will and testament or the statement of understanding memorializing the gift.

Two, the governing statute does not give them any right to even notice to the proceeding, let alone to participate in it.

And three, appellants have no standing under this court's Mary Baker eddy case for charitable trust matters.

Do the Glasgow factors even apply to this situation?

Actually, I don't think the court needs to get to the eddy case at all.

But the court certainly would have the discretion to do so if it found that, you know, under that multi-factor test that there were extraordinary circumstances.

Particularly, you know, I think under the case law, generally not so much as articulated by this court in the past that the attorney general's office was asleep at the switch.

And if I could just speak to that right now.

Would you please?

Yeah, I'd be happy to.

The appendix includes, first of all, Judge Rappa made a finding on the record in his order that the attorney general's involvement in this case in his words was meaningful and significant.

And there is ample evidence in the record to support that finding.

The appendix includes an exhibit that includes the correspondence, time records and other information with a chronology upfront documenting over months the attorney general's involvement in this matter.

Was it necessary for the attorney general to conduct an investigation as to whether the college could financially carry the golf course in the future?

Or was there any investigation of that nature?

There was certainly consideration of that issue indeed in the transcript at the hearing which opposing counsel attended.

Attorney Donovan on the record explained that his office had reviewed the last will and testament.

Had reviewed the statement of understanding.

Took into account the financial factors involving my client and the information that we put into the record included that Dartmouth College had at that time a $150 million institutional operating deficit.

And with regard to the operation of the Hanover Country Club was having annual deficits of $500 to $700,000 per year, not taking into account the $4 million in deferred maintenance.

Mr. Donovan who is here today told Judge Rappa that in light of these financial considerations his office considered that the CyPray standard for impracticable had been met under a variety of different legal standards.

He also talked about that his office had in communication with the college in our office had insisted that the modification be very narrow.

How was the donor's donor of the completed gift? How was the donor's intent served by the status quo in this case?

You mean by the modification?

No, how is it served by the Rappa's order? How is the donor's intent served?

By the, well certainly it is served if you take a look at the statement of understanding which is the operative document.

It has at the heading purpose, what the purpose of the gift is.

And the only persons who are identified to benefit for the purpose of this gift are future generations of Dartmouth students and members of the Dartmouth community.

There's no mention of the foundation, there's no mention of the estate.

So you're telling the court that the CyPray doctrine in this case has served by the college's alternative use of the proceeds?

I am absolutely saying that. And so counsel was critical of Judge Rappa's not having a further hearing on this.

But he did have a hearing in which I presented the information concerning the financial constraints that my client was facing.

Mr. Donovan made a statement on the record and Judge Rappa talked about all this in the record.

He then gave them an opportunity to speak to the merits by filing an amicus filing and they didn't do it.

So it's somewhat ironic that they're then critical of Judge Rappa for not having a further hearing on the merits when they had an opportunity to speak to them and they waived it.

How do you respond to the arguments concerning the exhibits that Judge Rappa considered?

Was there an objection to the exhibits? Did they enter into evidence?

Yes. So I showed up early to the court as did Attorney Goudreau. I provided them to her. I provided them to everybody.

I then addressed them in my comments to the court. There was no objection. There was no request to keep the record open.

There was no request to conduct discovery on the information.

So from your point of view, it was an understanding that that was part of the record?

Absolutely.

But at that point, the interveners weren't in the case. The opposed interveners weren't part of the case.

They weren't parties.

They weren't parties.

Well, they were parties to that hearing because it was a hearing on their motion and certainly they would have...

Although your binder was on the merits, right?

No.

Well, my binder was on both because their pitch to the court was that they have to participate

because the closure of the golf course is something that is inappropriate and they need to be there.

I was addressing issues that they had raised which happened to be the ultimate merits as well.

So in the future, any completed gift would have to include additional language in your view not part of this statement that would set forth

if any changes are made that the donor or the estate or the beneficiaries have to agree.

Are parties to that change?

It is my view and it is the case law of this court.

This court has held multiple times that in order for there to be a right of reverberation,

which is really what they're claiming, it has to be explicit in the document.

It is not to be implied and it was totally foreseeable that we would be here today

because both the will and the statement of understanding talks about future generations of Dartmouth students.

That goes on ad infinitum and it is to be understood that the golf course at some time might need to be closed or changed

and it would be just if Mr. Keeler wanted that, he could have put it in his will

and if that had been an agreement, it would be in this document and it's not there.

And the new proposal is also available to residents of the community?

I'm sorry?

The new proposal.

The new use?

The new use is also available to community residents.

We have this case kind of hanging over it so I'm able to represent that my client is actively investigating uses of this property

and it continues to own consistent with the requirements of both the director of charitable trust and the probate court.

So some sort of, I understand the new use is golf related in one aspect, supportive of the golf teams,

but it could be more than that, more than golf related?

We don't know.

I think we don't know and I don't know because I'm not participating directly in that process.

The golf limitation pertains to these funds.

So thank you very much.

Thank you, Mr. Holmes.

Mr. Haley?

May it please the court?

My name is Michael Haley.

I serve as the assistant director of charitable trusts at the New Hampshire Department of Justice.

I do, as Mr. Holmes noted, want to talk about the standard or the timeliness of the appeal,

but first there's been some discussion about our office's involvement in this case

and I just wanted to make clear that we were extensively involved over the course of six months.

The attorney Holmes provided over a dozen pages of emails documented more than six telephone conferences, meetings, calls,

and even so far as an email where our office redlined their proposal to address your concern, Justice Hans Morconi.

The fund is limited strictly to golf related purposes.

It's in our, the exact language is in our brief, but it is for golf only.

Well, back to your very first point.

There's a remarkable allegation of a gross dereliction of duty on the part of your client and perhaps even you.

Have you fully responded to your satisfaction?

I would not agree with that.

As I've just laid out, our office was extensively involved in this process.

And to the point of this, the allegation that we needed to be deeply involved in an investigation as to the financial viability of the golf course,

I think there's a small distinction but a very important distinction with regard to this fund.

The question here with respect to this fund is not whether maintenance of the golf course had become impossible or impracticable.

This is a fund that exists for maintenance of a golf course.

So the question is, is the fund impossible or impracticable when all it does is support a golf course that is now closed?

It's very common, for example, for schools or for towns to accept a scholarship fund.

And the scholarship fund is for, we recently had one for a home economics program.

Simply because the town has accepted a scholarship for a home economics program does not obligate the town to forever in perpetuity run a home economics program at its school.

Then would you address Justice Donovan's questions?

Yes.

You can talk right to him if you want.

Certainly.

So as far as the timeliness of the appeal, I think it's worth pointing out that New Hampshire Probate Division Rule 79 for the interlocutory appeals,

which is the order that they're now saying they are appealing.

It is relevant to parties.

They were denied party status.

They sought re-hearing of that question and were denied and that is when they should have appealed.

And I know that there may be a question of, so what's the big deal?

And I think it is quite important.

In this instance, at the hearing, our office did not oppose their opportunity to be heard on the, and we did not oppose their motion to intervene.

We don't want to take the position of preventing a charitable organization from being heard in court.

However, now that we do have a final order from the Probate Court setting the disposition of this fund, we do have an interest in having that carried out.

In the situation now, we have $3.8 million in charitable revenue or charitable assets that cannot be used.

They've been held up and can't be used for the donor's purpose for over a year at this point.

That's why it's so important to, at the outset of the proceeding, figure out who all the parties are,

have this intervention issue squared away so that the hearing can be carried out and we can get to an end

and the funds can be used for charitable purposes.

If we go back to the beginning, and they have a whole new hearing and throughout everything we've done so far,

that's going to tie these resources up even further and that's certainly not what the intent of the donor was.

He wanted these funds to be used for his intended charitable purposes and that simply won't happen if we go back and have a do-over of the entire proceeding.

I will speak to a couple of other points that I heard as far as the reverter clause.

Those are extremely common. It's very common to see in a testamentary interest if such and such ceases to be possible,

if such and such closes, then the funds are to go to XYZ and that isn't what happened here.

The will directed that the administrator decide how much money goes to Dartmouth.

She did that. That was memorialized in the statement of understanding which we do not agree as a contract, more or less a receipt.

And then that ended the estate's involvement.

At that point the fund exists at Dartmouth. The purpose is as memorialized in the will and that's the fund that we are looking to...

If it were a contract, is there any daylight between what the funds are perhaps going to be used for and the purpose in the statement?

We will look to the will to see what the donor's intent is.

Although the executor is representing the interest, we would have to go back to the will and that will was pretty clear about what was meant to happen with the fund

and that it was for the maintenance and upkeep of golfers.

Support of golf, right.

Correct.

And as a very final point, if we do reach the question of financial viability of the golf course, this fund is only for maintenance and upkeep of the golf course.

That means it can't fund salaries, it can't fund all sorts of other things.

So the simply the fact that there is this $3.8 million more or less there does not make it possible for Dartmouth to continue to operate the golf course.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Mr. Laveau.

Yes, thank you.

So in response to Justice Donovan's earlier inquiry with regard to authority for the position that we're taking on the timeliness of our appeal, I do have Prime Financial Group versus Masters.

It's a 1996 case from this court, 141 New Hampshire 33.

The summary of this for our purposes now is appeal timely, following two timely file successive motions.

And so there is our authority there, Prime Financial Group versus Masters, a 1996 case.

What I'd like to do is also quickly cite from the in-rate trust matter.

From the text of the opinion, when trustees seek to fundamentally change the charitable request by closing the facility created by the trust,

I've taken out or dissolved incorporation, and the plaintiffs seek to stop this action, then the plaintiffs are more likely to establish standing.

The question of reverter, does the reverter have to be expressly stated?

We have in our brief Evans versus Abney, a 1957 United States Supreme Court case that says reverter does not have to be expressly stated.

We have the opinion of justices in 1957 in New Hampshire case that does not require a reverter to be expressed and that a resulting trust occurs.

I believe the answer to Justice Donovan's question about was the financial condition of the golf course investigated?

It was not.

I think the essence of what has been admitted here is they just took it at face value and did not drill into it.

They didn't know apparently, for example, that $22 million in liquid cash had been put on the table to keep the golf course open and that other things had happened now.

We were not allowed to intervene.

There was no discovery.

There was no participation.

There was nothing in that regard.

I would circle back to this in the statement of understanding.

It says that future generations of Dartmouth students and members of the Dartmouth community may continue to enjoy the great game of golf at the course which he so loved, at the course which he so loved.

The thing, as we've talked about, the thing that was negotiated out in the semi-contractual, if not full out, contractual negotiations with the representative of Dartmouth College is that the clause at some time in the future, it is the opinion of the trustees that all are part of the

income from the fund can no longer be usually applied to the objectives as stated above than the trustees of the college may use the income for another purpose which in their opinion most nearly approximates the donor's objective.

That was expressly rejected.

Your red light is on.

Yes.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Court stands and brief recess.
