This is case 2020-0238, appeal of Town of Roxbury.

Good morning.

Thank you. Good morning.

May it please the Court, Amy Mansonly here for the Town of Roxbury and the Roxbury Planning Board.

Here with me is Mark Funk, Member of the Select Board.

I'd like to reserve two minutes of rebuttal time, please.

Zero, zilch, goose egg, nada.

That is precisely how many times the Housing Appeals Board traveled the roaded issue in this case during a blizzard,

during a washout, during heavy or freezing rain, during mud season,

or in conditions like this past election day.

When there was two feet of snow, trees and power lines down, town plows couldn't up the road,

residents had to fend for themselves, and they eventually got to town meeting early evening.

Now how many times did some of the Planning Board members and the Fire Chief travel the road in those conditions?

Incalculable.

That's not really incalculable.

Yes, they lived on that street, and they've lived on that street since the 90s, so we could do the math.

Maybe they go out six times a day, times two, since 1990, comes out to about 58,000 collective trips.

So these local people have a deep, deep expertise of this road during its best times and during its worst times.

And that sums up the central legal error in this case that infects every other subsidiary issue.

The Housing Appeal Board, the HAB, after its one-time fair weather 46-minute site visit,

unlawfully substituted its own judgment in lieu of the rightful and exclusive Trier Effect, the Roxbury Planning Board.

The HAB should have determined whether the Planning Board's record supported the Planning Board's decision.

Because of the HAB's central legal error, the HAB denigrated and ignored the evidence in the Planning Board's record.

Such as? What's the most important stuff?

I think the most important evidence is Fire Chief Mason's three central pieces of evidence.

Number one, the nearest fire hydrant is approximately two miles downhill from the proposed subdivision.

That emergency vehicles, including water tankers, required as a result of there being no fire hydrant,

cannot access portions of the road, including the sand and gravel portions of the road,

confronting the proposed subdivision.

And that Roxbury Fire Planning and emergency response relies in large part on the city of Keen

and therefore before even arriving at the road has already experienced the delay associated with traveling from Keen.

So don't those conditions currently affect the residents that do live on this road?

Absolutely. Yes.

And those residents have largely been, most of those houses date back from the 70s through the 90s.

Some of those houses predate the current push to make sure emergency response is in place

before permitting additional building, not all of them, but many of them.

But this case isn't about a retrospective study of what has happened in the past.

This case is about this proposed subdivision and whether it satisfies the emergency response requirements based on this road.

But this road is a Class 5 road and development is houses are allowed to be built with frontage on a Class 5 road.

So how do you parse the quality of a Class 5 road that is under your ordinance providing adequate frontage?

So that's where scattered or premature comes in.

Scattered or premature comes in where you have a lot of subdivision application that otherwise meets the dimensional requirements.

So it meets Class 5 road.

It meets the lot requirements.

All three lots are more than five acres.

It meets the 400 foot frontage requirement.

It meets the lot depth.

It meets all of the dimensional requirements.

Those are not disputed whatsoever.

But because the planning board made a determination which the evidence supports that presently a hazard exists.

And that's the determination that is needed to be made under the Zuchis and the Garapay line of cases.

That's where their decision is reasonable and sustainable as a decision of prematurity.

That's what this case is about.

Despite there being development in the vicinity of these two lots.

I'm sorry, could you repeat the beginning of your question?

Despite there being existing development in the vicinity of these two lots.

Precisely.

And that's where the Garapay case in particular is very relevant.

In that case, there was existing development in the area and finding of prematurity was sustained.

There is nothing in this scattered or premature statute and as that statutory language is repeated in the town regulations

that says scattered or premature is only allowed to be found in a place that is completely undeveloped.

Scattered or premature can be found in an area that is completely undeveloped.

That is partially developed as here and in the Garapay case or potentially in a place that is largely developed.

How much of that determination was affected by the focus on the potential development of the third lot?

Little to none.

If you read the planning board memorandum of decision and if you look at the planning board minutes,

it is abundantly clear that there was very little determination from the future potential for resubdivision.

The applicant opened the door about those 31 potential lots and it was discussed.

It is indisputable that it was discussed.

We are not denying that.

But it was discussed as many things were discussed.

It was also discussed whether there was potential for water wells to run dry.

That also is not a dispositive part of the planning board's decision.

The planning board found that the present circumstances represent a hazard.

So whether this subdivision application was for five lots, the 31 lots,

or the three lots that it actually was, the quantum had already been reached.

I was going to say one follow-up then.

Often the minutes and statements made by the applicant or the board members

find their way into the sort of quantitative quality of the decision.

So where we have focus on the 31 future development and wells running dry,

how do we separate those from the core of the board's decision?

I think it is pretty easy to look at the memorandum of decision and do that.

I would suggest that you could do it by the volume of words.

The volume of words, the vast majority of the words in the memorandum of decision

are about the current circumstances, the present-day circumstances,

which include cars presently getting stuck in the mud, cars presently,

and I should say vehicles, not just cars.

Vehicles currently going off the road, the road currently washing out,

and all of the facts.

I could go on and on and regale with lots of facts of the road if you wish me to,

but I think there are more important points to move on to.

One of them is the HAP jurisprudence.

I don't need to explain to this court how you have contributed to the evolution

of the HAP jurisprudence.

Most recently, when the appeal of Amherst where you declined to find

that the HAP had substituted its own judgment in the planning board,

and I read that case to be that you made that decline

because the litigant in that case had not pointed to concrete ways

in which the HAP had substituted its own judgment.

I would submit that this case now presents...

I wouldn't force the possibility that it could have been correctly decided.

Right, exactly.

And here we have the HAP I would submit actually substituting its own judgment.

So the planning board reasonably and correctly we would submit

found facts about the road based on local expertise of the planning board members,

uncontradicted expert testimony from the fire chief,

and then the HAP did the one-time farewell review

and found its own facts about the road.

The HAP's order completely unrights the fire chief's testimony out of its order.

It is not there in the order.

Was there an objection lodged to the view?

Not that I am aware of, but I cannot say that with certainty.

It seems to me you're arguing about the HAB going out on the view

and how could they substitute their judgment for these planning board members

who've lived there for decades and made thousands of trips

that that's like too good an argument because it makes the HAB

or a superior court when it does a view is never going to have

the type of experience that a planning board has.

It almost makes the planning board determination unreviewable

if we accept your hypothesis here.

It's not that it's unreviewable.

It's that you're not going out on a fact finding mission.

You're making sure that what the planning board found is reasonable.

You know, is the road curvy?

Is it hilly?

Could they have reasonably reached that conclusion?

There's nothing in the HAB order that asks or answers those types of questions.

But you were pointing out, you know, they went in the fall

and it wasn't snowing and it wasn't muddy

and so it can't really depend on whether it was snowing or muddy that day.

They can make the review that you were just talking about

independent of what kind of day it was, can't they?

For sure, but there should be an acknowledgement of that fact.

You know, there should be an acknowledgement that the planning board

received evidence that there are problems during winter and mud season,

which of course here in New Hampshire accounts for the vast majority of the year

and that we are here in none of those conditions

and none of that is there.

I mean, you're ultimately saying they applied the wrong standard of review.

Yes, that is what we are saying.

Yes, and that this case offers an opportunity to this court

to clarify, to further refine the standard of review

that the Housing Appeals Board should be applying.

Clarify the standard of review or to apply the existing standard of review?

The way that I would phrase it is to say to take it one step further

than you have taken it to date.

Currently, the way that you have articulated it

is the planning board should not agree or disagree with the planning board.

That's not their job.

And then further, it is also not their job to substitute the HAB.

It is also not their job to substitute their judgment.

You have not yet said that little nugget with respect to the HAB

and it clearly is the standard for Superior Court.

I see my time is up.

Thank you.

May it please the court?

My name is Patricia Panciaco.

I'm here on behalf of Greatwood's Unity Forest LLC.

They are a timber management company

and we're requesting this court affirm the HAB's decision.

Greatwood owns 159 acres of land located in the town of Roxbury

in the rural residential district.

Its frontage is along Middleton Road.

To digress for a moment, Middleton Road was laid out in 1763,

extended to the town of Nelson.

The portion beyond the first three miles of the class five length

of Middleton Road, and this is shown in the maps and the records also,

extends to Nelson, but that end of the road has been allowed

to revert to classic status.

In the town's master plan, Roxbury is responsible for 10.2 miles

of class five road.

Roxbury is responsible for its class five road,

as part of its role in managing the state's transportation network.

Middleton Road is 3.1 miles of that 10.2 mile length of road.

1.8 miles is paved.

The remainder is gravel.

With the exception of one pitch point at approximately the midpoint,

the road ranges from 20 to 24 feet wide.

Why is that important?

Why is that important to this case?

The width of the road, Your Honor?

Your descriptions of the road, yes.

The descriptions of the road are taken from the state aid

transportation, the state aid reports submitted by the town

of Roxbury to the New Hampshire Department of Transportation.

And this is a fact in the record, a supported fact reported by

Roxbury to obtain the state aid.

And it flies in the face of the planning board allegations

of a narrow sandy road.

And that it's impassable when two cars in opposite directions

approach each other, Your Honor.

Is it also true that there are portions of the road

that are just 18 feet wide?

Your Honor, there is one pinch point, Your Honor,

about a 10th of a mile at the midpoint of the road,

where it does narrow.

But other than that, it ranges from 20 to 24 feet wide.

That report is actually in the record,

and you can review the various lengths of Middletown Road

that were submitted to the planning board,

its review as to the width of the road.

Council, do you agree with Ms. Manzalli's characterization

of the Fire Chief's testimony about the road

and the hazards that presently exist?

Thank you for asking that question.

I appreciate that.

I was present at the July 13th hearing when the Fire Chief

purportedly testified before the planning board.

I actually made a call after it was alleged

after the Housing Appeals Board hearing

that the Fire Chief testified

and confirmed with Mr. Sanborn,

who was also present for that full hearing,

neither one of us ever heard the Fire Chief testify.

The minutes do not reflect the Fire Chief testimony.

My sense is it was comments that were perhaps repeated

by a planning board member during hearing.

I've not found any testimony in the two hearings

on this application from the Fire Chief

or the road agent in both of them live on Middletown Road,

as does one of the select men

in three out of four of the planning board members.

So I cannot address his testimony,

his purported testimony about, I believe,

what did she say?

The tankers having difficulty reaching there.

There's no hydrants and a mutual aid.

Mutual aid is absolutely true.

Most towns do have backup mutual aid.

Water tankers, perhaps they do have difficulty in the winter,

but there's no evidence in the record

of specific incidents when that's happened

or any other reports of loss of property

or there's no data whatsoever in the planning board record

to support the allegations the board made.

As to the hydrants, there is a waterline down on Brand Road

where Middletown Road starts to travel towards Nelson,

but that's very, very common in many New Hampshire communities.

There is no groundwater in, I would say,

majority of the areas except in the southern team.

Was there evidence in the record that vehicles

would go off the road, both cars and trucks?

Only planning board actually was in the memorandum

of decision or in the minutes.

There were no specific incidents ever pointed out

on such and such date.

No police reports, no department from the fire department

saying that they had to pull vehicles out of the ditch.

This was all testimony by planning board members.

Was there any discussion about conditions

that would require improvements to the road

either made by your client or by the town?

When we were at the July hearing on this application,

after Mr. Sanborn completed his presentation to the board,

he actually submitted with his presentation

a list of every ordinance provision

and every subdivision regulation

with a narrative explaining why the application complied.

There was never a discussion about the merits of the application.

The entire discussion was about Middletown Road.

And not once did anybody introduce any evidence

about shortcomings.

Now Middletown Road is 3.1 miles long.

To say there are six hairpin turns,

grades exceeding 15%,

areas with no guardrails or sidewalks

which aren't even required for new roads

in the subdivision regulations.

In fact, the subdivision regulations

don't even have a minimum width for the traveled way

as part of the design requirements.

There was no evidence about a specific location

or at such and such a point

you'll see the hairpin turn.

At this point there's a shoulder missing, nothing.

Just very broad statements.

You argue in your brief the conclusory statements

made by the planning board

in its meeting and notice of decision

were not supported by the facts observed on the view.

That is true.

So the purpose of the HEB was engaging in fact-finding

to counter-check what the board had determined?

No, I would not agree with that conclusion.

Before we went on the view,

we submitted our memorandums of law

and the board schedules the view.

They have the information that they've read.

When they went out to the view,

there was at least six passenger vehicles

that traveled up and down the road perfectly fine.

Not only did they travel the full length of the road once,

they traveled it a second time.

The facts, they're observing the cars going back and forth.

They had the facts reported to them, Your Honor,

and it is reasonable and logical for them

when they go out to the view to look to see the defects

the planning board reported existed along the road.

And that's within the purview of the HEB?

I would say there is a distinction, Your Honor,

and the reason I say that,

the HEB is populated by a seasoned land-use attorney

who's worked in that area of law for a period of time,

an engineer or a surveyor,

and another person well acquainted with the real estate industry

by design.

They have a trained eye perhaps more so

than you would on a superior court view of a site.

I don't know how that plays into it, Your Honor,

and I'll leave that to the court,

but they would know what to look at.

It sounds like they are substituting their judgment

for that of the planning board.

I'm not sure I would disagree with that,

but what I would say is it's not unreasonable

for them to look for the defects the planning board

alleged existed along the road.

You're saying they can substitute their judgment

because they've got better training and experience?

Perhaps, but you can't unsee what you saw,

and that's a fact,

and I'm not sure how that will play out in this case,

but more importantly, the planning board submitted nothing.

There were, as I said, no accident reports,

no specific locations,

no dates when purported incidents occurred.

There was no descriptions of personal injuries

or property damage due to the condition of the road.

Are they not allowed,

are the members not allowed to rely on their own personal knowledge?

I think they are, Your Honor,

but when it's beyond the ken of a typical lay board member,

I think expert guidance is required,

and none of that existed here.

Not only did the planning board

allege these defects existed,

they also stayed in their memorandum of decision

they were uncurable and unredressable.

So let's build the mode and pull up the gate.

It really, it makes the question

of where does the planning board's discretion

and isn't there a point at which

they have to support their positions with that?

Do you agree that if the road,

if the road actually is a present existing hazard,

that that would be a sound basis

for denying subdivision approval?

I do not, and the reason I say that

is because during the July hearing,

I presented to the board,

well, if there is a specific concern, Mr. Planning Board,

what is it?

Can we work together to resolve it?

It fell on deaf ears.

They were hearing nothing of it

because that would have required them to contribute.

It would not, in my opinion,

have accomplished their goal

of preventing further development.

The town has an obligation

to maintain a safe level of service.

If developers need to contribute,

they should contribute.

We put that on the table.

It wasn't considered.

And for that reason,

I do not think there's a basis

to reverse the HAB decision

because the Planning Board didn't introduce

a single fact other than their own opinions.

A quick question.

I don't think it's really relevant,

but why did your client decide to go

for the HAB instead of the Superior Court?

Simply because it's a residential plot

and because it's usually more expeditious.

The Superior Courts are pretty busy.

Do you agree that the standard

that we should be applying here

or that the board should have

should be applying is not

that they agree or disagree with the decision,

but whether there was evidence

and a record to support?

The decision of the Planning Board,

do you agree with that?

I think that the decision should,

the standard should be the same.

Unreasonable, illegal,

or unsupported by the evidence.

And the Planning Board's decision

was not supported by the evidence.

So it should be the same as it is

for the Superior Court?

I do.

How much weight if any

is given to the

background of the HAB members,

which I don't think

can be ignored.

And that is actually a welcome relief

in my world.

Similarly, we can't ignore

the experience of

the members of the Planning Board.

That's, Planning Boards

are supposed to bring their

experience as members of the town

to the table, aren't they?

And I would agree with that,

Your Honor. And I also

would agree with the Planning Board

Chair's statement that the Board

was trying to take the long view.

If you're

going to take the long view, though,

you don't do it at HAWK,

as applications come to your door.

Plan ahead

and deal with your responsibility.

I understand it's difficult

in Roxbury, it's a small town,

but

and again,

travel roads,

rural roads are difficult to maintain.

When did your client

acquire the property?

I'm sorry, Your Honor. When did your client

acquire the property?

Several years ago and typically

what they do is they manage

the timber, they don't clear cut it.

They sometimes will subdivide

one or two lots to cover the debt

and they'll just manage the forest.

Thank you very much. You're welcome.

Your Honor.

Thank you, Your Honor.

A couple quick clarifications.

The road is not passable after this

proposed subdivision area. It is closed

subject to gates and bars. There is a road

that continues, but it is classic.

For on-tents and purposes, this is a

dead end road.

The July 13 minutes

clearly capture Fire Chief

Mason's testimony and that's at page 34

of our attendance.

And that's where you were reading from

the report.

There's no claim that there was a

road agent testifying here. The road

position in Roxbury is vacant, so I

think that's just immaterial to this

case.

I want to mention an important point

here. The applicant

has the burden of proof.

So the applicant should be putting

in the information

to prove to the planning board

by preponderance of evidence that

the applicant application is

a scattered premature determination

made with respect to future

development on Middle Town Road.

So it means

that there's a present hazard

now, and until

that present hazard is

remediated somehow,

future development is not likely

to be approved. And let me address

that with some detail.

So the planning board's decision

is consistent with the

Cannons of statutory interpretation

that gives effect to the words of the

applicable laws here, and the applicable

laws are the scattered or premature

development state statute,

and then it's repeated verbatim

in the local law.

The applicant argues that the logical result

of the planning board's decision is to,

you know, put in the mode, think it's the language.

And therefore the planning board

decision cannot be sustained.

But this case actually isn't about

all future development.

This case is about

subdivision in this

application, in this planning board's

record, and whether it sustains this

decision.

It is about future development until

the hazards are mitigated.

Correct, but

the hazards identified in this case.

I see my time is up, may I continue this?

If you carry forward

that argument in the Cannons of

statutory interpretation, you're

reading all the words out of the

scattered premature development statute

that no subdivision could ever be approved

scattered or premature, because

it does stop development

in that area because of the

existence of a present hazard.

That would be an unlawful interpretation

of the statute under the Cannons

of statutory interpretation.

So in conclusion,

we are asking that you find

that the HAP unlawfully

substituted its judgment and reverse.

I have one question for you.

So do you disagree that the planning

board should have a duty to

cooperate with an applicant and

to engage in the process?

Oh, no, they absolutely

have a duty to assist.

However, that duty

to assist does not

extend so far as to require a

planning board to generate

evidence to meet an applicant's

burden of proof, which is what the

HAB suggests here. The HAB

actually contended that the planning

board should have discussed and told

that the applicant should have

permitted to satisfy the planning

board's concern regarding

firefighting and emergency response

access. That's the applicant's burden

of proof, not the planning

board's burden. They can assist

an applicant. Following up on that,

what about a discussion about

deficits in the road or

alternate fire suppression

measures that could have

mitigated?

If, as council represents

not considered, what about

that obligation to

look into ways that the applicant

might have supplied some of the

resolution to the deficits?

So most of the

alternative cistern,

dry hydrant, et cetera

are going to require some

emergency response vehicle

to get up the road, to

get to that alternative. How about

improving the road? So improving

the road would require

an unnecessary expenditure

of local funds. Unless the

applicant contributed.

I'm just curious about

why not a discussion.

Right. I think there probably was

some discussion that may not have made it all

the way into the minutes and there probably could have been

more discussion.

Yeah. But I think

in the end, the planning

board, while not

perfect, was

reasonable and lawful in its

discussion. Thank you.

Thank you very much, council. In case

submitted, of course, in recent.

I'm sorry. Never mind.

Forgive me. I thought

we were taking a break.

But you're done with us.

Yes.
