This is case 1220259 Larissa Troy versus Bishop Gertin High School at all.

I've reserved two minutes for you. May I please the Court? I'm Joshua Gordon.

I represent the appellant Larissa Troy who is not here today. She was in California.

So say you are a reasonable 17-year-old girl going to a Catholic school.

You have no sexual experience. You're differential to authority.

Maybe you're not too worldly, but you're having trouble at home.

School is a refuge. You get befriended by a trusted teacher.

Then he assaults you. You're scared, confused, unsure what happened, unsure whether it was wrong.

Then he assaults you again. This time Larissa dutifully reported to the dean of students

who was a mandatory reporter. She's told she's lying.

Do not repeat this story. You will be in trouble if you do.

But she knows it's wrong because she reports it, doesn't she?

Pardon me?

The fact that she reports it doesn't that indicate that she knows the conduct was wrong?

Well, I think it probably indicates that maybe she thought that the conduct was wrong

and she went to the dean of students which was her way of reporting

and was told that the school has nothing to do with this.

And she didn't believe that either because she told her mother.

Well, she told her mother and her mother's also told her you're lying.

Don't tell anybody. So she gets shut down.

And that is the reasonable thing to do when you're this person

and a teenage victim of sexual assault is a class of victims

that a judge has to put themselves in the shoes of.

And that is a reasonable thing for her to do.

If she had a duty to investigate, she did it.

Right then what more kind of reasonable teen victim of sexual assault do

and she does the objectively reasonable thing for people in this class of victims.

She buries it.

She compartmentalizes it.

She pretends it didn't happen.

She blames it on herself.

Do you agree that the case really comes down to the second prong of the analysis, causation prong?

Yeah, and she had no notion that the school was a cause of her injury.

So can you address the 1997 revelation?

I mean, it seems to me that based on the facts and at least as I understand them,

that contained everything she needed to know to proceed at that time.

Do you agree with that?

Of course it does.

The 1997 revelations, if she had been apprised of them, contained everything she needed to know.

She just never was apprised.

So the legal question there is what is she attributed to knowing in that situation?

Nothing.

Nothing.

And what is the support for that?

I mean, this letter, as I understand it, the information was widely disseminated to the Bishop

Gertin community.

There was media coverage about it.

So why is she not imputed to have that knowledge?

She never received it.

I think it's that simple.

And press coverage is not an accepted method of notification.

There are some exceptions if you're the Whitey Bulger plaintiffs and you live in Boston, maybe.

But press coverage alone is not a sufficient reason to be, a sufficient basis to be apprised of a cause of action.

So the statute tolls on and on and on and on and on until defeating the purposes of the statute

and limitations until she has actual knowledge?

Well, there are two responses to that.

One is the new statute makes that now state policy, right?

But it doesn't go on and on and on.

And it's not subjective in the way that my brother suggests.

It's objective in that she was diagnosed when she did what normal people in this situation do.

She buried it and something ventures it.

That's the standard, what happens for this class of people.

And something triggers it.

In her case it was, she found out she was, her likeness was being used on marketing.

And that she found the Bishop Accountability website.

And at that point she was objectively diagnosed with a variety of diagnosis

that are consistent with this class of victims.

But this wasn't a repressed, this isn't a repressed memory case.

Not a repressed memory.

I mean she consciously was aware of it and thought about it a lot apparently during this whole period.

She was aware of it for years and it affected her life in innumerable ways.

But being traumatized by events and memories is not the same as realizing causation.

Those are, those are different.

And she did what these victims reasonably do.

She made no connection until something then triggered the realization.

And then she follows up and with the, after she learns about Bishop Accountability website.

And she learns that the school knew and concealed before she was assaulted that her

abuser was a convicted sex offender.

And up to that point she had no reason to know or suspect that Bishop Gertin had

any knowledge of McEnany's crimes or that Bishop Gertin would even employ such a person.

And the school knew at the time of her assaults of this background.

School writ large.

It knew, it knew before, well before.

Well knew before but also at the time when she was denied any response.

Correct.

From the school.

Yes.

See me.

Go ahead.

Mr. Gertin, can you just clarify did I hear you say that you're not arguing for a subjective standard.

Do you agree that the standard is an objective standard?

It's an objective standard.

Is that right?

I think that's too well in the law to try to attack.

But she was objectively diagnosed with the consistent with this class of plaintiffs.

So there's two objective places, two places, two times where the objective analysis confirms what she did.

The first time was she did what people do in this circumstance.

She buried it.

She compartmentalized.

She tried to forget about it.

She moved away.

But she didn't bury it.

You said in response to my question that she was consciously thinking about it a lot.

She worked hard on trying to bury it for herself in her own mind by compartmentalizing it and then blamed it on herself.

And that's what people, I've never been there, but people in the situation do.

She's not really trying to hold the school responsible for the assault itself, but for its lack of responsiveness.

Exactly.

And negligent hiring, if I've read the police directly.

So trying to bury the assault itself doesn't really get to the issue of what her claim is.

She had no knowledge that the school had any role in this until she was triggered by Vanson in 2017 and looked into it.

And that's what made it clear to her that the school was involved.

And it's the school's actions and not McAnney's actions that are here today.

And on that point, can you address the court's discussion in footnote four about Dan Lee versus Bishop Gurt High School?

Have you abandoned that, the principal underlying that decision?

Remind me what Dan Lee was.

I think it was one of those federal cases.

No, it was Judge Groff.

Yes.

Superior court case where you found that once the plaintiff had knowledge of, and this goes to Justice Hans Marconi's point,

the institutional misconduct.

I mean, that is the complaint here that she's been damaged because...

The institution.

The institution.

And in Dan Lee, the Judge Groff said there's no way on earth that the plaintiff in that case could possibly have known that the institution in this case,

that President Laby hired this guy knowing about the allegations in Maine.

When Ms. Troy went to the dean of students, she was led to believe very explicitly that the school had nothing to do with this.

And she went on that assumption afterwards.

She didn't know that there was a school involvement until much later, until 2017.

Do we know whether the dean had knowledge?

Just a curiosity?

We don't know.

And obviously the person who hired her brother Laby knew, but he either kept mom about it or I don't know.

It's not in the record.

I want to address two issues, or maybe a single issue that I see my brother...

Majesty, just before we get off that point, is the Court's discussion about general knowledge of Catholic institutions, is that...

Did he find that as a matter of law or a matter of fact?

I think that's a matter of nothing at all.

Whether Catholic institutions have a reputation for this or that doesn't impinge upon Ms. Troy's knowledge of what Bishop Burton did in her situation.

And as I said, there's widespread publicity that Catholic institutions are engaging and knowingly engaging in hiring individuals who have troubled backgrounds.

Doesn't that put her on notice?

Yes, but one person's well known because they watch this network and one person's I don't know at all because they watch a different network or read a different newspaper.

If it's in an almanac, President Lincoln was the president?

Well, maybe.

But widespread news coverage, like I said, there's an exception for the whitey bulger plaintiff.

But other than that, news coverage doesn't give you knowledge that you have a cause of action.

And the other problem with that is when?

The news coverage is in 1997.

Does that mean...

Well, the news coverage about Bishop Burton, but the AG's report came out a few years later.

Does that mean that the statute limitation ends when the Attorney General's report comes out?

Or does it end when CNI reports it?

There's no way to judge those things.

And I think the law is pretty well set on that, that media publicity does not give you notice until the thing becomes something like an almanac.

Well, certainly your client's family had noticed they received the letter from Bishop Burton in 97.

Well, Bishop Burton says it's sent it to them, but the depositions say they have no recollection of ever having received it.

And if they had received it, it was never discussed with Larissa.

So I don't know what that...

There have been instances where the schools in this situation have alerted all former students.

And I think there was an example in the record given of that, but they didn't do that here.

Is the application of the discovery rule a question of fact?

The application of the discovery rule, yes, it's a matter of fact.

To which we owe deference to the trial.

Yes.

Bishop Burton says it's claimant of litigation is handicapped by McEnney's death, but he died before Larissa turned 30.

He died within the initial limitations period.

So she could have sued Bishop Burton after he died, he'd still be dead.

So I think there the schools claim that they are handicapped in their litigation because he's dead.

I think it's inapposite to the case.

And second, the same thing, the policy statement about statutes and limitations going on forever.

Well, that's the policy of New Hampshire now.

Thank you very much.

Thank you, Attorney Gordon.

Attorney Edward.

May it please the Court.

My name is John Edwards.

I'm Counsel for the Apollese in this case.

Bishop Burton High School and the orders order the brothers of the Sacred Heart of New England.

With me today is Co-Counsel James Canney and David Pincenot.

And representatives of the client are here as well.

President of Bishop Burton High School, Linda Boteur, and the provincial superior for the order, Brother Ron Kingel.

Thank you for the opportunity to air the issues that were resolved, we thought, by Judge Temple

and give us the opportunity to defend the decision that Judge Temple made here.

We think it was soundly decided.

Appellants on happiness with Judge Temple's ruling focuses on his construction

and application of the statute of limitations that governs this dispute.

And that's RSA 508-4-G, as it existed at the time this lawsuit was filed.

Admittedly, it has been amended significantly since.

And in particular, we're focused here on the second prong of the statute.

And the second prong sets forth a requirement that the appellant here must have brought

into action within three years after the time that she discovers,

and it's critical to focus on the next clause,

or in the exercise of reasonable diligence should have discovered her injury

and its causal relationship to the act or omission complained of.

I don't understand.

You're going to have to build it from the beginning.

I don't understand how this woman was under an obligation to bring suit.

How did she possibly know the causal relationship between, I don't know,

Sacred Heart, Bishop Gertin in the hiring of this particular miscreant?

I think the following facts are admitted by the appellant here,

and they certainly form the core of Judge Temple's ruling.

We dispute many of these factual assertions.

As a matter of fact, we say many of these things didn't occur at all,

including the conversation with the dean of students.

But having said that.

Why isn't that a jury issue?

But having said that, Your Honor, we can accept these facts for purposes of the analysis

of statute of limitations.

It is undisputed in this record that she knew she had been assaulted.

It's undisputed.

She knew the identity of her assailant.

It's undisputed.

She knew his affiliation with the school and with the order.

There is no dispute about that.

Is there any dispute that she comprehended the theory of respondeat superior?

Your Honor, that's a fair question.

And I think the answer to that is based on, and I think this is a critical fact finding

that isn't disputed for purposes of this record before you.

And that is there was a conversation with the dean of students in which the dean

of students repudiated everything, apparently repudiated everything that the appellant

had to say about what happened.

She said it wasn't true.

She told her that she shouldn't spread such lies, and she sent her from her office.

Do you dispute that that took place to just help me follow you?

There is no evidence in the record that that took place, that conversation.

However, for purposes.

That's different from whether you dispute it.

That the conversation took place?

Right.

Our position is that it did not take place.

That this were to go back down, we would be very much litigating that very issue.

Understood.

But having said that, for purposes of this, what brings us here today, we can accept it is true.

And think about what happened here.

Apparently, according to the appellant, she told the school or representative of the school

that one of the employees, one of the brothers of the order, and she knew both of those things,

had sexually assaulted her.

And in the day after that, and in the week after that, and in the month after that,

indeed in the ensuing six months, while she was still at that school,

and before she graduated, she continued to see and encounter her assailants at the school

with no disclosure about what had happened, no acknowledgement.

Perhaps she was traumatized. Who knows?

There is no doubt she was upset, and she was angry.

That is all part of the record.

There is also no doubt that she suffered emotional distress and mental distress,

according to her as a result of all this.

Anxiety, all of that. It's all acknowledged.

It happened in the days and weeks and months after it.

It happened while she was attending college or Providence College,

and it persisted in the many years of her life prior to the filing of this lawsuit.

The point, Your Honor, however it is, she saw that the school was prepared to allow this man

to stay in the school and continue to do his work.

Even before she thought that the school knew better and she, what, imagined it,

or she didn't, it really didn't happen until she found out later and had some corroborating

evidence. Bingo, light goes off.

She understood that the brother had caused injury to her.

She understood this over a two-decade period.

And this is not a situation, and this sets this case very much apart from many of the

other cases involving clerical sexual abuse and the issue of institutional knowledge

about the propensity of the assailant to do it.

And the difference in this case is, within a year-plus of it having happened,

every fact relevant to the case as pled here became public knowledge for all to know and see.

And much as we may...

What was it in the Providence College Journal?

I mean, how do you know that? How can you even say that?

Without any regard to media coverage at all, we know it because there was school

assemblies in which the topic was the express purpose of it.

The plaintiff wasn't there, though, right?

No, she was not.

Okay.

However, her mother was there. Two of her younger sisters were still there.

They received...

All you're forcing me to think about how my mother would have reacted.

Just stick with your points, will you?

The point is, in the final analysis, the response to all of the facts that were

known at every turn in this case has been yes, but the appellant herself didn't know these things.

That is the refrain at every turn when an actual admitted fact is discussed that turns

the analysis here of whether she had exercised reasonable diligence in failing

to have discovered it.

It turns it into a wholly subjective test, and my brother says,

no, no, no, we're not turning it into a wholly subjective test.

We're talking about a particular...

The reasonable expectations, the reasonable diligence of a particular kind of person.

And this particular kind of person was a young woman who attended this school,

who had significant family connections to the school that lasted long past the point

when she departed the school.

And her mother was aware, because the appellant told her, that this had happened.

And under these circumstances, this particular claimant...

This particular claimant can be expected to objectively have had an ability

to discover the truth she said she didn't have.

Why isn't that, what you just said, why isn't that speculation?

I'm sorry?

Why isn't that speculation?

What's the basis for your statement that she could have expected,

because her mother knew, the whole neighborhood knew?

What's the basis for the fact that she had an obligation to know in her own mind,

objectively, that this happened?

Because she understood explicitly that her assailant was a brother of the order,

was a teacher of the school, had committed the assault on school property,

while he was undertaking his duties as a teacher at the school.

That is enough, Your Honor, objectively, for this particular person to undertake

some inquiry into the facts surrounding the school's role and complicity in all this.

Your Honor, if in this case she has no duty to make inquiry,

if in this case there isn't enough here for her to conclude that the school

and the order are at least possible wrongdoers within the meaning of that phrase

as set forth by the Court in Glynes v. Brocken in Paris v. Pike Industries,

then we are turning the obligation of the statute for her to exercise reasonable

diligence in discovering the nature of the claims she has against these

institutions.

We are turning that analysis into a purely subjective one.

The answer, the response is always, it's true.

The response is.

Your saying, I don't mean to ask you to repeat yourself.

You're saying that she was on notice to know about respondent superior negligent

hiring theories and negligent supervision theories on the part of Gertin and Sacred

Heart.

Is that your position, sir?

Our position is, Your Honor, that based on the fact she did knew, she had at least

enough information to understand there was a possibility of wrongdoing, that in fact

there was negligence in the hiring of this man.

There was negligence in the supervision of this man.

And those claims are claims that are being made here.

And they can turn on the fact that the institutions knew about this man's past,

told nobody, and nevertheless placed him there without any safeguards, or if that

hadn't have happened, there still could have been a claim.

I would commend, Your Honor, one of the cases that Judge Temple cited when he

relied upon what he considered the maturity view of what this state of facts would

lead a reasonable claimant in these circumstances to do.

And that's the first circuit case, Kelly v. Mark Antonio, 187, F3, 192.

The case there is strikingly similar to this one, with one significant difference.

The close in time, complete revelations of the nature of the cell and its background

and the institution's prior knowledge didn't exist in the Mark Antonio case.

It does in this, and it makes this case even more powerfully favorable for the

Appalachians.

And in the Kelly case, the Court said all of the plaintiffs' claims are claims

for damages for the sexual abuse perpetrated by the priest's defendants.

In making these claims, plaintiffs don't allege that the hierarchy defendants'

silence mislead them into believing that the alleged sexual abuse did not

occur.

That's true here.

Nobody, nobody led her to believe it didn't occur.

She understood it occurred.

She also, nobody told her that it hadn't been committed by a cleric.

She understood it hadn't been committed by a cleric.

Or that it had not resulted in injury to her.

There was no question here that she understood she was injured.

She knew it at the time.

She felt it encouraged.

If her report to the dean is credited for the purposes of this argument,

then she was told it didn't happen.

But she understood it happened.

She had actually experienced it, Your Honor, and that's the difference.

She was told she was lying.

But that would be true.

That would be a material fact if, in fact, she didn't understand that it happened

or that she had been persuaded that what happened wasn't somehow wrong.

But she wasn't.

She understood it was wrong.

She understood it was wrong.

That didn't happen.

You can't say that about people.

Maybe she was interpreting that it wasn't wrong.

Authority figure tells you that your complaint has no legs.

I don't know how she would interpret that.

She would interpret that as the institution not believing the physical facts

that she had encountered and endured.

And that, in fact, the institution was prepared to actually countenance

having someone like this on its staff, in its schools, notwithstanding that knowledge.

So you don't think that encounter has any relevance with respect to whether

there's a causal connection between the defendant's conduct and her injury?

I think it very much has relevance, Your Honor, to it.

As Judge Temple said, it told her, that conversation told her this was an institution,

a school, and an order that was prepared to actually protect and remain silent

about one of its employees, one of its brothers, notwithstanding the fact

that they had at least some reason to believe he was engaging in this conduct.

And that's exactly what happened, Your Honor.

Even if that's the case, by 97 when that revelation is disclosed,

that's no longer the case, right?

She should have known at that point.

The question, of course, becomes, given everything she did know and experienced,

should a reasonable person have discovered those facts?

There's no debate here because we can't plumb the depths

of the appellant's subjective state of mind.

We can't contradict it, particularly we can't do it 22 and 23 years later.

So we have to accept that she's what she says, which is, in fact,

notwithstanding all that happened in 1997, I didn't know about it.

The question then becomes, is it reasonable under all of these circumstances,

all of them, including the fact that her family certainly had every reason

to know about it, that she couldn't have discovered this information in 1997

or in 1999 or in 2002 or in 2005 or in 2008.

And as an aside, it has been suggested that Brother Sean McEnany,

the assailant, the alleged assailant in this case, that he died before the 12 years

statute of limitations were passed, which is what would control

these circumstances.

That is not the case.

He died only a year prior to the filing of this lawsuit.

And that's a matter of fact in the record.

So Judge Roth's analysis was incorrect as a matter of law?

No.

There's a significant difference between the Damley case and this case, Your Honor.

And the difference is, as was pointed out in the briefs below when this issue

was very centrally argued, is this is not a case like the Damley case,

where the only way anyone could find out the information about the brother in that

case was through a bruising discovery fight.

The language, and I'm very much paraphrasing Judge Roth here, was that it's

absurd in the extreme to expect.

Because he could not conceive in its wildest imagination how the plaintiff

could have expected to have known.

And if you read further in that section, because it only came forth after

bruising discovery fights in the case, this was not information that was available

generally over a decade or more before the lawsuit was filed.

It only came tumbling out as a result of a difficult litigation and a difficult

discovery process, Your Honor.

A materially different situation than this one.

This is not information in this case that only could be induced by a determined

litigant who pursues all their rights and powers.

Well, under that theory, she would have had to file suit immediately after she made

this disclosure to the Dean of Students and had a bruising discovery fight to discover

that the president of the school actually knew that the perpetrator here had a record

in name.

There would have been such a discovery fight, Your Honor, because that information

would have been known publicly by the community at large during the course of

that litigation that you're contemplating.

In November of 1997, all of this information was publicly known by the world.

There was nothing hidden about it.

She was assaulted in 1995?

She was assaulted in November of 1995 if she had brought her suit, say, within

two years of that lawsuit, as she well put up, of that event, or even two years

and 11 months well within the statute of limitations.

This information would have come out.

At what point would she have learned about the causation on an objective basis?

The causation?

The causation between the negligent hiring and her injuries.

Give me a date.

I think Judge Temple takes the position and we agree with him that it would be

as a result of that meeting with the Dean of Students, but certainly sometime

in the elapsed 20-plus years that transpired had she undertaken her duty

to investigate, which is our position that the court has made clear as an element

of the reasonableness standard when measuring the claimant's conduct.

She would have discovered this information had she exercised any investigation.

Would have discovered the 1997 revelation.

Correct.

Now, just so we're clear here, Your Honors, apparently, and it's explicitly stated

in the briefing by the appellant, a new duty to investigate was triggered

when the brother-in-law shared a Facebook posting where Bishop Burton was trumpeting

the achievements of the appellant and her sisters as athletes and as models

of what the school liked to see of its students.

That event, which, of course, makes no reference to anything about the

institutional knowledge of Brother McEnany, that event no more triggers

an obligation than any other events that may have elapsed in the prior 20 years.

The fundamental point is that at any time from November 1997 onwards,

the slightest investigation would have revealed this information.

Thank you very much, Tony Edwards.

Tony Gordon.

To the extent that there was a duty to investigate, it was discharged when

she went to Dean Mansour and learned that the school was definitely not involved.

And the other thing that sets this case apart from others, I think maybe all of the others,

is that...

Was that argument made to the child court regarding the discharge of her duty to investigate?

I think it was.

I know there's a preservation question about it, but I believe it was,

and it's definitely in our motion for reconsideration.

What sets apart this case is that McEnany was convicted and he was hired by Bishop Burton

nearly two years after the conditions of his conviction were no teaching for two years.

He was hired as soon as that two years was up.

Let me just ask you, Mr. Edwards, makes the point that while you disavow

urging us to adopt a subjective standard, that's in essence what you're doing

because this information was all out there and your response is always,

but she didn't know, but she didn't know, but she didn't know.

And why doesn't that turn it into a subjective test?

It's not subjective because she went and...

When she learned about this from her brother-in-law,

she went and got an examination from a doctor who's pretty well known in this field

and her symptoms are consistent with this class of plaintiffs and that's what they do.

They try as hard as they can to forget about it,

work hard to get through their life in a way that this stuff doesn't bother them,

but it does and it eventually comes out.

And it comes out at a time that is triggered by some event generally

and for her it was that event and then she gets diagnosed and that's an objective diagnosis.

That's not some subjective, oh, I thought about it now.

This is an objective diagnosis of these symptoms at a particular time.

So it's an objective analysis.

Thank you very much, Attorney Gordon.

Thank you, counsel. Case submitted.
