This is case 2020-0730 and 2024-0169, state of New Hampshire versus Jordan Martin.

For the record, are we entertaining your grandchildren?

It's no day.

No, it's one of those days.

Good morning. May it please the court.

My name is Mark Sisti, and I represent Jordan Martin in this matter.

I have asked permission and with the court's permission for reserving two minutes of my argument.

Thank you.

Let me just start by saying there's probably nothing more devastating in a sexual assault case

than having a second accuser point the finger at your client

and essentially say he did it to me too.

In this particular case, I don't have to say how incredibly devastating that particular bit of information was.

You have before you a matter where you have two different people in two different places

at two different times, neither a witness to the other conduct,

both just incredibly devastating testimony coming from both.

It is not intertwined. It's not dependent on each other.

There is no need for it.

There is in fact no reason, none whatsoever,

that those two individuals should have been bringing accusations against Mr. Martin

at the same time before the same jury.

And I have to say, and I don't want to say this is a terrible, terrible, critical aspect here,

but the attorney in this case completely blew it.

I mean, this is a no-brainer.

We fight like crazy as criminal defense attorneys to eliminate this kind of prejudicial information before the jury.

You clearly would have made a different decision, but don't we owe deference to the strategy of the trial counsel

and then on top of that deference to the trial court's determination?

Let me make it clear there is no strategy in this.

It's totally unreasonable, so you don't have any argument on this particular case

where there should be deference to a strategy or a tactic.

There is no way you can articulate that material under the New Hampshire rules of evidence 401.

It was irrelevant between the two.

403, that it was more prejudicial than prohibitive.

404, that it's commenting on character.

This particular case invited something that I had never seen before.

It invited the prosecutor in this case to do a closing argument that is exactly what we try to avoid

and that this court has actually addressed before in the recent past.

But let's refer to the closing argument for a moment.

This is why it's so impactful.

Let me just state that on page 238 of the transcript, very end of the prosecutor's closing argument,

I ask you to put it into the context of the other evidence.

You heard that's relevant to what's going on that evening, and that is he tells Amy,

I have seen a picture of you and Chelsea, his wife, and was often thinking about having a threesome.

Now let me just stop right there.

One of the alleged victims in this case is Amy.

One is her daughter and we'll call her TS.

What I just stated would have never come in in TS's case if there were severance.

But let's go on.

Now that's not talk about going on an exotic holiday.

That's not talk about buying a new car.

That's a sexual context.

I think you'll agree with me. Let's stop there.

Now what is that?

What is that?

It's what this panel less than a year ago addressed and state versus Pierce.

And I'll quote specifically, we hold, and in Pierce it's on page 11,

we hold that the statement that quote, the children had been touched inappropriately

was highly prejudicial and warranted mistrial.

It is well settled that an incurable prejudice may result when the testimony of a witness conveys to a jury

the fact of a defendant's prior criminal offense.

The infusion of such evidence into a trial is probably only equaled by a confession

and its prejudicial impact upon a jury.

But you go on.

The state and the trial court acknowledged the prejudicial nature of such evidence

when the court granted the assented motion to sever charges involving the younger sibling.

In that case, both the state, the defendant and the court agreed that such evidence

would be highly prejudicial and should not be introduced

in the trial that actually took place afterwards.

The motion stated that the defendant would suffer unfair prejudice

if a single jury were to hear about two alleged victims.

That's a quote.

The prejudicial nature of the statement in this case is akin to other cases

in which we have held a mistrial to be warranted, and you go on and state what those are.

There is no way in the world that the prosecutor in Martin's case could have gone on

and stated, after what I just said,

I think you agree with me, and it didn't stop there.

He tells her that he's been on this social media site, only fans,

and that he gets requests from girls all the time for pictures of his penis.

Now, let's just stop there.

None of that would have come in, none in T.S.'s case, if there were seven.

And to sit and to say that's not highly prejudicial,

if you've looked at one page of discovery in the case,

belies the fact that you're doing a competent job.

But let's go on.

That's the context in which these events took place with respect to Amy.

Both sexualized.

I don't think you can disagree with that.

What's going on here?

If two people say that they were subjected to inappropriate sexual contact,

then they must be telling the truth.

One is bolstering the credibility of the other.

Why? Because it's allowed to come in.

It should have never come in.

This case, by the way, is not a bad defense case.

There's no confession.

In fact, there's a text message where he denies any of the contact.

There's no physical evidence.

There's no scientific evidence.

There's no third-party witness.

Is there any explanation for why either witness would lie?

Why neither witness would lie.

Is there an explanation why neither witness would lie?

I don't understand the question, actually.

So if you're trying these cases separately.

If you're trying a case separately, then basically it's the burden of proof.

There's no reason why you have to try them together, I guess, is the question.

What's the necessity of a jointer when you have to face an onslaught of this kind of material coming in?

It's insurmountable.

The state argues what makes the cases related or it motives to lie.

They're not related.

There's no conspiracy.

It's an illusion.

The theory that prior counsel places in all of the litigation is that there's this conspiracy.

There's none.

There's not a scintilla of evidence in the transcript, in the actual trial transcript,

that there was a meeting of the minds and that they got together to concoct a story.

In fact, trial counsel even basically misplaced some of the timing of what he claimed was important to him.

I'll give you an example.

The firearm aspect of the boyfriend in Vermont, that took place after the reporting of these events.

That had nothing to do with that.

That's afterthought.

That's rationalization for making a gigantic mistake.

I'm not saying that prior trial counsel was inexperienced.

I'm not saying he's a lousy lawyer, but what I'm saying is in this case he made a mistake.

Are you aware of any case where a court has found that the decision whether to sever is not a strategic decision?

Is not a strategic?

Is there any case that says that?

Deciding whether or not to sever a case is not a strategic decision.

If there's no strategy, it can't be a strategic decision, I guess, is the way it works.

You have to rationalize the strategy.

I don't want to just point to you, Justice Donovan, but you've been in court.

You've done these cases.

This is suicidal to take on something like this.

It's like me saying, I only have to run one mile, but I guess I'll run two.

It's easier to run one.

I only have to lift 50 pounds, but I'll lift 100.

Why?

You don't have to lift 100.

I'll go into the boxing ring and fight one opponent.

Now, bring in another guy, too.

Why?

Why subject yourself to that burden?

There's no strategy or tactic or rationale for going forward in that particular way.

Is that transcript from the deposition of trial counsel part of our record?

Absolutely, yeah, sure.

In fact, you can see in the response to the state's brief where it's set forth.

I believe there was a concession by the state that, in fact, it is part of the record.

Could you address the state's suggestion that the scope of the waiver of the attorney-client privilege

may not have been broad enough to address all the issues that bore on the decision this ever?

Not this ever.

No.

I think that, again, that's a losery.

In fact, there's no specifics that you can attach to it, and that's also addressed in the response to the state's brief.

You can cut right to it.

In fact, I think it's on the last page of our response to the state's brief.

What deference do we owe the trial court, if any?

Actually, the trial court, frankly, should have exercised its sound discretion under Rule 20

and on its own as the gatekeeper with regard to this trial should not have allowed jointer.

As you can see under Rule 20 that that is allowable.

In fact, it's encouraged.

In fact, under Rule 20 and under the ABA standards, there should have been a motion file to allow this jointer to happen.

One, there should have been advice and consent on the part of the defendant.

Two, and none of that is in the record.

I mean, all of this was ignored.

This thing went wild.

Didn't the case start as a single case?

Start as a single case?

In other words, it was indicted and under one docket from the beginning.

Yeah, but it doesn't matter.

I mean, administratively, it doesn't matter.

Who cares?

Why would there need to be a motion to join if it's already joined?

It shouldn't be joined.

It's improper jointer, period.

One, just because administratively, there's a docket number on an improper case doesn't make it a jointer.

What makes it a jointer is when trial counsel allows it to be a jointer.

What should have been happening in this case was that there should have been a red flag that alerted counsel immediately to separate these particular accusers

so that one can't be used with the other against the defendant.

But you're saying the defense should have filed a motion to sever,

but are you telling us that the state should have filed a motion to join

even though it was already a single docket with two charges?

Well, I mean, both ways.

Let's put it this way.

There are unrelated cases.

There's no assertion by the prosecutor during the course of this trial

that these were related cases.

They're unrelated cases.

You can see it for yourself with regard to the facts.

One does not depend on the other to go forward.

Each can go to trial on its own merit or lack thereof without the other.

They're not interdependent.

They're not intertwined.

And because an administrative docket number is placed on a case,

that doesn't make them necessarily joined.

But I have to say, one, the gatekeeper, the trial judge,

I believe really in this case should have exercised sound judicial discretion

and not allowed these to go forward at the same time.

I see my red lights on.

I did reserve two minutes.

Thank you.

Good morning, Your Honors.

Elizabeth Woodcock for the State of New Hampshire.

I want to address Mr. Siste's last point first.

He has criticized the trial court for allowing these cases to go forward together.

That would have been a proper argument for him to raise before this court

if he had decided to raise that as a matter of direct appeal.

He didn't do it.

And that's not properly before the court.

It's not proper for this court to second guess the decisions of the trial court.

Because before this court is whether the post-conviction court

properly considered the record and determined that the decision

to allow these two cases to go forward was a strategic decision

and was owed deference.

Justice Countway really kind of pointed this out

in one of her initial questions.

This is a case of double deference.

This court defers to the post-conviction court

which defers to the strategic decisions of the defense attorney.

Now one of the things that Mr. Siste pointed out

was that there is no confession in this case.

No scientific evidence.

Those were things that maybe to Mr. Siste

that means that the cases should be severed.

But it might mean something else to someone else who's looking at the case.

And I think that that's what the trial counsel made clear in this,

that he was looking at two cases that he thought were weak

and that he thought that if you tried them together

you could use the weaknesses of both cases to undermine each other.

The suggestion that the defense makes in its reply brief

that there was no strategy here in that the statements of the two alleged

or actual victims really weren't used to good effect.

Well that's not true.

On cross-examination defense counsel brought out the fact

that the daughter had this conflict with her mother

and that they were in sort of constant, I don't know, conflict.

The mother is saying, you know, you've kissed a boy, you're a whore,

telling her all these different things,

that that conflict might to a jury, persuade the jury

that neither one of these people was believable.

And that was a decision that trial counsel made

after talking about his strategy with another lawyer.

I think he said that he didn't actually tell George Osler

exactly why he had not moved to sever the cases,

but he did talk to George Osler from whom he'd taken the case

about his strategy.

He also talked about his relationship with his client

and he said that he felt that he had a good relationship with the client

and that therefore as he was making these decisions

he was trying to figure out what the best way of approaching this case was.

Well, the post-conviction court in hearing his testimony

and reviewing the deposition drew a conclusion

that this was a reasonable strategy

and this court owes that deference.

You know, what I think the defense actually argues here

is that this case could have been tried differently

and certainly it could have.

But in the reply brief the defense says

that the analysis that the trial counsel had gone through before trial

wasn't used, essentially.

And that's on page 9, I think, of the reply brief.

It wasn't used.

I think that that's not true because as I've pointed out

it was used on cross-examination.

But that's not the point.

The point isn't that you get to sit down

and read the trial transcript and say,

oh, wow, that backfired, that didn't work

and therefore counsel was ineffective.

If that were the case, every single time a defendant was acquitted

you'd have an ineffective assistance of counsel claim

because you'd be able to sit down and look and say,

oh, see, that strategy didn't work.

But that's not the point at which defense counsel

is making that strategic decision.

Defense counsel is making that strategic decision

without the benefit of hearing the testimony

of all the state's witnesses.

It's making that decision without the benefit

of hearing whether these people come across

as being credible or not.

And in this case defense counsel asked his client

why would they possibly be lying

and his client had no explanation.

So defense counsel had to come up with a plan

that would say to the jury,

these people are not reliable.

They're not telling the truth.

And that is a strategic decision.

Now the court asked about whether there is any case law

that says that a decision not to move to sever

is not strategic.

And I could not find it.

I looked, the court is aware,

I even cited an unpublished decision.

There isn't very much case law that I have been able to find

with respect to that.

But all of the courts who have reviewed the decision

to move to sever or not to sever

have said that that is a strategic decision.

I know that the court has had a lot of arguments this morning.

If the court has any specific questions,

I'd be happy to answer them.

Otherwise I'll yield the podium.

You just respond to the argument and the reply brief

that there was actually no evidence

of the so-called Chelsea motive?

I think that there was some evidence of it

when they questioned both Chelsea and the mother.

They asked about the defense attorney

asked a number of different questions.

So I think that there was some.

I don't think that it was compelling,

but I don't think that that's the point

at which you asked the question.

You ask that question when the defense lawyer

is drawing up his strategy and you say,

well, at the time he's making this decision,

does it make sense to go forward with this plan?

The fact that it doesn't come to fruition at trial,

I don't think that that means

that the decision is not strategic.

I've tried a lot of cases before I started working

in appeals and there are a lot of times

when things happened at trial that I didn't anticipate.

But that doesn't mean that I wasn't prepared

and that I didn't have a strategy in going forward.

So it's strategic but doesn't require consultation

with the client?

It does not.

I have not found anything that requires a lawyer

to talk over strategy with the client.

This particular decision,

I have not found anything that requires that.

I will point out that...

What about the ABA standard on which the defendant relies?

Pardon me, Your Honor.

The ABA standards.

They're not mandatory.

They haven't been mandatory with this court,

but I think that the other question, Your Honor,

is while he's making this decision,

he is engaged with the client.

He is talking to them.

He's trying to figure out what the best approach is

on a couple of different occasions during the hearing.

He says when he's trying to answer a question,

I don't know if that's covered by the waiver.

Nobody tries to clear that up.

And so we don't have a complete answer, I think,

is the way that I read that transcript,

because nobody says, well,

neither the court nor the prosecution

nor the defense attorney says, oh, yeah, sure, it's covered.

So we don't know what his hesitance is

in giving a complete answer.

But he does say that he was engaged with this client,

that they talked about a number of different things,

that he felt he had a good relationship with them,

and that in looking at the case,

talking about it with George Osler,

he came to the conclusion

that this was the best way to go forward.

And that, essentially, is a strategic decision.

Judge Bortzing doesn't appear to have addressed

the prejudice prom.

That's correct.

If we disagree with you regarding

trial court's decision not to seek severance,

do we have to send it back for analysis of prejudice,

or can we decide that on this record?

I think that you can't decide it on this record.

And the reason is that this court

is a court that reviews records.

And right now what we have is we have

the defense attorney's explanation

for why he did what he did.

We do not have an explanation from a trial court

as to why having reviewed all that testimony,

looked at the deposition, gone over the trial,

why the court found that there was no prejudice.

And I think in order for this court

to review the record fairly,

it has to have had a trial court

go through the record and make a determination

as to whether there is prejudice in this case.

The only time I can recall in recent memory

when the court just sort of presumed prejudice

was the Mallard case.

But that involved a question posed to a witness

that involved a racial trope.

And I think that this court said,

that's too much, but on this record

I don't think that you have that compelling situation.

So I think you should send it back to the trial court

if you disagree with the question of ineffectiveness.

If the court has no further questions.

Thank you.

Thank you for allowing me the two minutes.

Let's be very clear.

Prior counsel made it extremely clear during deposition

and during the course of the post-conviction litigation

that he did not consult with his client

with regard to severance.

Let's not be elusive about this.

Let's not dance around this.

That question's answered.

That was not on the table.

Let's not discuss it.

Is that dispositive in itself?

It may be, because under Rule 20,

paragraph two,

Joinder of related cases, offenses.

If the defendant is charged with two or more related offenses,

either party may move for a Joinder of such charges.

The trial judge shall join the charges for trial

unless the trial judge determines that Joinder

is not in the best interests of justice.

We still have the court involved.

But more importantly, paragraph three,

Joinder of unrelated offenses.

Upon written motion of a defendant

or with the defendant's written consent,

the trial judge may join for trial

two or more charges of unrelated offenses.

Upon showing the failure to try the charges together

would constitute harassment

or unduly consume the time of the resources

of the parties.

The trial judge shall join the charges

for trial unless the trial judge determines that Joinder

is not in the best interests of justice.

Joining these particular cases

was not in the best interest of justice.

There is no articulable strategy

where any competent defense attorney

would invite testimony

of unrelated sexual contact

by another individual in the courtroom

in an effort to defend his client.

Mr. Sissy, do you agree with Attorney Woodcock

that if we agree with you

that the remedy would be to remand

for a finding of whether or not there was prejudice?

No, I think this court has sufficient

case law behind it

as recently as the Pierce case to know

that this is the kind of evidence

that if presented during the course of trial

is just dynamite

as far as being a reversible error.

There's no question that this should not have come in.

This is a no-brainer.

This is one that it amazes me

and Attorney Woodcock, if I could,

stated she's been engaged in trials for a while.

I have two, you know, 46 years.

I know George Osler.

I know this trial lawyer.

I was the deputy director when he was hired

at the New Hampshire Public Defender.

He made a mistake.

Thank you very much, counsel.

The case is submitted.

Here you go.
