This is case 2020-0545, appeal of Dairy.

Good morning. Good morning, Your Honors. May please the court counsel. My name is Nathan

Madol. I represent the town of Dairy. We're here today asking this court to reverse the

Housing Appeals Board and affirm the ZBA's decision to deny a road frontage variance

requested by the respondents. As reflected in the certified record, the ZBA adequately

considered respondents' variance requests and properly determined respondents failed to

satisfy their burden in establishing the diminished property values in spirit and intent of the

ordinance variance criteria under RSA 64. So what was the evidence of the diminished

property values that the ZBA, the board considered? The ZBA and direct abutters as well as

the ZBA members themselves had concerns about the privacy that this particular

application would cause and the reduction in privacy to direct abutters. Was it a big

factor? How is a reduction in privacy because somebody does something on their

land? How is that an appreciable value and something that the zoning ordinance

or the site plan regulations can even consider? The first comment I would

make to that is this court has previously determined that reduction in privacy can be

the basis, can be a valid basis for determining that there's been a reduction

in the value of property. And that's in the Bedford-Vaha case that we said to

in our brief. And in that case, this court upheld a master's decision to

affirm the zoning board of adjustment on diminished property values because the

record demonstrated quote, limited privacy has caused the property values to

drop. And was there any expert testimony in this case? On the expert

testimony question and that was an issue that was raised with the respondents

in their brief. This court has been very clear that expert testimony is not

required to establish a reason that the ZBA deny a variance request under

674.33. But we also don't allow them to rely on speculation. That is

true. You can't rely on unreasonable speculation, but here it was more than

speculation. You had the director Butter who testified and provided comments

at the ZBA that this development would cause privacy concerns. Even though

the house is going to be built hundreds of feet away from the budding

property. And it's not just the house. That's the issue. So if you look at

page 116 of the certified record, you can see an overview of what this

lot looks like. And you can see the very narrow strip that's directly abutting

the neighboring property was always intended to be an access way. It was

intended and this is in the record as well as intended to be an access way

originally as a utility lot, not as a paved road with delivery trucks, people

going up and down all the time. A driver to a home is a different use, a

different level of invasion of privacy than a dirt access way to a utility

lot. It could be an improvement if you have cars rather than utility trucks

going up and down the road. I missed the first part of the question. It could

be an improvement if it's just a house with traffic going in and out. It

might be an improvement from a utility access way that would also need to be

cleared. So I'm just, I'm unsure of the relationship between a non-used utility

access that's now going to be opened up for the driveway purposes. How that is

different from what was intended in the first place. What the record reflects

from the understanding of the neighborhood residents and the

directive orders to this proposed lot is the intention was to have a very

seldom used utility access point. Whether it's cleared or not, that would be

something, and by the way, it hadn't been used as that for decades. Right. So

everybody starts to rely on the fact that this is never going to be used, but

that's not reality. And that was disputed. Nobody actually came up

with the individual that made that representation. Nobody identified that

person, right? That's correct. There was no dispute that, there was no

dispute that it hasn't been used for anything for, I think, three decades,

and there's no dispute that whoever was representing that that was the original

intention, that that point wasn't disputed in the record. It was

everyone's understanding that the original intention was to use this

eventually as an access point to a well, and that would be a less

intrusive use on this lot than what the proposed use is here, which is a

paved road with daily traffic right along the property line, causing

privacy concerns. Is there any, is there any deeded restriction or any

restriction in the subdivision plan that would limit the property to that

use? The original approved subdivision plan, my understanding, did

approve this use as a well utility lot. They, since that haven't used it

that way, and there's nothing that required to use it that way, they've

now moved forward submitting this application. Right. So for, Justice

McDonald lives on a golf course. He's not guaranteed that there's always

going to be a golf course. You might have, that's property might be

sold and be developed. He doesn't have a basis for reacting to that,

does he? Well, the basis for rejecting from the abutters isn't solely

that this is being used for something different than what they

thought it was going to be used for. That is in the record, and there

were people who raised, butters who raised that concern. The true basis

for the reasoning of the reduction of property values were abutters

concerned about the reduce of their privacy. And how the proposed use

here, yes, it's different than what they thought it would be used for,

but beyond that, it's going to have more of an effect on the

privacy and the reasons that they, that they purchased their homes.

And so they testified to that, they made that pitch to the ZBA, and

the ZBA has the de novo initial body that's considering the variance

application was entitled to rely on those representations that were

made by the direct abutters here in this case. Where the housing

appeals board aired on that point is they discredited the abutters

concerns, and they more heavily weighed the representations that

were made by the applicant, the representations that well, it's

not going to affect privacy. It's going to be fine. It's going

to be in the back of the house. The housing appeals board may

disagree with the original with the decision that was made by

the zoning board of adjustments, but that's not their

role.

Isn't they have entitled to look at the record and find out

if there's evidence to support the ZBA's conclusion? And if

there is no such evidence, then their conclusions are erroneous.

Isn't that what they decided?

If there's no such evidence, I would agree with you. But in

this case, and in the record before the housing appeals board,

there was evidence. And evidence consists of the aerial photos

of physically how the lot looks, the concerns raised

directly by the abutters who are going to have a reduced

privacy as a result, the concerns raised by the

zoning board, the concerns raised by the zoning board

and the concerns raised by the zoning board.

So, yes, I agree with the concept that the HAB can and

should look at the record and if there truly is no evidence

in the record supporting the ZBA's decision, reverse the

ZBA. But that's not what they did here. Here they looked at

the record and they said, well, we don't agree with the

ZBA's weighing of the evidence. And so we aren't going to

consider that. The other issue.

I want to the argument that the ZBA did in fact consider all

five factors and only explicitly addressed the two that

the project did not meet, so that they did in fact look at

all five factors as opposed to just the two.

On the factor issue, I think it's clear that the decision

is based on spirit and the ordinance factors, as well as

the reduction of property value.

Why didn't they address the other three factors?

That is potentially a confusing point and the Housing

Appeals Board did raise that and if that was a concern for

the Housing Appeals Board, so they felt like the ZBA didn't

properly consider those factors, or maybe they did and

implicitly decided that the applicant met those factors.

My reading of the Housing Appeals Board order is they

didn't think the Housing Appeals Board didn't think the ZBA

properly considered those factors. And if that's the case,

rather than step into the shoes of the ZBA and consider

those factors in the first instance, the Housing Appeals

Board should have remanded it to the ZBA to get clarity

on why those factors weren't considered or whether there

should have been a consideration.

So they have cannot address those factors in the first instance.

It's not permitted to do so.

It's permitted to address factors in the first instance under

very specific circumstances and that isn't met here.

So the Housing Appeals Board and the Superior Court

does it need to remand and can consider those in the first

instance only if the trial court could find, as a matter of

law, that the correct legal standard was met.

That's in the Chester, Rod and Gunn case, first town

of Chester. But there's at least three other

exceptions, or not exceptions, three other situations

where the proper step for the Housing Appeals Board to

take would have been to remand. And you see those

in the Cali first town of Dummer, Zoning Board of

Adjustment case, given an opportunity to clarify

its decision based upon the pre-existing record.

So if there was concern about an issue

and why the ZBA didn't consider those factors.

But what about RSA 67631, which says,

the Board shall provide the applicant, if it's

not approved, with written reasons for the disapproval,

disapproval. So if the other three

aren't included, those would not be reasons for the

disapproval. Here there were reasons provided

regarding the disapproval. And it was called the two factors,

not the other three. So I don't read the statute

as contemplating this round robin of, ah, here are two issues.

Oh, wait, we remand set it back. Now we're going to look at all five again.

And there are two other issues that to me doesn't seem to

comport with the expedited structure of these

appeals. I don't think it would be a round robin

type situation. I think that the court has been very clear that there are appropriate circumstances

to remand to the ZBA. It's certainly not

never, there's certainly not an inability to

remand to the ZBA. And there are at least three situations.

Again, as I was mentioning, the summer case,

we also can see this in the Barlett v. City of Manchester case,

remand the case to the ZBA to consider the issue in the first instance.

But how is this argument preserved? Did you make this argument to the have?

Council at the Housing Appeals Board did file a motion for reconsideration

with the Housing Appeals Board. Towns Council at the time did, we argue,

implicitly raise this in the motion that was implied.

You know, they did argue the Housing Appeals Board essentially usurped the role of the ZBA

by substituting its judgment for the board, which is reversible error.

And the certified record shows testimony of the voters who were concerned about the loss of

privacy. Did anyone claim in a motion for

re-hearing with the ZBA that the ZBA had aired because it hadn't reached those

other factors? At the Housing Appeals Board, the arguments

were focused on, to answer your question directly, no, it was not raised

by the Housing Appeals Board. No, I'm asking about at the ZBA.

Because, so if you're in a butter or if you're one of the

interested public and the issue isn't reached,

how do you, the motion that those issues are

waived and they haven't been addressed, how would a

butter know how to appeal or another interested party know how to appeal?

Right, and there's no indication in the minutes that those issues were raised.

Well, there was no, the hearing was, the request for a hearing was denied.

So there was no opportunity to raise those issues.

There was no, the question of the remaining variance factors

were not really raised in a meaningful way for the ZBA.

They were, it was raised for the first time by the Housing Appeals Board

on its own in its order where it said it went through the analysis

of the issues were raised at the ZBA, but we think there's

no reason for us to decide it in the first instance. And that's where

the analysis of the unnecessary hardship and the remaining factors first

appeared in the record. So yes, to the extent that there were a butters

or others who would have objected to that or seek notice

of an issue on that, that does not happen at the ZBA. And that's another reason

if there was unclarity as to

the ZBA not taking the proper steps that should have been addressing all five factors,

that's stronger evidence that the Housing Appeals Board should have

remanded it back to consider those not in a room, Robin, just for the one time.

Thank you. We reserve two minutes.

Thank you. May it please the court? Attorney Israel Piedron for the

Cooper family. The purpose of zoning ordinances

is to excuse technical non-compliance with the provisions

of an ordinance and the letter of it without

sacrificing the purpose and the spirit of that ordinance provision.

And overlying or underlying

overarching purpose is to make sure the property owner's

constitutional right to use their property is preserved when it can be done

in a reasonable way. The Coopers here want to build a single

single family home on a 2.5 or 2.6 acre

lot of record that's in a residential zone

it's in a neighborhood with other single family houses

the building site is hundreds of feet from other houses

there's plenty of privacy that's included except the lot only has

108 feet of frontage when 150 feet is required

108 versus 150

so it's a third less frontage than

required. Correct. When obviously

there's a lot of efficiency in a lot meeting a zoning requirement

you look at whether the purpose of that zoning requirement can be served

even if a variance is granted. So it's not a question

of mathematical percentage wise it's is that

land sufficient to meet the purposes of the ordinance which

requirement which is seeking a waiver from. And in this case

it's indisputable that the purposes of the frontage

requirement would be served even with the variance being granted

to and protecting overcrowding to

ensure emergency vehicle access. With 108

feet of frontage there was ample room to build

a driveway that meets all town standards. The town of

Derry has very rigorous driveway standards

that require a minimum width that require certain

shoulders that require certain grading and certain materials to be used

up to basically you know DOT standards. So you'd be making

the same argument if there were 25 feet of frontage if there was just enough

to build a driveway that is enough from your perspective.

I don't know that 25 feet would be enough but yes your point

is correct that as long as there is

sufficient room to meet all the purposes of the frontage requirement

in that situation then yes.

Now if this were a situation where there were only 30 feet of

frontage you're obviously not going to be able to build a house on a 30 foot wide

strip of land and so the overcrowding goal

of the frontage requirement would not be met or even if this was

a you know 100 feet of frontage and then it didn't

go back hundreds of feet to the back lot which is buildable

that could be an issue. In this situation it's a unique piece of land

that has this strip of an access way

that's owned in fee simple and it goes back hundreds

of feet to a buildable lot. Is there any factual dispute as the

representations that were made at the time the butters

bought their properties as to the

use of that property that it wasn't going to be developed for residential

purposes but rather it would be an access for a while.

Any dispute about that? Well I think that there is a dispute

yeah I mean in the sense that the butters

you know testified here say in speculation that

they had been told or they believed X, Y and Z. Well it's not here say

if they say that that was what was represented to me is it

that's they're saying what their understanding was

based on something that was said to them. I think

that the central question would be what was said to them which would be here say

but you know I'm not sure it's relevant

the fact is there was no

covenant that says a lot can't be built upon

there's nothing in you know the myths from the prior

zoning variance application that says it can't be built upon

there was probably an assumption by the butters that if a zoning variance

been denied previously that they would never be able to build

and the signed site plan indicates it's going to be a community

water supply lot. And so

certainly in a butter who's buying a house there

and does their due diligence and sees the signed site plan can't they rely on that

I don't think that they can rely on it to the detriment of the property

owner. I think they can make assumptions that in a lot of cases. So did the

Cooper's own the property from the beginning? Did they subdivide the lots? They did

but I should note that the butters none of the butters purchased from the Cooper's

this happened decades ago that Cooper's

subdivided this property and so to the extent that

there's you know an implication that the Cooper's themselves

my clients made representations about what the property could be

for. That's not the case because none of these butters purchased from them. Except

through the site plan process right. They created

the site plan. Again I agree with you

I wouldn't consider that a finding representation other than

you know it is what it is. Well it was that

a substandard lot in terms of frontage at the time

it was created. So I'm not sure of the answer to that

but I seem to recall that perhaps the frontage requirement was less

at the time that the lot was subdivided but I can't

remember whether it was a hundred feet. Well certainly the acreage was different

at the time of the subdivision because the butters lots

don't meet the two acre requirement correct? Yeah I think that's the case

I know that certainly they're non conforming at this point

with the minimum acreage being two and you're right

the butters are less than two acres. Again I'm

not quite sure, can't say for sure because I didn't review the ordinance at that time

Why is the Fisher doctrine not implicated here given that there was

a request for a variance that was denied?

Because in the intervening period of years as the

court was aware the variance criteria changed

rather dramatically or you know in a dramatic

fashion I guess necessarily the requirements didn't change all that much

but the doctrine was revised from the simplex doctrine

being codified statutorily between

two variance applications and so under

the court's precedent

forget the exact case

that change in the state of the law constitutes a substantial

change since sufficient

to remove rescue to collect concerns that's what the zoning board found

that wasn't appealed by anyone it was a challenge before the half

by the town and I think it was a correct

determination in any instance.

Did your client file a

motion for a request for re-hearing in front of the ZBA

it must have and did it

raise the issue that wait a minute you guys didn't address those other three factors

so you ought to correct that error.

I'm not sure whether it did explicitly or not I'm truly not sure because I don't remember

a word I know the gist of it was saying we meet

all five variance factors and I think that's implied

but I would go back to what Justice Hans Marconi

said and that the statute requires the zoning board

to provide the reasons for its denial and so

it can come on the board to do that whether or not requested an emotion for re-hearing.

But any factor is sufficient for a denial right

lacking any of the required

factors is sufficient to deny it.

And then the others weren't reached. I agree

I don't see the relevance to the propriety if the suggestion

there's you know my client arguments on appeal weren't preserved

I don't see that because of

the context of the petition for re-hearing saying we met all five

factors I'm not sure what else.

I don't think that it has much legal effect except that it

gives the trial court or the habit situation less of a record to

defer to and so in fact I would say that it gives the

more latitude to reach those factors because it doesn't have finding

from the board to treat

as prima facie reasonable. You know the court has said

that the absence or the failure of the ZPA to make findings

is not in and of itself error but

when you make findings it helps the appeals or the HAB review that

decision and so in this case I think it just

creates a situation where it's not necessarily a deficiency

but it just creates HAB more flexibility to

reach those issues and make those findings.

And there was evidence in the record to support the HAB's conclusion on the other factors?

I believe so. I believe that you know the

evidence was overwhelming that in this situation for example

if this variance isn't granted my clients cannot use

our property at all for any purpose really I'm certainly

no reasonable purpose and so that's kind of what a variance is tailored

for and I think when you talk about the use that's permitted

a lot that's a lot of record that meets and exceeds

all the variance requirements for all the zoning requirements and you can grant a variance

other than except for one

and the one that it doesn't meet can be waived without

impacting the purpose of that zoning requirement. Right.

The frontage itself, 108 feet

isn't the reason for the lack of privacy

further up the driveway. Absolutely.

So as you rightly pointed out that strip of land

would have been and still could be clear cut

regardless of whether this variance is granted. So where is the causal

relationship between granting this variance and the

claimed loss of privacy first of all and then how do you get

from loss of privacy to diminution of property value? I don't see any

connection at all and I don't think that's a valid basis for the zoning board to have

found that. If indeed it did find that which I should

say is questionable in my opinion

there's no written findings of fact which again it's not required to make

at that point. The statute has now been amended it is but

there's a minute with one board member

expressing a concern about privacy values

two board members expressing concern about spirit of the ordinance

I mean is that a finding that the

one board member out of five made a concern about privacy?

I personally don't think that's a finding of the board that's an opinion of one member

I don't think it's relevant because on this record the

HAB could have found and did find correctly that

there's no reasonable basis to find diminution of property value

and again I think that this is exactly what the variance process was meant

to ensure that this property owner can use the property in a reasonable way

without violating anything. And why was it appropriate for

the HAB in the first instance to address hardship?

Well as my opponent even conceded the HAB can

address things and

affirmatively find that variance factors are satisfied on an appropriate

record and again in this situation we have a unique property

that's you know uncontested cannot be used

except for variance that's the definition of a hardship

that's being used as a wood lot.

I think that it can't have a reasonable use. I don't think that's a reasonable use in a residential zone

and I would say I mean that's the second way

to establish a hardship but certainly in the first way this is a

unique lot and the zoning provision doesn't have

a substantial relationship to the purpose that it's trying to...

And is it unique only because it has 108 rather than

one inch or what else makes it unique? The fact that it's essentially a back lot

where it has a strip of land that goes back to a... opens up to a large

two plus acre back lot that's hundreds of feet

from the street that's unique for this area.

Was the HAB making a determination that as a matter of law

was no one necessary hardship? I don't know if I've raised it that way

I think that they have making a determination that

that evidence could only support that inclusion.

So I think it's a finding a fact that

this doesn't matter of law so I guess I'll correct myself. I do agree.

And it was entitled to do that under the case law if the evidence so supported

and the town didn't challenge that finding by the HAB. I should

reiterate that's not before the court properly. It's not preserved.

The statute's very clear that things have to be laid out

very clearly and explicitly in a motion for...

The town never asked for a remand to the ZVA. Never asked for a remand

and never discussed most of the variance factors in their motion for

rehearing. So that issue is simply not preserved in my opinion.

Unless the court has further questions. Thank you.

What about that preservation issue?

Your Honor on the preservation issue the town's position is that the council at the housing

appeals board did preserve it implicitly in the motion that was filed

by the housing appeals board. Saying that the housing appeals board

did no review the ZVA.

You served the role of the ZVA. Meaning they put themselves into the shoes

of the ZVA and in doing so made determinations in the

first instance. But you admit that they never asked for a remand to the ZVA.

The words remand are not found in the motion for reconsideration that were filed.

The argument that the town has presented to this court is that

that request was implicitly made. And there's cases to support this

that even if an issue wasn't directly raised. If it's implicitly raised within

the motion that's filed to the housing appeals board. Then

this court in the interest of justice and based on the implicit request

find that it was raised and move forward with the analysis.

There was a comment made about earlier

in my opponent's presentation about the record

as to the well lot. I would like to direct the court's attention to certified record

which is 68. Which very clearly shows

this lot was recorded notified early on as a community water

supply lot. And that was the original intent. Anyone

who was doing due diligence in purchasing these properties would have seen that.

Would have relied on that. The argument that the town

butters are making isn't that you have to

you have to use it as a community well lot. It's that that's what we intended

you were going to use it as. That's what we thought you were going to use it as.

Doing something different affects privacy in a different way.

Perhaps they wouldn't have purchased their property. Perhaps they would have purchased it at a reduced

value. That were a butters concerns

on the privacy point. And the ZVA relied

on those ZVA weighed those more favorably

than they weren't town was not forcing

the applicants to adhere to that

plan. They weren't forcing them to adhere to it. They were part of their decision

making was not that that's what you said that's what you have to do. They were

considering the change of use I'll say but

measure the different impact.

This case is submitted.
