This is case 2020-20098, town of Conway versus Scott Kudrick.

Tony Hilliard, understand your reserve two minutes.

Thank you, Your Honor. May it please the court. Excuse me.

My name is Russell Hilliard. I'm with the firm up in Hatfield

and with Jason Dennis from the Hastings law firm in Freiburg

where privileged to represent, excuse me, the town of Conway,

which respectfully submits that the trial court did not

improperly interpret Conway's zoning ordinance,

failed to give any real meaning to the phrase living as a household,

and should have determined that short-term rentals,

as operated by the defendant Mr. Kudrick,

are prohibited in the residential districts in Conway.

There are several very important things in this case that are undisputed.

Conway has a permissive zoning ordinance, meaning that unless a use

is expressly permitted in the ordinance, it is prohibited.

The Conway permitted use table in the appendix of 353,

which is the starting point of an analysis such as this,

according to your recent decision in working staff versus Portsmouth,

creates residential districts in the town with very defined

and limited commercial activities being permitted.

Some of those permissible business activities in residential districts

include owner operated, excuse me, owner occupied,

tourist homes, boarding homes, and beds and breakfast.

But non-owner occupied, those types of uses,

including hotels and motels, are prohibited in the residential districts.

They are allowed in the commercial districts.

Non-owner occupied, tourist homes, boarding homes, et cetera,

are allowed in commercial districts, not in the residential districts.

Can people who are not related to one another form a living household?

Is that your argument?

I'm sorry, Your Honor.

Can people who are not related to one another,

can they not form their own living household?

Yes, they can if they're living as a household.

I'm sorry that somehow the Trial Court got the impression

that I was advocating that there had to be a familial relationship.

We were not arguing that, but there's a reference to that in the order.

It's not the case, but they have to be living as a household.

The Trial Court took that phrase and just said,

all that means is being alive in the same place.

And I submit to you that that interpretation of that phrase

essentially writes it right out of the ordinance.

Because if you take that phrase, if all it means is being alive in the same place,

then the words have no meaning in the ordinance.

And the ordinance would apply, the definition of residential slash dwelling unit

would apply to permit hotels and motels

to own what would appear to be single-family homes

in residential districts and rent them by the night to guests,

checking in and checking out as you do at a hotel.

And that just can't be the intent of the Conway Ordinance as a whole

to permit that kind of use to take place in the residential districts.

Now, Mr. Kudrick's operation you have in the appendix beginning at page 53,

he's running a business, he's renting houses by the night

or by the day to guests at $125 to $525 a night.

It's all on a website.

Three of his six properties are in residential districts in the town of Conway.

There's a one-bedroom that has six guests, four-bedroom, 14 guests, two-bedroom, six guests.

It's undisputed that he never occupies these properties himself.

I included the websites in the record as part of one of my motions

because I wanted the trial court in you ultimately to see the nature of this operation

through the website advertising.

And they don't mean to be facetious, but if you look at those website pages,

one of the things that's emphasized is a great check-in experience.

If that's not an indication that we're dealing with a series of many hotels.

But isn't our problem here that this being a permissive ordinance,

and I don't know when it might have shifted from being a restrictive ordinance

to being a permissive ordinance, but once you're in that rubric,

then you have definitions that mean something at the time they are enacted,

which is before the prevalence of this type of rental.

And so aren't we really being asked to play catch-up

and take a definition that was established under one understanding

and apply it to a new use?

And isn't that something that should be done by the legislature in this case,

the town, regulating what has become a new use

so that there is clarity to the people who own the property?

Ideally that is certainly the case, Your Honor.

And in thinking about this case in preparation for today,

of course I've been thinking about how often the U.S. Supreme Court

has to deal with the constitutional question and our cell phones,

what's the privacy aspect of cell phones?

It's the same thing because in, I can't remember, it was 1960 or 1980

when Conway adopted zoning.

One of those two years, but obviously long before this,

in the absence of legislation, either at the state or local level,

we've got to interpret this ordinance as a whole.

And as this court made crystal clear in the working stiff case,

it's looking at the ordinance as a whole, not at isolated words or phrases.

And what is the intent of this ordinance?

There was, at least the amicus on the other side,

cited, collected a lot of cases from other jurisdictions

that as I pointed out in our reply,

we're not dealing with homeowners association restrictor covenant.

We're not dealing with states that don't have permissive zoning ordinance standard.

And we're not dealing with states such as Texas,

the jurisdiction that the trial court cited,

where zoning ordinances are strictly construed against the municipality

in the favor of the homeowner landowner.

We're dealing with New Hampshire law.

It's permissive ordinance if the use isn't there,

and that's the real problem here.

The trial court, that's the right word,

the trial court approved a use that can't be found

if the use isn't there and the table of uses isn't the remedy

to go to town meeting and try to add it so that it becomes a permitted use.

That's certainly the remedy for those who wish to have that type of use.

And until that time, it's prohibited

because it's not a permitted use on the use table.

It's not a permitted use under this table.

Well, where did the trial judge go wrong then?

Is that simple?

I'm sorry, Your Honor.

I said, where did the trial judge go wrong then if it is that simple?

The trial judge went wrong by failing to give any meaning

to the phrase living as a household

in the definition of residential slash dwelling unit.

So what does it mean?

What's your interpretation of that language?

We've suggested one on our briefing, Your Honor.

We've suggested one a number of times to be living as a unit

and one or more persons, no blood relation,

no familiar relation required,

that intends to maintain a usual residence in the same dwelling place.

The words, the definition is of the phrase residential slash dwelling unit.

There's got to be some sense that the words residential and dwelling

mean something for how we interpret the words that follow.

But is it a definition of the sort of use to be contrasted with running a restaurant

or running a school in a residential building?

They're living as a household,

meaning occupying the building as one would occupy a dwelling.

Right, but that incorporates something more than an overnight stay on vacation.

That concept does, and that's where we part company.

I guess that's the rub.

Can I live?

Can I occupy a residence for one day?

And if the trial judge is right, I don't mean to repeat it,

but it struck me about this case from day one.

If the trial judge interpretation is right, what are they called?

Residents in by Marriott, Homeward Suites by Hilton.

They could go into a residential district in Conway,

purchase every single house on a street,

and then check people in at three and out at 11 the next day.

A change in the form of ownership though.

I think we already decided that.

Whether condo or direct ownership or who the owner is doesn't really matter.

Well, what it tells you that it's a business,

it's a commercial activity, and not a residential use.

That's what it tells you.

And that's why I've said several times and tried to emphasize.

We're not talking about a couple.

Let me just interrupt.

There are entities out there, not Marriott,

but investment firms that are buying single-family residences

and renting them.

And so how do we limit the duration?

They might be renting them for a month, six months.

I'm asking for on these facts, this gentleman and his six properties

that are rented by the night constitute a business activity

that is not consistent with a residential use as defined in the ordinance.

I take it, Mr. Hillier, if somebody is leasing that same house

for a year, that's not a problem for your perspective.

If it's for a month, is that a problem from your perspective?

Does that violate the statute?

Are they ordinance?

I've got two answers if you mind.

Your Honor, one is I'm not entirely certain where the line is,

but I do know the Mr. Kudricks over on this side of it,

which is short-term rentals prohibited.

It's probably 30 days.

If you look, the briefs have collected,

I don't think every reference anywhere in state statutes.

You agree that the ordinance doesn't say anything about days, duration, does it?

It doesn't.

Why do you want us to rewrite the ordinance?

I'm not asking you to rewrite.

I'm asking you, Your Honor, to recognize that the way these properties are used

is a business activity.

But commercial purposes are allowed in the residential dwelling area

with a special exception, right?

Absolutely, Your Honor.

I'm not asking for a special exception or a variance,

but I'm not sure a special exception applies,

but variance certainly would.

But the question is what he's doing permitted as a right,

not whether a zoning board might give an exception or a variance,

and it's just not a use listed in that table of uses.

You're pointing to living as a household as the line in this,

I mean, that's what favors the town under your interpretation.

So you're living as a household if you're living together for greater than 30 days?

I suggest 30 days is probably the right time

because a lot of residential tenancies are months to months.

It's the principal basis for that.

It's a reasonable interpretation, Your Honor.

But that's why it's important to me that this case involves a property owner

who doesn't reside there, never resides there,

and rents them out by the night.

And that scenario is not a permitted use in the town of Conway.

How far out...

But you can lease them for a year or greater than 30 days.

I mean, what line are you asking us to draw here based on this language?

I've said in the brief, I don't think you need to draw the line in this case.

I think you can very well say the case presented is not a permitted use.

Nightly rentals in the residential districts.

That's all I'm asking you to say.

It does make sense to me that...

Oh, I'm sorry.

I was going to say it does make sense to me that

if you look at all the statutes we've collected

and you think about experience in life,

many residential tenancies are month to month,

or they become month to month if you hold over.

So maybe the answer is 30 days,

but that's just not necessary to be determined

to decide that this defendant's operation

is not a permitted use in the town of Conway.

Thank you.

Attorney Johnson.

May it please the court.

My name is Matt Johnson,

and I and my colleague, Saul Wonstock,

from Divine Milliment and Nathan Fendasy

from Freddie Flaherty represent the Epilee, Scott Kudrick.

I'm happy to take questions whenever the court has them.

Mr. Johnson, why isn't Mr. Hilliard's argument

that your interpretation or the trial court's interpretation

renders living as a household as mere surplusage?

Why isn't that the case?

With all due respect to the town,

I think they narrowly interpret the trial court's rule

and trial court's decision was not that narrow.

Living as household, the court found

that living as a household meant it was a social unit

engaging in those activities that are related to

and consistent with household activities.

And again, the trial court tied her analysis

directly to the definition of the zoning order,

which is what this case is about,

textual analysis.

And that definition matters.

The definition of residential slash dwelling unit

is a single unit providing complete

and independent living facilities for one or more household,

one or more persons living as a household,

including provisions for living, sleeping,

eating, cooking, and sanitation.

So simply put, it's not as so simple as saying

they are alive in a unit.

They are alive in a residential unit

doing living, sleeping, eating, cooking, sanitation.

But that still doesn't mean

that doesn't give meaning to living as a household.

What you just described is that sentence

without that term in it,

it still works from the position that you're arguing.

With all due respect, I think it does provide the context

because those final provisions,

the living, sleeping, eating, cooking,

modify and provide context to living as a household

and make it clear that what the court looked at

was the use being undertaken by the individuals

who are occupying the property.

If individuals, a social unit,

occupied the property to engage in a micro-business

or a pop-up store, this is Conway,

so they wanted to do screen printing

or sell t-shirts out of the property.

That would be a commercial use

because they're not using the property

in a residential basis.

Does the client rent the bedrooms out to individuals

who don't know each other, complete strangers?

Would that be a permitted use?

It is a single unit.

He can rent the unit out to a certain number of people.

They do not have to know each other.

They have to operate though as a social unit

where they're living, eating, sleeping together.

That is why, and that is the construct

and that is the use of the property

which makes it residential.

So many winners I go off with a bunch of friends

from college and rent a house for a week to go skiing.

I assume people do that up in Conway as well.

So does a group of friends that assemble

from around the country for four days,

does that satisfy the household definition?

Does it need to?

Yes, it does because people are eating,

sleeping, living together, congregating together.

It is a social unit.

It can't be familial based as the town has conceded

because then if you're asking about who

and what their social connections,

what their familial relationship is,

that's down a path of impermissible discrimination

I would submit.

But that's why the focus has to be on use

and the town makes the point about their permitted use table.

Well, first of all, the permitted use table

may not say short-term rental.

It also doesn't say long-term rental.

And I haven't heard the town or anyone take the position

that a property owner can't have a long-term rental

because a phrase long-term rental

is not in the permitted use table.

What's in the permitted use table

is single-family home, multi-family home apartment,

and those all flow back to the definition

of residential dwelling unit,

and that's what the court was focused on.

Do you agree with the principle that,

given this is a permissive ordinance,

that if the use doesn't fall within

a category that's listed as a permitted use,

it's not permitted?

I would agree with that as a general proposition,

but I would state that it does fall within the use table

because this meets the definition of a single-family home

or a multi-family home by referring

to the residential dwelling unit definition.

And because short-term rental is within that definition,

it is by automatically a permitted use under the table

because those uses of residential dwelling units

are all permitted in the property.

So the question really is, does short-term rental fall

within the definition of residential slash dwelling unit

as set forth in the Conway zoning ordinance?

Is that so?

Even if at the time this ordinance was adopted,

there was no such thing as Airbnb or VRBO,

so people weren't renting their homes by the day

on the Internet.

So that this wasn't contemplated

by the voters of Conway when they adopted it?

It may not have been contemplated by the voters.

If the voters want to change the zoning ordinance

because of new technology, they have a recognized means to do that.

I would note as well, though, that this definition

of residential dwelling unit, at least from my research,

appears to have been the definition for quite some time.

It also doesn't refer to long-term rentals,

which have obviously been a known quantity.

And I would also submit that,

and I think the court could take judicial notice of this fact,

that Conway has long been a vacation town.

People have rented properties there

long before the digital ability to do it much faster.

They have rented it.

So it's a little hard to argue that the zoning,

when putting the zoning together,

Conway would not be aware of the fact

that some households are rented out for short-term purposes

because it is a summer and a winter vacation destination.

And so it's hard to argue that that was not in the context

or not in the mind of the Conway

when it was putting its zoning ordinance together.

Back to my earlier example about strangers

renting out bedrooms in one of your clients' homes.

Isn't that a living household?

Isn't that much more like a boarding house

or a lodging house which is not permitted

in a residential area and needs to be owner-occupied?

To be clear, that's not what my client does.

He rents single units.

He rents single units too.

Yeah, he rents houses.

He rents a dwelling unit being either a two-family

or a single-family.

He is not renting out individual rooms

to disparate groups of people.

So it wouldn't be permitted to do that?

No, because I don't think that would be permitted to do it

because they're not renting it as a whole

because one of the definitions of residential dwelling unit

is a complete independent living setup

which is different and distinct from transient accommodations

which is the specific definition that Conway has

which excludes any location that excludes a kitchen.

So that's why there is a little bit of balancing

and that's why the definition for tourist home

refers to transient accommodations

and refers to renting out rooms or groups of rooms.

So that is a distinction.

Where transient is important.

Significant.

Absolutely.

And one of the important points in this case is that

unlike many cases, including cases cited by all the parties

and including the working stiffs case,

Conway has a specific definition of transient accommodations

which is not what the City of Portsmouth had

and it specifically defines transient accommodations

as not having a kitchen.

And the record is clear, undisputed,

that all of the properties owned by Mr. Kudrick

do have a kitchen.

And so by definition and how the structure

of the Conway zoning ordinance works,

transient accommodations cannot be part

of the residential dwelling unit

and that's the structure that they set up.

And the difference that Tony Hillier pointed to,

homewood suites and residence in

so products that are offered by hotel chains

which do have kitchens.

What's the difference here?

Those are different setups

and those fall within different provisions

of the zoning ordinance.

Those would not fit within the definition

of dwelling unit, residential dwelling unit,

I do not believe.

Should it be any part of our thinking or analysis here

about the types of problems that come

from these daily rentals in terms of traffic,

turnover, garbage, things like that?

Should that be relevant to us?

With all due respect, that's not relevant

to the textual analysis of the zoning ordinance.

The zoning ordinance has to be interpreted

at the way the Conway wrote it.

If Conway has changes or wants to amend it

or update it, obviously they are free to do so

and can do it, but it's really looking

to determine whether short-term rental

is a permitted use because it falls

within the definition of residential dwelling unit.

That's the analysis.

And you don't dispute that Conway

could prohibit short-term use.

It's just you're saying this ordinance doesn't do it.

This ordinance does not do it

and the court does not have to reach that question

because that's not the question before the court today.

But as written now, this Conway zoning ordinance,

as the trial court found, does not prohibit

residential dwelling units.

And I think an important point here to look at

is that Conway knows how to restrict short-term rentals.

They do it in multiple provisions of the zoning ordinance.

There is a provision in the zoning ordinance

where if you want to convert an older home,

1930s are older to a multifamily,

you can do it, but one of the conditions

is it cannot be for short-term rental

and the ordinance specifically says that.

So if you're buying a property,

a person is on notice that that's the provision.

Same thing if you want an accessory dwelling unit

for your property in Conway.

You can do it, but it requires exceptions

and to get the special exception,

one of the requirements is that

neither the single family home

or the accessory dwelling unit

can be used for short-term rental.

And for the older home, they even define short-term rental

as nothing less than 30 days.

And those amendments were put in in 2018 and 2019.

So I would submit that if the definition

of residential slash dwelling unit

already prohibited short-term rentals,

the way that the town now wants to argue,

and I'll point out the town had not argued this

until about 2020 or 2021.

If it always precluded it,

there would have been no reason to have those amendments added

to set forth these specific sections

where there are limits.

What I would submit is that shows a proper balancing

or an attempted balancing,

which is a municipal function

by the town.

So the general rule is

for residential dwelling units,

short-term rentals are permitted.

They fall within the definition,

but the town has created certain specific exceptions.

The exceptions for older houses

and if you want an existing dwelling unit.

So that shows evidence that if they wanted

the definition to preclude short-term rentals,

they knew how to do it.

If they wanted a durational requirement

in the definition,

they knew how to do it

because there is a specific durational requirement

in the older home renovation section of the statute.

So again, the town is trying to engraft

onto this definition,

durational requirements.

Attorney Hilliard's comment was very telling

where he said,

I don't know what the line is.

That's because it is,

that is not,

I submit for this court to decide

the definition that plays.

It's because that the temporal aspect

does not matter under this current

construction of the ordinance.

Isn't that correct?

Absolutely, is a function of use.

If you are using,

if the people occupying the property

are using the property for residential purposes,

meaning that basket of residential activities,

they're using it residentially,

whether they use it for a day,

six months, a year,

there is nothing in the definitions

of the zoning ordinance

that creates any sort of durational requirement.

The town's attempted new definition

of living as a household

is unworkable.

It includes reference to the intent

of the user.

How can you zone based on the

subjective intent of the parties

and it has a phrase,

the usual residence.

What does that mean?

If someone has a second home in Conway,

are they allowed to use it?

Is it, is it a permitted use?

What, how do you have to prove

whether it's a usual?

Maybe when this was adopted

by the residents of Conway,

it would have been front of mind

those folks may well live in

single family homes,

as opposed to older houses

being renovated

or homes with accessory dwellings.

Right, my point being,

exactly right, my point being

the ordinance does strike that balance

and the town is trying to

engraft provisions

and suggest that the town of Conway

maybe didn't overlook

or it's outdated their ordinance

but in fact those provisions

relative to short-term rentals

already are included in the ordinance.

They're just not included in the ordinance

where the town wants them to be.

Can you remind me,

when was the residential dwelling

unit definition adopted?

It was unclear to me from the record.

Is it at least 15 years ago?

It appears to be,

but it does not appear

from as far as I can tell

to have them been amended

or modified.

Should it matter that at the time

of the adoption

that Airbnb and VRBO

didn't exist?

Would that matter at all

in terms of our interpretation

or the understanding

of the voters when they adopted it?

I don't think it would, Your Honor,

because at the time

Conway already was a vacation

location

and already people are

renting their homes out

for ski weeks

and summer weeks

so I think the use

that existed

on short term rentals

already existed

whenever they put the ordinance in.

Are there ski clubs

that rent residences?

Are they addressed specifically

in the ordinance anywhere

or would they come under

this residential dwelling definition

in your view?

It would depend

how they were rented

because again

there are tourist home definitions

and so it depends

whether it's a transient accommodation

it would also depend

are they renting out rooms

or groups of rooms

or are they renting out

as Mr. Kudrick

because the entirety

of the residence

as one unit

for one experience

so I think that would be

a difference as well.

Let me ask you this

if the world changes

and a use

that did not exist

at the time

the permitted uses table

was adopted

crops up

is that use permitted

or is that use

not allowed

if it falls between the cracks?

Isn't it not permitted

and the onus is on the person

who wants it permitted

to go to the town

and to have that adopted?

I think it would depend

on the particular facts

of the case

but to be clear in this case

residential uses

in the residential districts

are permitted

and under the definition

of the zoning ordinance

short-term rentals

are within that definition

so therefore are

on the permitted use table

and I see my time is up.

Thank you attorney.

Attorney Hillier.

Thank you.

Just briefly.

1980 is when the ordinance

was adopted initially

and I agree is no indication

that the residential

slash dwelling unit definition

has been changed since

from the original.

Number two

the petition

and the allegations of the petition

are taken as true

given the procedural

context of this case

described the problems

that had developed

within the town

with short-term rentals

that precipitated

trying to address the problem.

But should that be part

of our analysis?

Isn't this just a matter

of ordinance construction?

I'm not sure it is

only in the sense

that if there's some

suggestion that

this has been around

a long time

and tolerated

and all of a sudden

we bring this lawsuit

that's not the case.

The petition describes

what the impetus was

commencing litigation.

Second

this tourist home

issue and the lower courts

focus on

whether there's a kitchen

or not.

I've addressed this

in the briefs

but the tourist home

definition talks

about transient

or semi-transient uses

and it's only with respect

to transient

that in the definition

of transient accommodations

which is there

for density purposes

talks about

not having a kitchen.

My point is that

if this operation

fits anywhere

in the current table

of uses

it's under tourist home

and because it's

non-owner occupied

it's permitted

in the commercial districts

but not the residential

districts.

And finally

clearly long-term

rentals, residential

rentals

are permitted use

because it's a single

family

problem.

It's just not an issue

for purposes of this case.

Thank you very much.

Thank you very much

counsel.

Case is submitted.

Courts adjourned.
