This is case 2022-0457, Chase Cutts, Brigham Neighborhood Association, Inc. at all, versus

City of Boardsmith.

Good afternoon.

Stand.

Attorney Dow, you reserved two minutes.

That is correct.

Thank you.

May it please the court?

Attorney Kelly Dow, representing the appellants in this matter.

And I guess in trying to think about everything, I think the most central point here is that

it's clear the planning board has no statutory authority to review a rezoning determination

or any determination for that matter made by a local legislative body.

Additionally, the Superior Court on an appeal under RSA 67715 has no authority in its review

of a planning board decision to review a rezoning determination or any other determination

by a local legislative body.

Furthermore, I would say that this point was brought out to the trial court.

If you look at page 17 of the appendix in paragraph 7, that was brought out on page 18.

This isn't the objection to the motion to dismiss.

It was brought out in paragraph 15 on the motion to reconsider.

Page 23, paragraph 11, stated that, look, the appellants here, we can bring a declaratory

judgment action.

We can bring action before the ZBA, but the planning board has no authority to

decide this type of issue.

And additionally, on the next page in paragraph 16, it discusses how the Superior Court's review

of a planning board decision is a limited type of review.

And the reason I think this is central to this issue is, if the planning board lacks authority

to determine something to do with rezoning, then that completely resolves the issue

of race judicata.

It has to be a separate cause of action because the court doesn't even have, or the body here,

the planning board or the Superior Court on the review has no authority to even consider

that question.

Any more than saying, oh, it's race judicata, you can't file your bankruptcy in federal

court because you didn't raise it with the planning board, or it's race judicata,

you can't ask for variance from the ZBA because you didn't ask for variance from

the planning board.

In fact, if the appellants in this case had brought this rezoning issue to the planning

board, that would be something that is not permitted by law, and I'm not aware of any

good faith extension of New Hampshire law that would allow a planning board to decide

into a rezoning.

That's by statute, and that's reserved to the zoning board.

So that would have been a legally frivolous action.

So I think it's a very easy issue on the issue of race judicata here is that this was

raised to the judge, the planning board has no authority to review this stuff, and the

judge didn't look at that.

In terms of the actual analysis in race judicata, it has always been an objective

test.

You look at a factual transaction.

In the pleadings presented to the trial court, it discussed

the two different proceedings.

There was a 2017 proceeding that ultimately ended in a determination of rezoning by the

city council.

That was in 2017.

In 2020 and 2021, there was an action before the planning board on a conditional use

permit.

So two different time frames, two different bodies, two different types of determination

presented to the trial court, page 16 in the objection, and the introductory paragraphs two

and three and four and five contrasting the two different things.

There's also two different remedies here.

If you were reviewing this legislative body's determination, you're looking for reversal

of the local legislative body, which would be the city council in the case of the

declaratory judgment action.

If you're looking for, you're challenging a planning board decision, you're looking for

a reversal of a planning board decision.

So different remedies, different time frames, different bodies, totally different

causes of action.

One cause of action couldn't even be decided by the planning board.

And instead, what you get from the judges starts to speculate and impute

psychological motivation to a collective group of people involved in the appeal and

says, oh, you just want to stop the development.

Well, there's no mens rea in race duty court.

It's an objective test.

It's based on a factual transaction.

And second of all, I'm not sure that judges are in the best position based

on acting out of motion to dismiss, to decide what the psychological

motivations of a collective group of petitioners are.

Well, what would happen in this case in regards to this development if the second

case were allowed to go forward?

And there was a determination that the zoning amendment was not lawfully adopted.

And there's this approval that's already come up through the planning board

in the Superior Court, and we've already affirmed what happens then.

So you're saying if this proceeds and the petitioners prevail, at that point,

well, first of all, the city obviously has the capacity to go and do the rezoning

properly and put the rezoning in.

And then that's that.

And what happens to the earlier approval and affirmed decision for the

planning board?

It just...

I think they can get a variance from...

If they don't like the rezoning is reversed, they can go to the ZBA at that

point and get a variance to go proceed with their project.

Do you agree, it seems in the record that the issue of the spot zoning

and the issue of procedural shortcomings, alleged procedural shortcomings

and the adoption, that that issue was raised in the first proceeding

was discussed?

Is that right?

It was identified at the planning board.

It was identified at the planning board, I believe, but it wasn't...

The planning...

As I said, statutorily, the planning board has no authority

to act on that, but I don't think that's germane to the issue of

race judicata.

And the reason I say that is it's a different cause of action.

It's really not pled and wouldn't be pled because the planning board can't

decide that.

That's a decision by a local legislative body.

So about race judicata is about efficiency in large parts.

So isn't it more efficient to have all of these claims litigated

at the same time?

I guess what I would say to the court in response to that is the court is

obviously bound by the legislature's statutory enabling if the legislature

wanted to have kind of one land use body and everything would just

be decided by that body, that would simplify and make everything

more efficient.

But what the legislature's done is they've...

You've got a local legislative body.

You have a zoning board of adjustment process to review that.

In addition, brought out the exhaustion of administrative remedy cases

in the brief.

There was some question about that, but you don't even have

the question of exhaustion of administrative remedies if you're

talking about the same cause of action.

So yes, if you have a adjudication of the same cause of action,

then you have this judicial efficiency.

Could you bring an appeal to the superior court of the planning

board decision and then move to add additional claims that, hey,

and the zoning wasn't properly adopted and it's spot zoning?

Wouldn't that have been the best way to bring all of this

together at the same time?

You wouldn't have to go through the planning board.

You could just add that on or consolidate that.

Well, that is...

The issue is could they have added a separate cause of action

and that can be up to...

That's up to the discretion of the trial court.

It's a totally different cause of action.

You're challenging a legislative action by a local legislative body.

So I would say hypothetically you could try to do that

and that would be up to the discretion of the trial court

because you would also be dealing with a totally different party.

You're reviewing a planning board decision.

Now you're going to have to bring an action against the city

and the city council, which is a different function.

I mean, it's part of the same municipality,

but you're talking about a totally different set of entities

within the municipal corporation at that point.

But certainly whatever race judicata means,

the law is that it's the same factual transaction.

It's an objective test.

And what happened here was basically the judge

ran away with speculation.

And this was if we were to reverse and send it back to the trial court

or if we were to reverse on race judicata,

can we decide the latches issue here in the first instance?

I don't believe the court can because it's a motion to dismiss

and the claim is in the pleading is that we didn't know,

we didn't receive notice.

So I think the inference is,

okay, these guys didn't know until they filed the suit

and they tried to file it.

Once they found out about it, they filed it.

And so I think on the pleadings,

I don't see how the court could address the latches issue.

Does that mean that after discovery and adjudication,

that there could be a summary judgment action

or a decision on a final hearing that latches applied,

I'm not going to make a determination

one way or the other.

This is just a motion to dismiss on the pleadings.

And no, I don't think on the pleadings,

you can say latches, especially with the legal standard

for addressing a motion for dismissal.

And that's what's frustrating about this determination

is essentially the appellant is being held

to fail to raise an issue that they didn't know about

before a body that didn't have any authority

to adjudicate that issue.

They didn't know about it.

What do you mean?

Well, the claim is that there was no proper notes

of the rezoning changes sent to the residents of Chase Cuts.

But I thought it was mentioned in front of the planning board.

I think there was some.

I think there is.

How could they not know about it?

There was, well, the planning board was in 2021,

which was right around the same timeframe

the suit was brought forward.

And the planning board case was proceeding.

If you look at, there's a decision by the judge

on the declaratory judgment action

and the judge doesn't grant the dismissal,

he stays the dismissal until the planning board case is resolved.

Which was pending here.

It was pending, yes.

And then he goes and then based on the dismissal

that he acts on the suit.

So this suit is simultaneous or around the same time

as the planning board action gets going.

So as far as saying, oh, you knew in 2017,

well, the whole point is you didn't have notice

in 2017 of these changes.

This all went on under the radar

and you found out about it

when this crazy thing started coming through in 2021.

So you're asking about the latches question.

I don't see how you would be able

to decide that on the pleadings.

Let me just ask you an actual question.

Yes, certainly.

Ms. Chalifor, was she a member

of the homeowners association?

She was not and that is in the record.

She was not and she was not a participant

in the planning board appeal process.

The judge just looked at the fact

that she lived in the same neighborhood,

had some general grievances with the city of,

the city here of Portsmouth

and also that she spoke at a plan,

a couple of planning board meetings maybe.

So she provided testimony, but so I didn't really,

I think I've got a yellow light,

but I do want to get to that.

And that was brought out and the court itself,

the trial court talks about the Walker standard.

And if you look, it's on page 42 of the brief,

but if you go through the quote,

the court starts to analyze and say,

well, she's not this and she's not this.

But then we get this, having elucidated the standard,

apply the standard and found that she doesn't have it.

They throw in something about how

she's substantially similar.

She lives in the same neighborhood

and has some grievances.

She could have brought this separately

rather than being added to the existing group.

Certainly, yeah, certainly.

And she also had nothing to do with the first litigation.

So this idea that she's nearly in,

that it's the same relationship as a successor

in realty or a guardian in a ward

or any of these other relationships

where this court has found a functional relationship

but has no relationship whatsoever.

But isn't the legal analysis the same for Ms. Chalifor,

whether or not she's bringing the claim separately

or together with the group?

I think if she's not in privity with the group,

then the rest you to caught argument fails.

Right, but that's, I'm not asking about privity.

What I'm asking about is is an legal question

the same whether she brings a suit separately

if you're representing her separately

in a separate action as opposed to

being one of many plaintiffs here.

Is it the same legal question for us?

The question of rest you to caught of the question.

Well, I mean, privity is part of the race to.

I'm just trying to answer your question and get clarity.

I think, yes, say she's simply filed this all on her own.

There will still be this issue

because I think if she wasn't privity with the group,

then she would be subject to that if this,

if we consider an attempt to attack

a zoning redetermination in 2017

by this city council as the same cause of action

as a 2020 to 21 appeal of a planning board.

If that's gonna be the same thing and she's in privity,

then I guess that would be it.

I see I have a red light.

I'm going to sit back in my train report.

Thank you.

Chief Justice, members of the Supreme Court

and may it please the court.

My name is Trevor McCourt

and together with Robert Sullivan,

I represent the city of Portsmouth.

Now, if I may, there are two,

there are two broad categories of issues

I'd like to discuss today,

but before I get into those issues,

I'd like to provide a brief factual history of the case

for the court.

In February of 2020,

the planning board approved a 22 unit apartment

to be developed next to a church, a parking lot

in the Chase, what is known as the Chase Cuts neighborhood

of Portsmouth.

In the months preceding that approval,

Attorney Hogan and multiple members of that neighborhood

appeared before the planning board

and other land use boards

to speak against the development

of this 22 unit apartment building.

After the planning board granted various approvals

enabling the construction of this 22 unit apartment building,

Attorney Hogan and many of these neighbors

took an appeal to the Supreme Court.

Although Ms. Shalifor did testify

for the planning board at public hearings

and positioned to this apartment building,

and although Attorney Hogan did raise the issues

of spot zoning and failure to notice to the planning board,

Ms. Shalifor was not a plaintiff

in that first set of litigation

and neither of those two issues

were raised to superior court at that time.

The trial court then affirmed

the decision of the planning board

at which time Attorney Hogan on behalf

of the neighborhood association and the neighbors

brought an appeal to this court.

As is ordinary in the course of an appeal,

this court issued an order for a transcript fees

to be paid by the appellants in that case.

And the day before that deadline expired,

Attorney Hogan filed a separate lawsuit

in superior court, which is the underlying suit here.

The next day the deadline came and went

and Attorney Hogan did not pay that $275 transcript fee.

This court then dismissed the case,

which was then reconsidered

and that case was indicated on the merits.

But at that same time,

the city filed a motion to dismiss the second action

on grounds of Residucata and Latches.

That was eventually after a final order on the merits

came from this court, that was granted.

What is your response to the argument that Mr. Dowd

makes that the issue of spot zoning

and of the procedural, alleged procedural problems

and the adoption of the ordinance,

that really couldn't even be brought

before the planning board or litigated

in front of the planning board.

They don't have jurisdiction to deal with that issue.

Well, of course I would agree

that the planning board has no jurisdiction

over spot zoning or the issue

of failure to notice the adoption of zoning ordinance,

but the superior court clearly does.

And I know of no law or case

or any other legal standard that would prevent

the plaintiffs from bringing that

as an additional cause of action

in the first set of litigation.

And I don't believe the appellants cite to any law

that says they can't bring that as a cause of action.

And I think what this really gets to your honor

is if you look at the complaint

in the second set of litigation,

which has been provided,

Attorney Hogan cites seven separate pieces of requested relief

in that declaratory judgment action.

And each one of them call for the invalidation

of the approval of the planning board approval

of a 22 unit apartment building at 200 Chase Drive.

Each one of them.

And only when you get to the seventh cause of action

do you find anything relative to Miss Aliforce property.

This case amounts to a brazen attempt by neighbors

to invalidate and delay the development

of this 22 unit apartment building

in the city of Portsmouth because they don't agree with it.

They don't want it because it will block their view.

And they lost their appeal on the merits

in the first instance.

And now they've taken the second cause of action

in a clear attempt to delay it,

in hopes that it will kill the project.

Is there any case that you can cite to a similar facts

where there's been this sort of functional

property relationship under circumstances

similar to this, where you're just in the same neighborhood?

I couldn't find any case that had similar facts to it,

but the functional relationship test

which comes from Dago v. City of Portsmouth,

that's the test which the trial court relied upon.

And I think that is what really gets to the heart

of the privity issue here in this case.

So does the neighborhood matter?

So if you live next door, that matters,

but if you live half a mile away, it would be different?

Yes, I believe there are many facts

that if you changed ever so slightly,

would take this out of the Residucata context,

but given the totality of the facts,

given that the attorney at trial

was the same attorney in both cases,

given that each and every one of the plaintiffs

was the same in both sets of litigation

with the exception of Ms. Chalifor,

and that she is situated in the exact same position

as each and every one of the other plaintiffs,

all of those lead to a conclusion

that there was privity in this case.

So would you be making the same argument

if Ms. Chalifor hired a different attorney

and brought a separate case?

Well, it would depend on what the complaint says.

I mean, if it was the same complaint.

The complaint says the same thing,

but different attorney, different case.

Is that gonna be borrowed by Residucata?

I would argue this, Your Honor.

I would argue that it would be.

I mean, again, this is the cause of action here.

The requested relief, as I said,

is the invalidation of that approval.

It is not about her property.

It's not about zoning broadly in the city.

It is either by neglect or strategy,

an attempt by counsel to save one plaintiff,

to save somebody in the event that they lose

on the merits in the first case.

They're saving someone, holding someone in abeyance,

and if this court were to overturn

the decision of the trial court,

that would lead to all kinds of abuse

by neighbors seeking to, again,

delay projects in the hopes that,

by attrition, they can kill the project.

Now, in this case, we have a church,

so hopefully they will be around long enough

to see this project through at the end,

but could easily conceive of other situations

where developers may not have that patience

to develop a project that has received full approval

by the planning board

and all other relevant local land use boards.

Now, I'd like to also discuss

the issue of preservation of issues.

I'd like to go through that.

I think if this court reads the...

Your brief says that none of your opponents,

Mr. Dowd's legal theories are preserved.

Yes, yes, Your Honor.

And I would certainly stand by that.

If you look at the standard in the state of Leonard

from 1986, that case stands for the proposition

that a passing reference to a legal argument

is not sufficient to preserve an issue for appeal.

And if you read the objection to the motion to dismiss

and subsequent motions for reconsideration,

you will see that really no legal argument

is fully developed, that no case law is cited to,

no statutes are cited to,

well, I think there might maybe one statute...

The issues came up.

I mean, the issue was joined, right?

Right, exactly.

What is standard for review?

Oh, I'm sorry.

It is de novo.

I'm sorry.

It's de novo review because it's just on legal issues.

But they're not able and they're de novo

and reviewed to raise legal issues,

even if they hadn't been raised before.

Well, case law in this state does require a witt case.

I looked at the one you cited for that.

I didn't see it.

Yeah, so the town of Nottingham v. Bonser,

I didn't cite it in my brief and for that I apologize,

but that does stand for the opportunity that the trial court,

if a trial court has no opportunity to address an issue,

it won't be considered on appeal.

Addressing the issue, the issue was raised.

Sure, and then Leonard states

that if it's just a passing reference,

that's not sufficient to preserve the issue.

And of course, it's within this court's discretion

to consider these issues if you so choose.

And that's why I go on to brief the individual issues

and the two issues that we have before us

are privity and cause of action.

I've already spoken to privity,

but if you have any other questions about it,

I'd be happy to discuss further,

but I would like to speak to cause of action.

And Attorney Dow does rightfully point out

that these are clearly two separate legal theories

that were advanced by Attorney Hogan.

And that is of course correct,

but what I think the trial court correctly found

was that we have to look at the end sought.

You could think of a breach of contract case.

You're seeking damages at the end of the day,

you could theoretically come up with multiple theories

of why someone breached a contract

and those theories could theoretically,

those causes of actions could theoretically be brought separately,

but not on a tribunal or subject matter jurisdiction.

Planning board certainly, but again,

there's no, I know of no law or rule or anything else

which would have prevented Attorney Hogan

from bringing that as an additional claim.

Where?

In the first instance at the Superior Court,

at the Superior Court level.

He could have clearly brought all of these claims

at the same time.

On the planning board appeal,

he would have raised the notice defect issue.

Yes, Your Honor.

I think that these issues could have been combined

into one set of litigation.

I mean, they're seeking the same end here,

which is to invalidate the approvals.

Keeping aside whether they could or could not have,

why must they have been brought at the same time?

Well, this is in the interest of certainty

in our litigation and judicial economy, Your Honor.

Again, if we allow people to save these kinds of claims,

save extra plaintiffs for later,

which are encouraging is attorneys and neighbors

who are dissatisfied with the decisions

of local land use boards to wait

and to save people for later

and to save potential causes of action

in an effort to further delay the process.

When, if this were to get to the merits,

I'm certain the city would prevail,

although we have to look at the face of the complaint

for our factual analysis.

The issue is the invalidity of the 2017 amendments.

It would seem you'd be making the same argument

about anybody bringing that claim.

Somebody who lives on the other side of Portsmouth,

if they brought a claim saying,

hey, those amendments were invalidly adopted,

the result of that would be the same

as if the plaintiff's prevailed in this case,

which would be there goes the ordinance

and whatever implications that has for the prior approval.

So does your argument apply to anybody

who is challenging the adoption of that ordinance?

No, Your Honor.

As I say, this is narrowly to the facts of this case.

This is because all the neighbors

are nearly identically situated.

They're all neighbors of one another.

They live directly abutting one another

and they're all facing the same impact.

If you looked at someone on the other side of town

represented by another attorney,

I wouldn't be making this argument here today.

So it's just because they said,

well, and the result of invalidating that ordinance

would be that this approval is no good.

It's because they said that

that they are barred by collateral stop-off.

Well, Your Honor, they brought

declaratory judgment action

and the declarations that they sought,

that they requested the trial court to make

were to invalidate the planning board approval

at 200 Chase Drive.

They did not seek, you know,

it was not framed in a broader manner.

I think had they done that as a strategic choice,

this would have been a harder argument to make.

I think it's because of how they framed it

and because Attorney Hogan repeatedly

to the trial court represented that

all they were seeking was the invalidation

of the approvals granted to 200 Chase Drive.

That was explicitly the motive

of the second set of litigation.

It was not because of the impact it would have

to Ms. Shaliforce Holm.

It was not because she sought to do something

with her home or anything of that nature.

That wasn't the goal of the litigation.

The goal of litigation was to invalidate

the approvals granted at 200 Chase Drive.

Presumably some of it lived a mile away.

It wouldn't have standing to challenge the approval.

Right?

Yes, that'd be right,

but she does have standing as in a buck.

Or if there's a defect in the enactment procedure,

maybe anyone would have standing to challenge

an unlawful rezoning, for example.

If they didn't receive proper notice,

then sure, they would have standing.

But the only folks who would need notice

are those who are affected or within an area

that would be affected by rezoning.

Correct, and I think this was part

of the Gateway District rezoning,

so not everyone affected by that rezoning

would be in a better,

with standing to appeal the Planning Board approval.

So there might be more projects

that already have taken place that could be affected.

That's right.

That's right.

So you're saying that there would be on question

the record will support your argument

that the theory of recovery was identical

in both causes of action, is that correct?

I mean, they're not going to be,

it's gonna be a copy and paste, Your Honor,

but it will be this, it is the same request relief,

which is the invalidation of the Planning Board rules.

Right, Ms. Shaliff is not pointing out

that she now can't do something with her property

that she would have otherwise been able to do.

Exactly, Your Honor.

But she is pointing out that the neighbors

are now able to do something with their property

that she might not have been in favor of.

Absolutely, and she should have brought that

in the first instance,

which is why I at the proud court

also brought in the issue of latches,

but I see that I am out of time here.

Thank you.

Just briefly, I want to once again stress,

this was an action, it was a motion to dismiss

on the pleadings and the standard is to construe

the pleadings and the light most favorable

to be the appellants here.

You've heard an oral argument,

this whole speculation about Diane Chalford

was all part of this and then she was held

in a band secretly by the lawyers

so that she would be pulled out.

That's not in any of the pleadings

and certainly not an inference

in the light most favorable to the appellants

and I think that's the only way this case keeps going

is these malicious speculations about the appellants

and those may even be true or false or whatever,

but that's the whole point of having a trial process

and a discovery process and looking for the truth

and point out that the discovery process

and the procedures for review of a planning board decision

is very different from a declaratory judgment action

where you'd have the discovery

and all the typical things that you would have in that

which is another reason why

they're very different causes of action

and I also want to push away from this.

Do you agree that the relief

that was sought is identical?

Not identical, but I think it would have both

situations had they been prevailed

and either one would have had significant consequences

and it would be problematic

to the development project of the 22 unit apartment there,

but I mean, as I would say,

if we look at this subjective standard

like in the family law context,

somebody looks to modify the planning plan

because they hate their acts

and they want to stick to their acts

and then they lose, does that mean

they can come back and modify child support in three years

because they hate their acts

and they want to stick it to their acts?

That's where this court is going.

You're shutting down the family court

and this whole idea of doing some speculation

and creating some mens rea for race judicata

is not the way to go.

It's an objective test.

It's what is the legal remedy?

There's two different legal remedies.

What is the factual transaction?

Two different time frames, two different boards,

they're different causes of action.

You agree that the end result

sought in each litigation

is the invalidation of the planning board approval?

Is that right?

I don't think it would invalidate necessarily,

if the zoning determination,

I don't know if that would invalidate

the conditional use permit,

but I do think it would create more zoning

that they would have to go to the zoning board

to pursue the project.

It would not give them a clean bill of.

Thank you very much, counsel.

Case is amended.
