This is case 2022-051 in the matter of Robert Pazzani Jr. and Dajana Pazzani.

Good morning. Good morning, Your Honor. May it please the Court.

My name is Andrew Peel. I represent the appellant Dajana Pazzani.

I'd welcome questions anytime. I'd like to concentrate on what I think is a big issue in this case, and that is the land in Panama.

And I'd like to kind of focus my argument today on two parts. How we got to valuing the land and what the Court did when it divided the land.

So, again, I welcome questions at any time at any parts of my brief.

But the Court didn't divide the land.

No, the Court didn't divide the land. The Court awarded the land 100% to Dajana.

But in valuing it and then arranging the value is where I think the Court made a mistake.

So, again, this is several hundred acres of Panamanian farmland.

It was gifted from Dajana's parents during the marriage.

And the question first before the judge was how do we value this thing?

There were appraisers hired. The appraiser hired by the husband, according to Dajana, trespassed on the land.

And Dajana, with the aid of a Panamanian lawyer, brought a complaint to the Panamanian public ministry.

As the appraiser then informed husband's lawyer, I will not testify.

Trial Court ruled under 804-B6 rule of evidence that the appraisal report can come in without the husband's appraiser having to testify.

This rule of evidence has not been interpreted by New Hampshire as of this day.

So what should the trial court have done then?

The trial court could have, should not have ruled.

The husband made three hearsay arguments and two of them were rejected by the trial court.

Only 804-B6 was accepted by the trial court.

And we believe the trial court made an error in that the rule of evidence says that it's only by wrongful conduct if a party causes a witness not to testify.

And wrongful conduct has never been defined.

But the federal courts, which have interpreted wrongful conduct, has said there has to be something that strikes to the heart of the judicial system.

And wrongful conduct that the federal courts have viewed as being sufficient to invoke 804-B6 is killing the witness,

assaulting the witness, bribing the witness, criminally intimidating the witness.

But here, in essence, the trial court found that this was an effort to intimidate the witness.

And isn't that a factual finding that we can't get behind?

Well, first of all, the question is, does the trial court apply the facts to the law?

The question is, is a civil complaint filed against a witness, is that a sufficiently wrongful conduct to warrant the invocation of 804-B6?

Here's a problem that I have judged.

Is the trial court analyze the conduct under American law?

The trial court did not analyze whether the complaint filed in Panama was valid or invalid under Panamanian law.

That is the problem.

How do you define wrongful?

Is wrongful viewed through the lens of where the conduct occurred?

I would say yes.

In this case, the trial court had an affidavit from the Panamanian attorney who explained what happened, why it happened,

and most importantly why it was valid under Panamanian law.

That's your C2, isn't it?

Well, it came in as an affidavit in response to a motion in lemonade.

The problem is, if we go on that route, the only evidence that husband had that it was wrongful

was an unsworn letter from the appraiser's attorney saying, I think this is fabulous, it shouldn't come in.

But here's the other question.

Is the filing of a civil complaint against a witness a wrongful act?

No court in the United States, to my knowledge, has ever ruled that.

The only court that I've found, and perhaps there are things that I haven't found,

but the one court that has even come close was what I cited in my brief called Despania.

In Despania, defense counsel contacted a witness's employer in the course of pre-trial discovery

wanting to interview this witness as a ship's engineer.

And after the ship's engineer got wind that defense counsel was making inquiries about a statement he'd previously made,

wanting to take his deposition, the ship's engineer says, I'm not going to cooperate further.

I'm not going to do any of this. I'm not going to participate in this litigation.

The plaintiff in that case said defense counsel's contacting of an engineer and essentially causing the engineer

not to want to cooperate further was wrongful conduct, and the court said no.

There is really engaging in a pre-trial discovery which has the result of the witness becoming, you know,

afraid of testifying does not constitute wrongful conduct.

The filing of civil suit is not the same thing as engaging in this.

We've got to be careful. It was not a law suit.

No, I'm not a judge. It was a civil complaint.

And again, according to the court...

Well, wouldn't it be like a complaint to a disciplinary...

Let's assume we're here, and it's a complaint to the appraisal board or the real estate

board or the professional conduct committee. It might be a legitimate complaint.

Correct.

The timing of it may cause some impact to the litigation.

It could, but again, that dovetails back into the Spaniard.

If it's a legitimate complaint, if you have a reasonable basis to make a complaint against

another party, and it has a blowback effect of making that witness not wanting to testify,

you have to do the analysis. Was it wrongful?

Was it without merit?

And there was no finding in Panama that this complaint to the civil ministry was without merit.

The second issue...

Does it make a difference that the witness communicated to the husband's attorney that he feared imprisonment

or there was a possibility of imprisonment?

I don't think it does, because again, if you read the Panamanian lawyer's affidavit explaining

why that language was used as apparently something that is done in a civil complaint

to a ministry saying if you find this witness has committed these crimes, this is the

punishment that Panamanian law could impose.

Apparently that triggers the investigatory process.

But here's the other thing, Judge.

You've got to have two elements in 804B6.

You've got to have, did you do wrongful conduct?

And that is a question of law. What is wrongful conduct?

And then you have to cause, directly cause, the witness not to testify.

Let me just ask you a fundamental question, which is you're arguing technical arguments

about 804B6, but the rules of evidence don't apply to these cases.

I'm glad you raised that, Judge, because the rules of evidence do not apply,

but the family division has a discretion to apply them if the family division feels

that it would allow the speedy orderly and predictable resolution of the case.

In this case, Judge Lumiere specifically wrote in her order that I am applying the rules of evidence

in my discretion, and she went through the entire analysis of 904B6,

but the two other hearsay exceptions that were raised by her husband's attorney.

So I would say this, she didn't make the gasoline analysis under whether the evidence comes in or not.

She specifically chose to use the rules of evidence.

And again, I cite the case in my reply brief for Raul versus Edwards Automotive Group,

is that when you have to look at what the language in that order specifically says the judge is doing it.

In this case, this judge says, I am excluding this evidence based upon the 804B6 analysis.

So therefore, if she is saying this is the analysis I'm using,

I would submit that it's appropriate for us to then say, on appeal, your analysis, Judge, is wrong.

That's what you chose.

But it's an unsustainable exercise of discretion review, right?

It would not be a mixed question of law or fact is you're interpreting a rule of evidence.

That's a question of law.

What does this mean?

What does wrongful conduct mean?

And then it's a question of fact, how do I apply the facts before me?

Do the facts before me fit within this legal definition of wrongful conduct?

The second issue I'd like to say, again, this is our journey of how we got there,

is there was a valuation of the land.

Now, in this case, we had two appraisals.

We had the husband's appraisal that reached a value.

And again, I'll take any other further questions that I want to cut off discussion,

but I know my time is before you is limited.

We have two appraisals.

We have a $4 million appraisal from husband's lawyer.

We have a $700,000 appraisal from wife's lawyer.

We have five pieces of land, each appraisal looked at each land,

assigned certain characteristics to it, comps,

came up with values for each piece of property.

Now, what the trial court did is says,

well, I think some of what the husband said is true

or some of the husband's appraisal analysis was correct

and some of the wife's appraisal analysis was correct.

I think the value lies somewhere in the middle.

And the trial court chose a value of $2 million, roughly.

Now, I agree.

The valuation of land or any piece of marital property is a question of fact.

That's chamberlain.

I also agree on the coutral that a trial judge is not welded to accepting all of what an expert says.

The trial judge, she can say, I accept parts of this expert's opinion.

I accept parts of this expert's opinion.

I accept it all.

I accept none.

But here's where I think there was a mistake.

As you've said in Rostakowski,

there has to be an evidentiary basis before the court

to come up with the number that they came up with.

And the court cannot do a number by speculation.

That's the Enway Walters decision.

Here, neither appraiser adopted the $2 million value.

But that happens all the time.

I mean, the trial courts sometimes accept one appraiser or the other,

but usually it's somewhere in between.

So there can't be a problem that the trial court didn't accept one or the other.

If there is evidence before it that allows the trial judge to say,

here's the parts that I'm accepting.

I'm going to discount this appraiser's number

because I don't think he should have given it this deduction.

Or I'm going to accept this appraiser's comparable values

because the properties that he chose as comparables

don't match with the other person.

They are perfectly free to do that.

That's all the Manchester housing decisions

that Attorney Connor cited in her brief.

But here's the issue.

We don't know what this judge did.

We don't have that analysis.

We can't determine from her order how she got a $2 million,

except say, and again, I'm going to paraphrase,

and obviously we wanted to direct quote from Judge LaMere,

the value lies somewhere in the middle.

If you're going to choose a different value,

you've got to tell us how you got there

and you got that number.

It was a very specific number.

It was halfway exactly between these two conflicting appraisals.

Wasn't the husband $7 million?

The husband was $4 million and ours was $700,000.

I believe that's, again, I'm using round numbers.

But I was psyched according to the case of Gaskill,

which talked about that the one last thing,

and I know I got five minutes,

is what the court did when the entire value of the property

to the genre, the court said,

I will off that your alimony award.

Norberg being Norberg clearly states,

alimony and property division are two entirely different things.

Secondly, alimony does a very specific thing.

It provides the needy spouse with a stream of income

that will help them maintain their marital life.

So what would you have us do here

if you think these are in conflict

and that order can't exist as it is?

Should we just say, okay, you have to pay that amount tomorrow?

Isn't that a worse situation?

It could be a worse situation, but you have to,

I'll cite the court the case of Heinz v. Lagos,

which is a supreme judicial decision out of Massachusetts.

In this case, same facts,

with a white elephant piece of property,

hard to liquidate,

the trial court has to take the property issues

and the realities of the property it has before it

in dividing the values.

Again, I don't want to throw the baby out with the bathwater,

but in this case, what the court has done,

and it was a very unique solution.

I've not seen it ever done in New Hampshire.

In a trial court, there was no comparable New Hampshire decision

was make essentially a 12-year property division payout.

That was quasi-modifiable because it was tied in with the alimony.

And the questions that I've raised

that the trial court unfortunately did not answer is,

what happens if there's a modification?

But your client could sell the property tomorrow

and satisfy the...

If she could, and I see my red lights on,

but I would like to answer your question, Justice Bassett,

is that our client has taken the position

that there are two major impediments.

One is that she's only a 52% owner of the property,

and second of all, she strongly believes that

and testified at trial that she would never get

a million dollars to give him his share of the property.

Again, the trial court has to take the reality

of the facts on the ground and can't do an offset.

I see my time is up.

I thank you very much for your attention this matter.

Thank you.

Tony Conner.

May it please the court.

I'm Doreen Conner and I represent Robert Pisani.

In her brief, the wife concedes the principal issues on appeals,

the family court's valuation and distribution

of wife's Panama farmland.

As this court knows, those particular issues,

valuation and distribution will be reversed

only if this court finds there was an unsustainable

exercise of discretion which the wife has not sustained

and thus this court should affirm.

I'll take questions at any time.

I agree that the rules of evidence should have applied

or were applied by the trial court.

I disagree, Your Honor.

I pulled out page one of the order on the petitioner's motion

to admit Panama real estate.

The judge just, what she says is she goes through the fact

that Goslin and the rules don't require the rules of evidence

and so then she says, consequently,

the arguments advanced by the petitioner

as the wife's motion should be granted

and the rules of evidence cited to support

those arguments have been considered.

She does then go through the analysis,

but she clearly starts her decision by saying,

I don't even have to do this and because of that,

as an alternative basis, this court can affirm

her ruling without going into the rules of evidence.

If you want to go to the rules of the evidence,

this court should also affirm because the wife's

interpretation of the rule is unduly narrow.

I found the decision.

I think you'd like to avoid the rules of evidence.

I would too.

Out of Massachusetts, the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court,

Commonwealth versus Edwards, decided in 2005

it is at E30 and E2D 158

and the precise issue in that case

was the definition of wrongdoing

and the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court noted

that wrongdoing doesn't have to be illegal conduct.

It doesn't have to be murder or assault or bribery

as the wife suggests.

Instead, wrongful conduct is any significant

interference with the disclosure

of relevant information at trial.

Lawful conduct can be deemed wrongful

if it interferes with the disclosure

of relevant court testimony.

The Commonwealth case dealt with

coercion to have a witness not appear at trial.

Same thing happened here in terms of

the filing of this lawsuit

four days after wife's motion

to strike the appraisals was denied by the court.

We're talking about a complaint

that seeks $1 million for alleged trespass

in up to eight years in jail.

Don't we need to understand Panamanian law?

No, Your Honor, because the issue is

whether the wife can

take advantage of her own conduct

in making this witness unavailable

to then say, you can't let the witness in

because I, or the evidence in

because I can't cross-examine this witness

that I have influenced not to appear.

I think you simply need to determine

whether the action was significant

and caused the witness to not want to appear.

And then you have to look at what the trial judge said.

And the trial judge found that it was

reasonably foreseeable that this was going to be the result.

So the action without regard

to what the scope of Panamanian law provides

when we are another?

Correct. You're viewing it based on

interpretation of this rule of evidence

if you even get there.

And in terms of the intent

as Justice Vassus indicated,

that's a question for the,

factual finding for the trial court.

In this case, the trial court

addressed the timing of the lawsuit.

She addressed the severe

and disproportionate penalties

in the, not the lawsuit, the complaint.

And she also noted

that the complaint itself

has a provision where it says motives

for this civil action.

And it specifically references

the New Hampshire divorce

and it seeks penalties against this appraisal company

because it says there are,

that they inflated the property values

to wife's detriment.

So the very wording of the reason

this complaint was filed

ties into an effort not to

have this witness testify.

How is it that the appraisal

couldn't have been done by agreement?

Why was there, was there,

was the wife prohibiting access

to the property?

I can't speak to that, Your Honor,

because it's not in the record

proceedings and I was not trial counsel.

The other interesting issue

that appears to have come up

is the suggestion that the trial court

isn't allowed to pick a value

in between the two appraisals.

That happens every day

and there are tons of cases from this court

in enforcing that.

But what's the support here?

I mean, my understanding is

they can't just pick the middle.

They have to have some basis.

The way I read this order,

I mean, of the individual

property appraisals

and then sort of added

by discounting

and then adding what was left

and then it looks like there was

a method to the madness.

But it's hard to decipher.

If you look at the decree

from pages 29

to 32,

the court, which is actually

in the opening grade from page 80

to 83, the court goes

through the two appraisals

and talks about why she's accepting

portions from one or the other.

Without a doubt, the court

found that husband's appraisals

were more professional.

They supplied three comparables for each

property.

It was signed by two appraisers,

had the license number and the appraisers

were members of the institute

of registered

appraisal folks in Panama.

Wife's appraiser

didn't have any of those credentials,

didn't do any comparables

and came up with a price

per hectare or per meter

but couldn't explain why.

And so the court said

I'm not really feeling too easy about this

and therefore pecked at a decision

between the two.

Now the law that wife cites is

that you can't average

different types of competing

methods and that was raised

in the motion to reconsider

the court's response to the motion

to consider. She specifically said

I didn't do that.

I looked at the two appraisals

and based on what I saw

I picked a value in the middle

and so there's certainly no reason

to set aside that judgment call

on the part of the trier effect.

I also want to talk a little bit

about this alimony issue.

The court is correct.

The wife would be in a far worse

situation if she was ordered to pay

this property distribution

tomorrow. In fact,

husband is at a disadvantage.

This court in Harvey indicated

that you can't have a property distribution

over 23 years

and said something to the effect of property

distribution should be paid as soon as

practicable.

Not sure that 12 years is as soon as practical

but that was a deviation in

wife's favor and yet she's complaining

about it. She can pay

that property distribution

any time she wants. Husband will

then have to continue to

pay alimony. They are completely

different and the court indicated

that not only in her decree but also

in the response to the motion to

reconsider. The hypotheticals

that are raised. Yes, alimony

can be modified.

Wife might remarry. There are lots

of things that can happen that will change alimony

but not property. This court

has repeatedly said a property

distribution is final. That property

distribution continues no matter

what. Something might happen

with regard to alimony but unfortunately

husband is not going to

get his property distribution

yet for some 12 years losing

the opportunity to invest that money

to help him pay the alimony.

If anything, that particular order

is in favor of the wife

and not husband.

How they treat it for tax

purposes will be up to them.

One of the other things

that was raised in the brief

but not talked about today.

Also, wife argues

that

the court aired and even considering

the full value

of the Panama land because

wife transferred out

some before

the non-hypothecation order.

Again, that's controlled by this

court's case law in Abrams

where the very same thing happened

where husband deeded out

$400,000 to his kids

when he knew the divorce was imminent

and this court said no, it's

not a race to the courthouse

before who gets the order of distributing

money. That's a marital asset

it's a fraud on the court

and we won't allow it.

Now, what the trial court can't do

and what she did not do

is order money

funds that have been distributed out

or land that has been distributed out

and sold and that's the Mueller case.

But what the court can do

and what this court authorized

in Abrams is charging

the wife with the full amount of the money

or the asset that she chose

to give away without consideration

in the course of the distribution

and that's exactly what

the trial judge did

and reverting that would allow

fraud, whatever

divorce is imminent and people have assets

that they don't want to share

with the other spouse.

If there are no further questions

I will rest on the arguments

that are made in the brief and would simply

say the trial judge was in the best

decision place to make the factual

decisions. She issued a

37 page narrative

degree and ruled on hundreds

of requests. Her decision should

be affirmed. Thank you.

Thank you very much counsel.
