This is case 2022-0129 in the matter of Mark Hebert and Kelly Hebert.

Counsel, you've reserved two minutes, I see.

I have, thank you.

Please proceed.

Thank you.

May it please the Court, my name is Brian Lee, and I am representing the appellant Mark Hebert.

I will take questions at any time.

Thank you to the Court for taking the time to hear from the parties in this case.

It is appreciated.

This case seemed simple at first and readily resolvable at the time of the temporary hearing

now nearly five years ago.

The parties had $550,000 in cash.

They owned two homes with equity at each.

And they were on the same page that the education of their son was going to be a priority.

They both agreed on.

Unfortunately, over time, this case devolved into a bit of a morass of litigation that

leads us here today, where my client, as from the beginning, simply wants a fair and just result.

I'll begin with one of the issues on appeal, which is the proceeds of two lawsuits

that the Respondent, Kelly Hebert, was a party to.

It was determined in the final orders, or at least by virtue of the trial court granting

a request for findings filed by the Respondent that those proceeds would not be considered

marital property.

However, the record is clear that at the final hearing, the Respondent testified that in fact

it was her position that those proceeds were to be considered marital property and that

they should be divided evenly.

That representation is challenged as being conditional if they were deemed to be

marital property, they should be equally divided.

That was, I think that was something that was contained in a pre-trial memo that was

not part of the substantive evidence at the final hearing.

But it's in the record, right?

I don't know if that's considered part of the record.

It wasn't a document required by the court.

It wasn't meant to distract you.

And in any event, why is that binding on the court?

Can't the court determine whether it's marital property or not, regardless of whatever

this test is?

I think it's within the court's power to do so.

But I think if one party advocates for a position, I think it would take some unusual

circumstances for the court to rule against what that party's position in

terms of, for example, in this case, we have the comparison with the

Latondra case.

And the circumstances, I think, could not be more different from what we have

here.

In that case, the plaintiff had been subjected to some discrimination by a

country club that her husband belonged to.

He mocked her participation in the lawsuit.

He didn't.

He wasn't involved in it financially.

It's one of those cases that sort of has extreme and somewhat odd facts that

result in defining.

In this case, my client's testimony was not challenged that this was a

lawsuit.

And this was a probate litigation involving the respondent's uncle regarding

some trust that her grandfather had set up.

It was something that dominated the party's lives for years of something

that my client participated in 20 to 30 hours a week, something that he

traveled to New Jersey on multiple occasions to participate in mediations.

And it's something that directly it would impact both of them as a married

couple that had to do with the respondent's inheritance or potential

inheritance.

How much was left at the final hearing?

Some went to legal fees, correct?

Well, there was, at the time of the temporary hearing, there was $550,000

in cash at the time of the final hearing.

But some of that $550,000 was designated for legal fees, correct?

Some of it was paid back to the respondent's mother for legal fees.

Yes, I think it was $265,000.

And you agree that that would be appropriate?

If it's a marital asset, then there should be a deduction for the

expenses associated with that?

Yes.

Can I ask a question about the IRA award?

Which IRA is the court referring to?

The one that awards the petitioner half or the respondent half of the

petitioner's IRA and or 401K?

Well, there were two accounts, I believe, that my client had at the

time of the filing and at the time of the final hearing.

Right.

And this references petitioners August 2021 financial affidavit,

which looks like all that's listed there is a $500 monthly

contribution.

So is that an issue at this point in time?

I'm not quite clear on your question.

Okay, so is your client challenging that part of the property

settlement, property distribution?

That's not, I don't believe that's part of the brief.

I think it's part of obviously, it's part of the overall

scheme of whether or not this was an equitable division.

And I think that it's noted that although the trial court,

specifically did not find that there was any violation of the

anti-hypothecation clause, there was testimony about, you know,

for example, from the time of the temporary hearing, my client

was solely responsible for all the expenses regarding two homes

until they were sold.

Right.

And there's an allegation that the court valued that division

before those expenses were made.

Right.

Is that something your client's still pressing?

That the valuation was at the time of filing rather than the time

of distribution?

That's correct.

Because money was withdrawn for reasonable and ordinary

necessary expenses.

So it is advanced that it would be not equitable to use the figure

from the beginning.

Okay.

And sorry, another question.

That's okay.

We've got a lot of issues going on.

The property valuation for the business property with the

excess lot, is there precedent or some, well, is there precedent

for valuing that property as if it were subdivided in the future?

Well, I don't know of a case that's on point.

I don't dispute that it's within the trial court's purview

to assess a value based on the totality of the circumstances

and the evidence that it's presented.

Nonetheless, I think it's reviewable whether or not a hypothetical

subdivision that has not occurred and may not be able to occur

should really be a fair basis.

Is there any indication that the court considered the hypothetical

nature or the quasi-speculative nature of a subdivision?

I don't think there's an indication that the court considered that.

I think the court just accepted...

Mr. Stanhof's analysis.

Mr. Stanhof's analysis.

There was a competing analysis offered by your client, though.

Was there?

My client testified as to his personal knowledge of the state

of the excess land, as it's called, where the rubble from the

existing property had been built and his understanding that it

wasn't built at all.

Because of the condition of the property?

Yeah.

You agree, at least, as a concept that highest and best use

is the proper valuation method here for the appraiser?

I don't disagree with that.

No, I don't disagree.

But why do you say that the property that just has rubble on it

and it's not developable, can't develop it?

That's the issue, I assume, right?

That's the issue, yeah.

I mean, and this sort of speaks to sort of...

Is that in the record somewhere in the testimony?

I believe it is in the transcript of my client's assessment.

And didn't Mr. Stanhof...

And we refer to the tax assessment value as well

as something to the court should consider.

And didn't Mr. Stanhof review the subdivision regulations

and the zoning and talk to town officials as to whether or not,

as the basis for his opinion, that it could be subdivided?

I think his testimony is inconsistent.

On that point, he references talking to a town official,

though he couldn't say who it was

and he wasn't sure if he talked to a town official

or someone from his office talked to a town official.

He testified, he walked the property, correct?

I believe he said that he did.

But he didn't speak to my client.

But he did view the property in person.

So the two valuations that were before the trial court

were 450 for the existing lot as a 1.5 acre lot

or 1.64 acre lot and then 1.5 acres as excess

at 160,000 which totaled 610.

That was Mr. Stanhof's.

Right.

And then the other figure before the court was 429

which was the assessed value before any adjustment

for equalization ratio, right?

Correct.

I want to just move on because I think...

I was going to move you on.

Can you talk about alimony right now?

Yes.

I think really that one of the central issues here

is the determination by the trial court

of some income attributable to my client.

And that was taken...

What is that number?

It seemed to me, I had to kind of do some reverse math

but it seemed to me the number was like 175,000

or something like that.

That was a formula, right?

Right.

Right.

So that doesn't match any of the other numbers.

It does not.

Okay.

It does not.

The response expert, Mr. Maloney,

we got an expert disclosure that said,

essentially I went through all of these records

and I determined that some of these things

noted as business expenses were in actuality

personal expenses.

Well, when it came to trial and under questioning

it became apparent that in fact he had not done that.

In fact, what they had done was they had made a list

and in fact, trial counsel later in the transcript

said she made the list.

They just went through and put a whole bunch of things

in a category of personal as opposed to business.

And the fallback position at the final hearing

was, well, this would have been disallowed

by the IRS.

So essentially...

What difference does that make?

It makes a great difference.

The IRS?

Well, first of all, I don't think that

that theory wasn't really tested

because that wasn't the expert's disclosure.

That wasn't what we received as this is the expert's opinion.

The expert opinion we received was,

I've gone through these expenses

and these are actual, actually personal expenses.

Then it became, well, I didn't really go through them all.

Somebody went through them all.

Then it became, well, I looked at the credit card,

some of the credit card statements and

I determined a percentage...

Let me cut you short because your time is running out.

Isn't that for the trial court to sort out

and not us?

How do we sort that out?

Well, I think what the way that you sorted out, Your Honor,

is I think that it's pretty clear that

if there's a fair method of determining

whether or not something is a business or personal expense,

it certainly isn't to have the other side's lawyer

make that determination.

And that's what was done in this case.

But weren't they hampered by a lack of information

at some point?

I don't think so because...

It's strange because the claims

of being hampered by a lack of information

were basically, we want these receipts

and my client said, I don't have these receipts.

When you buy something from Amazon,

as he did for the business on a daily basis,

he generated a list of everything you bought from Amazon,

date, what it was, how much it was.

That was all exposed.

But even if all those under Maloney's report,

and again, sorry to cut you off.

That's okay.

Time's running.

Even if you add in direct payments, wages,

and the credit card expenses,

you still don't hit $175.

You don't.

And he also put in there as income disbursements

from the retirement funds, which...

Right.

...and a sale of the house.

I mean, I don't know where the trial court got that number.

I really don't.

But I do think that you have to be critical

of Mr. Maloney's testimony

because, first of all,

I don't think it was even made clear

through his testimony that

these things would have been disallowed.

I mean, we didn't get into that

because that wasn't part of the disclosure.

That wasn't their theory going into the final hearing.

Your red light is on.

You still have two minutes.

And one question.

Yeah, go ahead.

Oh, no.

Has anyone done the overall distribution

of property percentage-wise?

Well, I mean, basically

what you'd be looking at now is

the respondent getting everything that's left in retirement,

the respondent getting everything that's left

from the sale of the home,

which is by far the biggest liquid asset.

My client being required to liquidate the business

that is his livelihood

and give her half of the value

and then trying to subdivide a property and sell it.

So, I mean, it's heavily weighted

in the favor of the respondent.

And the trial court, again and again,

denied their request for finding

that an unequal distribution of property

was warranted for any reason.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Counsel.

Good morning.

May it please the court.

I'm Jacqueline Leary,

along with my co-counsel,

Peter Anderson,

Representative Kelly Heber.

The trial court noted in its narrative order

that it reviewed and considered

over 5,000 pages of exhibits and reports.

The court also held the record open

for 13 days following the date of trial

for submission of additional documents

from Mr. Heber.

He submitted none.

He now appeals the decision

of the lower court

on nearly every single issue

as a matter of law or abuse of discretion.

He argues this despite failing

to hire his own independent experts,

despite failing to submit fair market value reports

and without complying with the court orders

as he failed to provide full discovery

under Rule 1.25a in court order.

Mr. Heber has not met his burden

that the trial court's decision must be affirmed.

So how do we get to what income was determined

to be attributable to Mr. Heber?

Correct.

I can go right into that, Your Honor.

So the income that Mr. Maloney determined

was for gross income in 2018 was 242,000.

Right.

But we know that includes withdrawals from an IRA,

which doesn't count as income

for the purposes of support.

Correct.

So what the trial court did is actually

Kelly requested for alimony 4,846 per month.

The trial court ordered 2,640 per month.

The trial court did do its own independent analysis

after reviewing the experts report.

And if you look at Mr. Maloney's report,

the 242,018 plus the 2019 287,000

plus the gross income for 2021-29,

if you average that out,

it's even higher than what the court is determining.

Well, but again, those $200,000 numbers in 2018 and 2019

include IRA distributions and capital gains,

which are not counted as income for the purposes of support.

So you're really looking at 2020-129,000.

How do we know that the alimony ordered was based on that income?

Well, I think what the trial court did was when it looked at it,

it did reduce those values.

And that's how it got to the 2,640 per month.

If you look at the case of Henry Rodimond.

So you don't think the trial court used the formula,

the alimony formula?

I think that the trial court did use a formula

and then has discretion to determine the amount and duration

under case law.

And then based on the amount and duration

made the appropriate calculation to lower

by $2,000 per month, the alimony.

Which under the formula would indicate an income of $176,000?

Correct, roughly $175 to $176,000.

But I think what the court also did,

and there's authority under a matter of Federsen versus Cannon,

this is 149, New Hampshire 194.

When you're determining a party's gross income,

the court is not only required to rely on the estimates

that are presented on the financial affidavit,

but they can also turn to the tax returns of the prior years

and all those tax returns were in the record.

And if you look back, Mr. Hebert's 2019,

I believe adjusted gross income was roughly 167,263.

Right, but that included the distribution from the IRA.

Even taking the distribution and setting aside,

if you look at the personal expenses associated

with the report, I understand that Mr. Hebert's position

is that a chart was just created,

but every single line item from the report

was submitted as an exhibit that the court went through.

And for the purposes of the actual trial,

there was not enough time to go through every single expense.

And the court did state that it reviewed

all of those expenses when it went through.

And I believe the court made its own determination

from looking at those expenses

that Mr. Hebert did in fact fail to report significant income

because if he is categorizing personal expenses,

which he declared as lab supplies

and paid those expenses through the company,

then that is income for the purposes of support.

And those are captured in Mr. Maloney's report.

Mr. Maloney's report as well as all the additional documentation

that outlined that report,

which were nine volumes of documents.

But that still doesn't get us to 175,000,

accepting all of them across the board,

doesn't get us to that number.

So can I ask you about the real estate valuation?

Yes, Your Honor.

Do we or don't we take the value of the property

as it's currently used?

I mean, for example, if I have a farm 100 acres

and it could be developed into 50 house lots,

do we value that as the highest and best use

or do we value how it's actually being used at the moment?

I think the correct approach, Your Honor,

is to do the highest and best use

based on Peter Stanhope's expert analysis.

He actually had someone in his office call the town

that's in the record ask if this zoning is appropriate.

They said that it was appropriate.

He walked the property himself.

He allocated about $5,000,

but not any sort of timing

for approval of a subdivision,

which may or may not happen based on what the status of the land is,

developable land, blah, blah, blah.

So again, do we, if we're valuing a home,

do we take its value as it's currently being used

or do we speculate that, well, you could have an accessory unit.

It's allowed by law.

And with the accessory unit, it'd be worth more.

What's the authority for that speculative increased value?

Correct.

I think the authority goes back to ratay versus ratay 146 to Hampshire 44,

which determined that an appropriate division of marital property

should be based on the fair market value

and they determined that fair market values can be based on expert opinions

of the highest and best use.

In this case, we had an expert.

In no situation did he have an expert or any report,

a tax assessment is not the appropriate value to use

and is oftentimes significantly lower.

But an owner can testify.

An owner can testify if it's supported with opinions of value.

Correct.

I don't think that he had supportive opinions of value.

A tax assessment pursuant to ratay versus ratay would not be compliant

with New Hampshire law.

Moving back to specifically the duration of alimony.

The maximum duration in the term of alimony is 50% the length of the marriage.

There is an argument that because he's reaching retirement age

that therefore the duration should be shortened.

In fact, RSA 45819A states that the court could find

that justice requires an adjustment under paragraph 4

and paragraph 4 is the special circumstances.

And if you look at the subsection of the statute,

any other reason the court deems material or relevant,

in this case the court went to in its uniform alimony order

specifically set forth special circumstances.

First, it said that the petitioner's financial affidavit

it based it on that.

Second, it talks about the credible report and testimony

provided by Richard Maloney.

Then its narrative order the court went further stating

that it also adopted ruins of law from Kelly's

finding the facts and rulings of law documents

submitted to the court.

Due to time, I'm only going to point out a few

of the ruins of law that were leaked.

And in paragraph 26 Kelly has a lesser ability

to acquire future capital assets and income.

This is under the paragraph 4C as a special circumstance.

Ruling of law paragraph 22 Kelly's contributions

to marriage enabled Mark to develop his business

and career as well as her homemaker contributions.

That's a special circumstance under RSA 45819A.

That's paragraph 4 subsection K.

I believe she is entitled to alimony

as she has a need for alimony.

He has ability to pay.

The duration is appropriate.

And here in this case Miss Hebert's future

earning capacity is limited.

She contributed to this marriage.

She took care of the party's home.

She took care of the minor child.

She worked at the party's business.

She helped care for Mark's elderly parents.

Can you, sorry on another topic,

can you explain what you think the division

of the IRA means in terms of values?

It seems a little inconsistent.

It says dividing it as of the date

the divorce action was filed,

but then it says see attachment to petitioners

August 2021 financial affidavit,

which is post filing.

So do you have a concept of what the order means there?

In terms of value.

I understood it in terms of value

as although the court might not deem

that he violated the non-hypothecation clause,

the court was still recognizing

that these funds were taken out

and did value it at the time of the initial date,

which I think is why there's a little bit

of confusing language.

I think what the court meant to write is

look at the value at the time that it was put in there

because he did take out tens of thousands of dollars.

But if you look at his current financial affidavit,

you would see that's the amount that's left over

which would be enough to be able to give

our first share of the value at the time.

I think that that is what the court was trying to do

when I interpreted it,

but unfortunately that's the court's discussion

and there was no clarification

or modification files by the other side.

And I don't believe that they properly asserted that

as an issue upon appeal that they were contesting

the IRA amount.

Why shouldn't all the litigation settlements

be included as marital assets?

Yes, Your Honor.

So I will just briefly address the overview

of the legal lawsuit proceeds before I get into that question

because I think having a little bit of background,

Kelly became involved in this litigation back in 2015.

This was involving her state of her grandmother,

some associated trust, extensive family business

and other matters.

She received the settlement offer back in 2016.

It wasn't until December of 2017 that she got those proceeds.

At the time of actually the trial, there were no proceeds left.

And the reason for that is if you look at the breakdown

of those fees, 513,000 was what was put,

I believe, on her temporary order roughly around that amount.

Then there were no motions or anything filed by the other side

saying you cannot use these for ordinary expenses.

She didn't receive any temporary alimony

or other support during that time.

And she was the one...

It wasn't ordered.

It wasn't ordered at that time.

The reason was...

So she spent money on expenses.

He withdrew to spend money on expenses during that time period.

She spent this lawsuit money on expenses.

Correct.

He withdrew from the IRA to cover expenses.

Yes, she was tasked with paying for the educational expenses

and he was tasked with paying for the house.

And then it said that they reserved the issue of alimony.

That's why alimony wasn't ordered at that time.

But I think it's important to focus on the breakdown.

The 265,000 of the 513 was attorney's fees.

And then 248,000 of that was spent between February 28th of 2018

in September 2nd, 3rd of 2021.

This is a span of 43 months.

43 months boils down to 5,166 per month

when she wasn't getting any additional support.

These expenses that she had to pay,

technically she was running a deficit at that time.

She relocated to Connecticut for her son's education.

He has some special needs requirements,

so she transferred there.

There was costs associated with their relocation.

So why shouldn't her expenses, if they're covered by that,

be offset by the expenses he had to make in terms of

withdrawals from the IRA, which your client is now going to

receive essentially per share while he's deemed to have

squandered, I guess, his share?

Why shouldn't that be offset?

I think the difference is that the court viewed one as a marital asset

and one not as a marital asset.

So back to Justice Bassett's question,

why not consider it as a marital asset?

And I think the reason it wasn't considered as a marital asset

is when the court was looking to LaTondra and how in LaTondra,

which counsel correctly described was a gender discrimination lawsuit,

they felt that we were more analogous to that case.

And when you look at that case,

yes, she was the one who was the gender discrimination,

but here there's a similar issue.

This is her family.

It was her interest in the estate.

This was a probate action of the grandparents.

In fact, it was a whole family affair of everyone involved.

Mark never sought to join in on this action.

I understand that tangentially he was involved in this.

He was a husband and had to deal with his wife complaining

about a lawsuit and being involved in neighbor traffic.

Pay for travel expenses and things like that?

The travel expenses?

I don't think it said who.

Depositions or whatever.

I mean family expense, right?

There is family expenses, yes.

But Mark testified that Kelly spent as many as 80 hours per week

working on the lawsuits for three years.

Mark didn't pay any of the expenses of the legal fees.

He didn't pay any of the 100,000 that she had to pay

her sisters back for settlement proceeds.

He never sought to join in on the actions.

In fact, the settlement agreement,

the accounting of where the proceeds went,

the other documentation supporting all of this

are all final exhibits in the record.

The court reviewed those and I think that looking at those

settlement and how it was all organized,

the court then determined, well, based on these documents

and the implications we got, this is not a marital asset.

Your Honor, I see them out of time.

If I have 10 seconds to briefly conclude.

We'll give you 10 seconds to conclude.

The decision of the trial court is set forth

in the January 14th order is sound.

It's based on the law.

It's based on the facts and the court should not disturb it.

Thank you for the time.

Thank you, Ms. Leary.

Mr. Lee, you're two minutes.

Thank you.

With respect to the argument that the trial court

somehow went through all of these expenses,

this is regarding the income issue,

clearly that didn't happen.

And in fact, the trial court basically says in the transcript,

I'm not going to go through every one of these.

And in the final order, there's no language

that indicates there was some determination

that things were personal expenses versus business expenses.

Essentially, the experts threw up his hands

during the final hearing and said,

well, these would have been disallowed

because in his opinion, apparently,

which was not an opinion advanced before the hearing,

there wasn't enough backup receipt documentation,

although we never really had the opportunity

to flush that out or to further argument.

But you agree as a conceptual matter

that if they are truly personal expenses,

it's appropriate to include those

in gross income calculations.

Yes.

Somebody has to figure that out.

The judge has to figure that out.

Right.

Yes.

But again, I would say I don't think

that an appropriate basis would be for...

I mean, if in fact, their position was that

a lack of receipt or a lack of backup documentation

was the issue, then why not just say

any expense that doesn't have

the specific type of receipt we think is necessary

should not be disallowed?

And that's not what they did.

They just sort of went through and decided,

first of all, this is...

And there was no methodology to it.

It was just sort of an artificial inflation

of the income.

And again, with respect to the lawsuit proceeds,

I mean, my client's testimony was not challenged.

This was not an argument

that was made substantively on the record.

This was just something that was included

in the numerous requests that were filed.

My client spent money in this case from the IRA

because he was tasked with keeping two houses going

that nobody was living in.

The respondent spent money in this case

on going through lawyer after lawyer after lawyer,

re-litigating these issues.

And it didn't have to be that way.

It's unfortunate.

But that expenditure, those things should be considered.

And I would just ask the court to look at this

and balance it into fairness.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you very much.

Case submitted, we will stand in a brief recess.
