This is case 2020-0648, Charles B. Cole versus town of Conway.

Good morning. Good morning. Please proceed.

My name is Chris Knopf and I represent the Pellan Charles Cole in this matter.

I think the first issue that needs to be dealt with is either the motion to amend that we had asked for should have been denied or granted.

The remaining arguments don't necessarily matter if we are not allowed to amend our complaint.

So, did you provide the Superior Court with a copy of your proposed amended complaint?

We did not. Why not?

We are still doing a factual investigation for the amended complaint when we filed our original motion to amend.

And then when we raised the issue at the hearing on the motion to dismiss,

we raised the allegations that we were going to add to the amended complaint

and then laid them out even further in the motion to reconsider.

But after the order it would seem moved to file an amended complaint unless we got the motion to reconsider granted.

And as stated at the hearing and in our motion to reconsider,

the town engineer and later the public works for the Tana Conway

had knowledge of the problems with this sidewalk.

It was constructed incorrectly and there's a record over the years of reporting to the select board

or the budget committee for the Tana Conway.

You know, there's some issues with the bricks in the sidewalk.

We've had to replace them.

They're disintegrating based off of improper installation when they originally paved the sidewalk years ago.

And 23192, as far as the pleading burden, which is 23192,

it just requires us to allege with particularity the means in which the town or the town officer

who would be responsible for the situation had actual notice or committed an intentional act.

And we believe the new allegations based off of the research we had done,

that shows that the town engineer who was the officer in charge of the sidewalks had actual notice

and he provided notice to the select board and the budget committee.

So there's no claim of written notice under 23192.1A, right?

Not for the amended, I propose medically, there's not.

It's merely that the officer who was responsible for the maintenance and repair of the public sidewalks,

particularly the one that the client fell on, had actual knowledge of insufficiencies with the sidewalk

and reported that to the select board.

So we believe that meets the pleading burden.

And what is the precise insufficiency of which the town employee had knowledge?

That the sidewalk when it was installed was, it was paved and installed incorrectly they used.

I believe as he had described to the select board, the underlying layer was improperly done

and caused I guess abnormal amounts of heaving and cracking in the sidewalk

and caused some of the bricks to completely disintegrate, crack in half, fall out.

And ultimately was there any allegation that there were missing bricks?

At some point I had read about missing bricks.

That was in the original complaint and that would be the amended complaint

based off of the photos that we have.

There were missing bricks.

And now based off of the research that was, that's the disintegrating bricks

because there's a hole where brick used to be with just some dust.

And how long ago had the work been done at the underlayment and the sidewalk?

If I recall correctly, you said the sidewalk was installed 18 years ago as of 2021

and that was to protect it from the sidewalk.

Okay, I guess that puts into 2004, 2005 range.

So would be your position that if a town or city employee becomes aware of cracking

or shifting in brick sidewalk that that's sufficient notice to satisfy 23192?

If cracking and shifting is causing an insufficiency then yes, which is our allegation.

And in this case, you know, maybe 10 years ago, you know, they were still having the same problems

but it wasn't causing bricks to completely disintegrate, causing coals to appear in the sidewalk.

While as we get closer on the day that my client felt that was the case.

So he had actual amount of the problems with the sidewalk then turning into an insufficiency

and he acknowledged the entire way through.

And we have a record of him reporting problems with the bricks as early as 2009 to the select board.

Is there any dispute as to the status of Primax and whether it satisfies the 5B statute?

In the context of this case, the reason we raise that is that if the emotion to amend is reversed, it's granted.

We file a mental complaint. It survives emotion to dismiss.

In the event that the question of what the municipality was grossly negligent or act in bad faith involves their chosen maintenance schedule

or how they, when they decide they're going to repave something and so on and so forth in those priorities.

23192-4 explicitly states that kind of stuff that will entitle the municipality to discretionary function.

They don't say immunity but I'm presuming that's the intention of the statute.

And previously, you know, the court when reviewing the statute says it is a mixture of standard of care and the immunity portion I believe is 23192-4.

And if that's the case and the town has procured a policy of insurance, they can't plead immunity up to their policy limits.

And what we're saying is that there isn't a sufficient factual record so far at the trial court to make it a determination as to

the particular liability coverage that the town has procured is there is not insurance for the purposes of being able to plead immunity or not.

Was there a request made to the town for whatever policies they have?

I know. There was no request made so far at the trial court level.

The only discovery we made a right to know was regarding any documents regarding that sidewalk.

And we had a notice deposition of the town engineer called DeHangeli that was successfully quashed and then we had a motion hearings.

So that the factual record so far at the trial court levels what we put in their pleadings and attached.

You attached a document from Primax in your objection?

We did. We did attach a document acknowledging liability coverage from Primax.

And the town objected to its inclusion and it wasn't mentioned by the trial court in its order or at the hearings and we don't believe it was ever considered regardless.

And we were entering it as proof that they had procured insurance or at least raised that issue that there could be insurance in this case.

Therefore immunity could be investigated.

So how would the amended complaint address the immunity with respect to Primax's status?

We don't believe the amended complaint would have to address the immunity issue.

It's as the factual record develops in this case and if it turns on the particular decisions the town made as to maintaining the sidewalk

we either to pave something else or pave this sidewalk, so on and so forth.

Those kind of decisions, 23192 for explicitly granting them discretionary function immunity for those kinds of decisions.

So that would effectively amend 507b7?

What's the argument there? I'm not understanding that.

The argument is that for allowed to proceed in the factual record develops and the question of what grossly negligent or bad faith that the town made that led to the insufficiency in my client's injury

turns on the decisions the town made as to their repair schedule, what to maintain, how much money to allocate towards fixing the sidewalk versus something that has more aesthetic value as opposed to safety value for the town.

Under 23192 for that, those kind of decisions are immune decisions and the claim would fail.

However, if they procured insurance they would not be entitled to that immunity up to their policy limits.

That's the issue that we want to make sure we have the opportunity to develop.

The trial court seemed to equate the use of primex as having no insurance, so why does it matter?

I'm sorry, could you repeat that?

My reading is the trial court indicated primex is not insurance, so why does it matter whether the claims are insured claims or not?

If primex is the sole provider of insurance and it's deemed not to be insurance.

Because if they're not deemed to be insurance then the town's allowed to entitle themselves to that immunity defense that the particular decisions the town made as to maintaining the sidewalk, choosing different ways.

So do you dispute whether primex is or is not insurance?

We do dispute and we don't believe there's a sufficient factual record for the trial court to have made that decision so early.

Can you just clarify, have you asked the town for whatever policy they have whether it's called insurance or not within the scope of the statute?

Or either just asked them, wrote them a letter, asked them or filed a 91A request for it?

We have not done so in this case or in another document by filing a declaratory judgment action, not at this moment.

As to our request for a motion to amend, we anticipate the town's going to argue, they've argued before that any complaint or claim under 23192 was also was satisfied by both parts one and parts two

saying that we also have to allege with particularity the actual bad faith or grossly negligent act.

But 23192 does not state that the pleading burden includes grossly negligent or bad faith acts.

It's just the manner that the actual notice, the town received or the intentional act.

And I think the question of the town and for this court is why the legislature chose not to include the words grossly negligent or bad faith act in their pleading standard while they kept it in the standard of care.

And I believe that's because they did not deem it appropriate to have a claimant try to allege with the particular grossly negligent act or bad faith act that caused insufficiency.

Just the manner, the actual way that the town knew that there was a problem with the particular public highway sidewalk and so forth.

If you want to know more questions, thank you for your time.

Thank you, Attorney.

Attorney Burrows.

Thank you, Mayor.

Please, the court.

Matt Burrows on behalf of the town of Conway.

I will welcome questions at any time.

What this appeal is an example of is a plaintiff that filed first and then attempted to engage in due diligence second, which is in direct contravention of RSA 231 90 to 92.

The manner in which the appellant proceeded with the underlying litigation is the exact opposite of what the statute requires.

But how the trial court handled this matter is exactly consistent with the mandate in RSA 231 90 to subsection two.

That statute says that when a plaintiff fails to plead with particularity notice under the statute of an insufficiency, it requires dismissal of the complaint.

This appeal has no merit and the trial court's decision should be affirmed.

As it relates to the argument itself, I'm going to start with addressing the trial court's treatment of the motion at dismiss and then touch on the motion to amend because there was a point raised by Justice Donovan that I do want to ultimately address with the court.

In the briefing itself, there really isn't any meaningful challenge on the part of the appellant as it relates to the trial court's application of RSA 231 90 to 92 against the fact and the complaint.

That argument really has been waived, but even if it had somehow been preserved, the trial court properly applied the written statutory scheme to the minimal facts that existed in the complaint.

When this complaint was initially pled, there were both assertions of written notice.

We don't know who sent the notice.

We don't know what the notice said.

We don't know when it was sent and we don't know who received it.

That's clearly insufficient under the statute.

There wasn't a statute of limitations problem here, was there?

No.

As far as I can read, there was no statute of limitations issue associated with this.

Does that all overcome our general proposition that claims on motions to dismiss should be freely granted, leave to amend in order to cure any deficiencies?

I will agree with you that as a general matter, this court has recognized liberal leave to amend, but that is not without restraint.

That is not an unfettered doctrine.

When an initial complaint is deficient and when we're dealing with substance.

Tell me what the boundaries are and what the case is setting forth the boundaries are and how they apply here.

Well, when we deal with a substantive amendment, the case law is clear that a substantive amendment should be afforded to prevent injustice.

And ultimately, the amended pleading has to actually cure the deficiencies associated with the underlying complaint itself.

We don't know that because we haven't submitted an amended complaint yet.

But there were assertions within both the, I guess, emotional amend and the surreply was lumped together from a process perspective and that's procedurally improper.

But let's just assume it was actually an emotional amend.

There were factual assertions within that.

There were factual assertions that were made before the trial court because the trial court afforded the appellant and opportunity to extrapolate on these issues.

And then there were further factual assertions that were made in addition on the motion for reconsideration.

But the standard procedure is on a motion to amend, you take a look at the complaint and you essentially re-analyze under the motion to dismiss standard,

whether the amended complaint fails to state a claim or not.

So why shouldn't that happen in this case?

Because it's not the trial court's job to do the work of the appellant.

It's the appellant's role to provide.

They're seeking leave to amend to provide that information to the trial court so the trial court can make a determination whether it's sufficient or not.

But there was no proposed amended complaint.

There had been no analysis regarding how the proper factual assertions would actually cure the underlying deficiency associated with the initial complaint.

This is not a situation where the appellant was afforded no opportunity to amend the complaint.

If you look at the actual timeline from the trial court, that motion to amend will call it was filed even April of 2022.

Approximately five months later, there was a hearing on the motion to dismiss at which time the trial court entertained additional facts,

however vague they were, from the appellant that may have, according to the appellant, cured the underlying deficiency.

Were there any discovery efforts made during those five months?

There was a right to no request which was just referenced by appellant's counsel as it relates to the written notice which yielded nothing.

There was an attempt on the motion.

There was a request for a deposition that was properly quashed.

But interrogatories or request for documents?

No interrogatories, no request for documents, no telephone call regarding a request for information, a letter.

What was the status of the record before the court?

Remembering this motion to dismiss with respect to Primax?

The status of the record before the court was the objection, specific to Primax,

was the objection that was proffered by the appellant with a letter from Primax that specifically said the town of Conway is a member of Primax,

and that Primax was organized under RSA 5B.

That's really the status of the record.

In addition to the cases that have been cited by the town, and it's really the reply,

and also I believe the objection to the motion to amend as well addressing that issue,

because the Primax issue has been addressed by other courts.

Primax has been addressed by the federal district court in Martin of Antilles.

But not by us.

Primax specifically has not been addressed by this court in Bowser via the town of Effing,

which again, is a non-precedential decision.

This court concluded that a pooled risk management program that is organized under RSA 5B is not insurance,

as contemplated by RSA 412.

That they can't offer any insurance products,

or that some of the policies they offer to towns are insurance or aren't insurance?

The statutory scheme specifically excludes pooled risk management programs from the definition of insurer.

By definition, if they provided insurance as contemplated by RSA 412, they'd be subject to that regulation.

And so by its very nature, Primax is not insurance.

So even though it provides indemnity, because it's not insurance, then the town is immune,

even though they've got indemnity for certain acts.

That's correct. There's a difference.

Well, it's important that with respect to the concepts of indemnity and defense,

that is not the same as traditional insurance.

And what we see in RSA 5B is the legislature's intent to specifically exclude pooled risk management programs

as a matter of policy from constituting insurers under RSA 412.

So we're not under 507B?

Well, RSA 507B specifically says that it's lawful for municipality to procure a policy of insurance under RSA 412.

And when we read that statute, the effect of it is that if a town obtains traditional insurance like from GEICO or Allstate,

you can't get immunity.

But when we take that statute and compare it to RSA 5B, we have the legislature saying that the pooled risk management program,

whatever pooled risk management program is organized under RSA 5B, is not insurance.

It's delivering the same essential product, which is indemnity if there is a claim.

It's just a different form. It's a different entity.

And I think in Chapter 5B it could be fairly read that the legislature in the context of municipalities

was endorsing the concept that they could pool their risk.

And instead of profits going to insurance company, they could share the profits.

I mean, it's clearly Primex is not regulated by the insurance department.

But that doesn't mean they're not providing insurance.

And again, I just want to be very careful with the language I use because insurance has a particular meaning in RSA 507B.

And we're talking about a policy of insurance procured under RSA 412.

And Primex...

So that's the language you're relying on?

That is the language I'm relying upon.

And that is the legislature's statement as to a policy of insurance under, again,

and I'm paraphrasing, but RSA 412, that is being treated differently.

Well, but 507B7A doesn't...

It allows them to procure policies of insurance described in RSA 412.

It doesn't prevent them from insuring themselves through a pool risk option.

And then you follow on in the statute and it talks about any action so insured against.

I guess I'm not seeing that by allowing them to purchase policies of insurance,

the legislature is omitting or preventing them from insuring through a pool risk

for the purposes of 507B.

There's nothing within 507B7A that would prevent a town like the town of Conway

from participating in being a member in a pool risk management program.

But simply being a member in a pool risk management program does not mean that that town

or any other town, I believe, there are approximately 500 that may be a member of Primex.

That doesn't mean that they weigh the immunity contained in RSA 507B.

We focused a lot on Primex and these issues, but at the end of the day, as it relates to this case in particular,

it really doesn't matter because the standard of care in RSA 230192 applies

irrespective of whether the town of Conway actually has insurance in the traditional sense

under RSA 412 or not, and that's consistent with the language in RSA 507B7A.

And it's likewise consistent with this court's decision in Clutier versus City of Berlin from 2006.

So I would suggest that it's not something that the court even needs to reach

because at the end of the day, the standard of care is still the standard of care.

If you want to touch on what Justice Donovan raised as it relates to the amendment

or the lack thereof, and we've touched on it as Justice McDonald as well,

as it relates to the actual process that occurred before the trial court,

there was ample opportunity for the appellant to amend the complaint to due diligence.

And that simply did not occur in this case.

Are you saying that the plaintiff was required to file the proposed amended complaint with the motion to amend?

I'm not even suggesting a proposed amended complaint.

I'm suggesting doing something more than what was done here,

which was simply, for example, on the motion to amend.

It was a screenshot of text without any reference whatsoever for date, time, where it came from,

and saying this entitles me to amend.

That's woefully insufficient, and the town actually raised with the court the fact

that that news article came out five months after the incident that forms the basis of the complaint.

Was there a request by the plaintiff for a deadline by which to submit an amended complaint?

Not to my knowledge. No. I'm not aware of that.

And as it relates to the actual conduct before the trial court,

there were affirmative statements made regarding what the town knew,

what actual knowledge it may have had.

And that was based off of the meeting minutes in this news article,

but I would suggest to you all, I've reviewed and I would suggest the court do the same.

With respect to those meeting minutes, they don't actually line up and support what the plaintiff is saying.

What they demonstrate is a general conversation between a town engineer and a town select court.

But wouldn't that be a better issue for summary judgment?

Because the appellate has relied upon them in substantiating what he believes is the actual notice

that's been provided to the town.

We need to look at those and again bear in mind that the appellate has a good faith obligation to make factual assertions.

And there is inconsistency between the statements made on the record as appended to the brief that we submitted.

In addition to those meeting minutes, they don't line up.

It's a general conversation between the town and its engineer regarding infrastructure, which we should expect.

And in addition to that, there is nothing in those records that actually supports the contention that the town knew

about an insufficiency associated with this particular sidewalk.

One of the meeting minutes was from 2021, which was after the event.

Some of them were from 2018 and 2009, but none of them actually touch on this particular issue of a purported insufficiency

related to this particular sidewalk where the appellate claims that he fell.

So to your point, Justice Macdonald, the court should grant emotional amend when it's intended to prevent injustice.

But as part of that analysis, an appellate cannot claim perceived injustice born out of his own conduct.

And that's precisely what we have here.

Because allowing an amendment in this case is going to cause the parties to expend resources.

It's going to result in the waste of the court's time.

And it's inconsistent with what the legislature stated when it enacted RSA 231 90 to 92 in response to the city of Dover case

that I believe repealed or found unconstitutional RSA 507 B.

The purpose of the statute is to afford a town like the town of Conway

with the greatest protection constitutionally possible arising out of purported liability associated with its sidewalk.

There is nothing as it relates to the trial court's conduct that was improper.

It did not abuse its discretion when it denied the motion to amend.

It properly applied the law to the fact and it should be affirmed.

Thank you very much, council.

This is submitted.
