This is case 2022-0718, State of New Hampshire versus Vincent Cheney.

Mr. Rothstein, I understand you've saved one minute for re-bottle. Is that right?

That's correct, Your Honor.

Please proceed.

Thank you. May it please the court? My name is David Rothstein. I represent Vincent Cheney.

This is an appeal of a denial of a motion to suppress any motion for a new trial.

There are three issues that were raised. There's a Frank's issue,

and an effective assistance of counsel is related to the duty to investigate.

And an effective assistance of counsel is related more specifically, I guess, to a receipt.

I'd like to talk about the receipt and make four points.

First, this receipt, it had probative value. It mattered.

Second, Mara Castro's statement about the second bracelet was critical to the trial court's ultimate probable cause finding.

Third, the failure to introduce the receipt at some point below,

whether at the hearing or in some sort of a motion to reconsider after getting the order, was ineffective and prejudicial.

And finally, the trial court aired when it neglected to reconsider its order in light of the new evidence that it received.

This is a somewhat different review of an affidavit that we have here.

In the normal case, when a trial judge is reviewing an affidavit.

How could the trial court have reconsidered with new evidence that wasn't presented originally?

Well, there's a couple things, Your Honor. First of all, there's the allegation that it was ineffective for trial counsel who had that evidence to not present it to the trial court.

Second, the point actually that I was just about to talk about here is that this review that the trial court was doing was a different sort of review than the trial court does most of the time in terms of a magistrate's determination.

In the normal case, the magistrate looks at the four corners of an affidavit and the trial court on review is called upon to find that there was no probable cause based on the four corners of the affidavit

and the trial court looks at the four corners of the affidavit and says there was or were not probable cause.

Here, the difference is that trial counsel below made allegations underfranks of misrepresentations and omissions in the affidavit.

So in making those allegations, it triggers the trial court to do a different type of review and consider things that it might not normally consider and consider things that the magistrate did not consider.

For example, here, based on the challenge, the trial court looked at or listened to the interview that investigator Harris did of Mara Castro, obviously something that the magistrate did not do.

The trial court also looked at a videotape of an alleged robbery in an ATF, which is also something the trial court did not do.

Along the same lines here, it is our position on appeal, the position taking the motion for new trial, the position taking here, that the receipt was another species of evidence that the trial court said that it could not have considered,

but I would say that the trial court not only could have considered, but should have considered and was obligated to consider when it was brought to its attention.

Who is going to testify to the receipt? How is the defense going to put that in?

Going back at the hearing, and I was thinking about this as hypothetical defense counsel, I think what I probably would have done at the hearing is I probably would have asked investigator Harris some questions about his investigation, which was that issue.

I would have asked him some questions about the second bracelet. I would have asked him if he had asked Mara Castro for any proof or to produce any evidence that there was a second bracelet.

I would have asked him if he would have been interested, had there been proof of evidence that there was a second bracelet.

I would have called Mara Castro at the hearing, and I would have gotten the receipt in through Mara Castro.

And there's another very interesting aspect of this proceeding.

I thought Mr. Chaney was the one that produced the receipt and gave it to his attorney.

Well, Mr. Chaney gave the receipt to his attorney. Mara Castro knew that and told investigator Harris that there was a second bracelet, that it was purchased in 2005,

and that it was identical to the bracelet that he thought was pawned, that he thought was a different bracelet.

If you look at the receipt, it's 162.2, the very same weight as the bracelet that some of the attorneys have.

So Castro had personal knowledge of the receipt, basically?

Castro, I do not know that Castro had personal knowledge of the receipt, but she had personal knowledge of the existence of the bracelet.

And I believe that she would have been a conduit at the hearing for the presentation of the receipt.

Obviously, the only other person who could have introduced the receipt at the hearing would have been the defendant himself,

which would have been something that would have been considered.

I want to say this though, so this is an unusual proceeding in that the credibility of Mara Castro took on such a large and a major role.

That's another unique thing about this case.

So, Harris recited in his affidavit the interview and the claim that she made about the second bracelet.

And the trial court, not only was that information significant to the trial court,

but I would submit that that information became a pillar of the trial court's order.

As post-trial counsel said, five times in seven pages the trial court invoked the absolute incredibility of that statement.

The trial court in its order said, the inculcatory information as to the claimed existence of another bracelet identical to the one stolen

would carry the day for the establishment of probable cause to search for two related jewelry items.

So, it's a unique case in that her credibility and what the trial court calls her the absolute incredibility of her statement was so patent.

Now, to me, I want to say that I know and respect both trial counsel and the trial court.

To me, if I'm at the hearing or if I get the trial court's order and I see the trial court's order and I see how incredibly focused the trial court was,

how hyper focused the trial court was on this particular claim, the credibility of Mara Castro's claim,

it has to trigger me an impulse to bring to the trial court's attention this receipt.

And to say to the trial court, you've made this a salient issue here.

I've got to tell you there is a receipt that shows, I understand you don't believe that, but that she was telling the truth.

And if you rested your order on the premise that she was not telling the truth, you have to do a reassessment of your order.

By analogy, let's say that a judge makes a finding in an order that a particular person was credible.

This person testified under oath and they were credible.

Let's say that trial counsel has presently information, credible information that in a courtroom down the hallway a week before that very same witness was found to have lied under oath.

The trial counsel didn't present the information.

It would be effective for trial counsel under those circumstances to not bring that information to the trial court and it would be improper under the circumstances for the trial court not to reassess its order and the basis of its finding with that new information.

Well, didn't the trial court do that in deciding the declining to grant the motion for new trial?

The trial court did not do that, Your Honor, and again with that page 62, which is part of the order, the trial court said that it could not have considered the receipt.

The trial court taking the position that it could not have considered the receipt, in my view, did not therefore conduct any reassessment having considered the receipt.

Do we have the recording of the interview or the video in the appellate record?

You have the transcript, it's in the appendix, you have the transcript of the interview between Castro and Harris, and you have the recording of the ATM transaction.

And one of the points that I make on appeal is that at least in some respects, because you have that information, to the extent that this court does a recalibration of probable cause, this court is in the same position as the trial court would have been.

Well, isn't that an interesting issue that we haven't directly addressed about the level of deference that we owe the trial court when we have in front of us the same evidence like a video?

Right. Well, I think that you've addressed it, but to the extent that you haven't addressed it, you talk about the owing of deference.

I absolutely agree that the court, that the standard applies in terms of the owing of deference unless clearly erroneous, the owing of deference in terms of assessing the credibility of a witness that the trial court saw and this court did not see,

absent exceptional circumstances. But if this court is reviewing a document that the trial court reviewed, or if this court is reviewing something like a video or something like a transcript,

let's just take the video, for example, because the transcript, I don't know that there's, I mean, there's some differences of opinion of whether Harris made misrepresentations in the affidavit.

Well, there seem to be significant differences of opinion about what that video shows.

There are significant differences of opinion about what the video shows, and I watched the video. I personally did not see Mr. Cheney laugh.

I personally did not think that it was inconsistent with a video of a man being robbed in an ATM.

So should we watch the video and draw our own conclusions?

I think this court could watch the video and draw its own conclusions and could find that the trial court, to the extent that it found to the contrary, clearly aired.

So I guess you could look at it either way. Either this court could independently look at the video and draw its own conclusion.

Or let's say, just to take another example, let's say it was a video where that said the person who was wearing a yellow shirt and had a clown nose on

and was holding an umbrella. Well, I mean, I think you could look at the video and say, the person's not wearing a yellow shirt.

They don't have a clown nose on and they're not holding an umbrella. What that means, I don't know.

We've had cases involving videos from the state prison and videos from police camps where we've looked at them and it didn't seem to square up with what had been found below.

I think if it doesn't square up with what was found below, I think it would be equivalent to a finding of clear error.

I mean, if you put, I guess in this case, six eyes instead of ten eyes on it and you watch it and you discuss it, I think you can say, to me, it does not look like, I don't draw the inferences that the trial court did

and I think he would be entitled to do that as opposed to a trial where a witness testifies and you're reading the dry transcript and, you know, there you'd be deferring more to the jury or to the trial judge.

In your reply brief, you cited a civil case on the standard of review. Could you not find a criminal case? Why did you cite that case?

I don't remember. The standard of review, I think it just seemed to aptly stated, I think the standard of review judge would be just in terms of the deference that this court owes to.

There certainly are criminal cases that recite, I believe, the exact same language. I can't remember why I picked that particular case, maybe because of its currency or because of the way it stated it.

But in my opinion, on appeal, this court's standard of review in terms of the deference that it owes to a trial court and circumstances where it may or is entitled to not defer to the trial court.

I don't think there's any difference in criminal or civil in my view.

Is totality of the circumstances how we should look at all of this?

It is totality of the circumstances and I would have to concede that if the trial court, you know, if this court says to me, I'm going to give you everything.

I'm going to give you everything that you say. I'm going to give you everything you say about the receipt. I'm going to take all the inferences from the receipt that you say, I still find that I can get there a different way than the trial court did.

And this court, as it knows, can affirm based on different grounds than the trial court did. I would agree with that.

But I would, below, a post-conviction counsel said that the finding about the receipt and the inferences from the receipt eviscerate probable cause.

I would echo that. I would argue that with this information that a reviewing court would no longer find probable cause to search.

I mean, if I just finish my sentence, you have a situation where the issue is, is there another bracelet like this bracelet?

I mean, that's really the issue. If there's another bracelet like this bracelet, then I would say it doesn't have probable cause to search anymore.

Well, what if the question is why not ensure the second bracelet?

Well, they did ensure the second bracelet. They didn't ensure the bracelet in 2005.

Again, this is one of those negative inferences that the now retired attorney Ramstall talks about. I mean, do people have older pieces of jewelry that they never insured and don't insure?

I think they did.

Well, I never had $65,000 worth of jewelry to begin with, but if I did, I don't think I'd leave it in a shower.

Well, I appreciate that. I think it was actually that necklace was the one he was wearing in the ATM. The other jewelry was expensive. That's the Manchester Caswell jewelry.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you, Mr. Rothstein.

Mr. Gadier.

May it please the court, Sam Garnier for the State of New Hampshire.

I intend to advance two arguments this morning. First, that the search warrant was supported by probable cause even after excising the alleged misrepresentations from the warrant affidavit.

And second, that trial counsel was not ineffective for choosing not to pursue an argument rooted in the duty to investigate.

And I welcome the court's questions at any time.

Why shouldn't the receipt issue have been pursued?

Specifically under the tangway in duty to investigate, Your Honor, or just more broadly?

More broadly.

Okay.

So more broadly, as the trial court said, the trial court could not have considered the 2005 receipt.

And I would like to respond to Attorney Rothstein's points that the court did consider evidence that was not within the four corners of the affidavit.

The argument that was being made was that there were material omissions and misrepresentations.

And the misrepresentations and the omissions came from the interview, the video, and pieces of evidence like that.

So those pieces of evidence were necessary to evaluate in order to evaluate the argument that things from that interview and things from that video that were material were omitted or misrepresented.

There was no argument that there was a misrepresentation or an omission specifically above the 2005 receipt.

Investigator Harris could not have omitted the 2005 receipt in any pertinent way since he did not know about it.

So the trial court could not consider that unless it dealt with the tangway issue.

But even on the tangway issue, as the state would assert Defense Council recognized when testifying a motion for a new trial, the 2005 receipt could not have triggered a duty to investigate.

The tangway does not stand for the proposition that a duty to investigate can be triggered by information not known to an affiant.

It stands for the proposition that a warrant may be invalidated on the basis that information was omitted from an affidavit and that information was not known to the affiant,

but it should have been because the affiant should have investigated further.

So in tangway, what triggered that duty was what the state police officer learned from the local Conway police officer that her tipster was known as a police groupie, as quirky, as troubled,

and that he had a conviction for uttering a false prescription.

She did not pursue that information to determine whether or not her tipster was credible before she almost solely relied on the tipster to apply it for a warrant.

So it is the information that she did know that triggered the duty to investigate, and if she did investigate further, she would have found that her tipster had another underlying juvenile adjudication for making a false report.

Can we assume that the second bracelet exists or the first bracelet exists and still find probable cause?

I think you can, Your Honor. I think even if this court were to assume that that bracelet in that pawn shop were this first 2005, first bracelet purchased in 2005,

I think that piece of information could cut both ways. I think Defendant would argue, see, that makes my, that makes Mara credible.

She's telling the truth about this second bracelet. The state might argue, it's odd that you purchased an identical bracelet,

insured it, and then lost it and claimed it, but you held on to this other one that was not insured. That still might raise suspicion of fraud.

So I think that could cut both ways, and I do not think even assuming it to be true, it would eviscerate a finding of probable cause.

Can you explain the standard of review that you're suggesting because it seemed to be different than Attorney Rothstein's?

Sure. I think the standards of review are a little bit nuanced here.

So speaking to the material misrepresentations in omissions, whether or not a misrepresentation was made and whether or not it was material are legal determinations that this court reviews de novo.

Whether a misrepresentation was made intentionally or recklessly is a factual question that is for the trial court and that is owed deference if it is supported by the record.

Now I would agree with Attorney Rothstein that if you were to watch the video, I believe the trial court's order says that Mr. Cheney can be seen laughing in the video, for example.

If you were to watch that video and see that he is not laughing, there is no other evidence in the record that he was laughing.

So I don't think that alters the standard of review. I think it just leads to the conclusion that that factual finding is clearly erroneous.

However, the trial court also heard testimony and rooted its factual findings in that.

So for example, on the issue of whether or not Mara Castro would provide her home address,

Investigator Harris testified to a phone conversation that he had with Mara where he looked to set up a meeting at her house

and she would not do that and suggested that they meet at Dunkin Donuts.

And then there's the interview where he asked, where are y'all living? Very general question.

She says up the street in Manchester. That is a general answer.

I think to the extent the trial court made factual findings about whether or not Mara would provide her home address,

to the extent that is based off of testimony that the trial court observed, it is still owed deference to that extent.

To the extent that this court can review the transcripts of the interview,

I think that this court maybe could conclude that the finding that Mara would not provide her home address

is clearly erroneous to vis-a-vis only the interview.

But I don't think this court should be reviewing essentially de novo the testimony that the trial court was able to observe.

Can we review the video de novo?

Assume we don't see the defendant laughing in the video.

Are there other aspects to that video that suggest that it may have been just a little too convenient for this to have happened in an ATM?

I absolutely think this court will come to this conclusion, Your Honor.

I certainly did.

Whether or not Mr. Cheney can be seen laughing, I'm not sure.

But in my view, the entire encounter was very, very calm.

The person entering the vestibule was quite calm.

The person being robbed was quite calm.

I did believe that I saw a wallet in the defendant's hand and that was not taken.

The whole interaction just seemed a lot more friendly than I would imagine.

It would play out if I were robbed at an ATM and it certainly does raise suspicion the state would submit.

So as far as the trial court's order, I'll be brief unless the court has questions as I go along.

The trial court found that essentially investigator Harris did not make any material misrepresentations or omissions.

I think this court should affirm on that basis.

That would be a de novo review.

Even if this court disagreed, the trial court reached the same conclusion even after excising all of the information that the defendant took issue with.

And this court has instructed that that is what trial courts are to do when they're faced with a warrant that has an affidavit that makes material misrepresentations and omissions,

but they aren't made intentionally or recklessly, which is what the trial court found here.

It then excised the information, re-analyzed and still found probable cause and that can be seen at page 49 of the defendant's addendum.

That portion of the court's order.

What level of deference do we owe to that?

The finding that it was no misrepresentations or omissions were made materially or recklessly.

There is still probable cause after you excise.

I believe that the finding that there was no intentionality or recklessness, that finding is owed deference,

but the probable cause determination re-analyzing is a legal conclusion that this court can review de novo.

So on either basis, I think this court should affirm either that there were no material misrepresentations or omissions,

or even if they were, you can excise the misrepresentations, include the omissions, and you still find probable cause.

As for the ineffectiveness, as previously discussed, the trial court could not have considered the 2005 receipt,

so trial counsel was correct that as a general matter the 2005 receipt just was not relevant.

Trial counsel was further correct, even though trial counsel stated that he was not aware of Tang Wei when he filed this motion to suppress,

he articulated his understanding of the duty to investigate further correctly to the extent that it can be correctly articulated.

I would point out that even the first circuit in Tang Wei observed that this duty of further inquiry is not well understood.

Tang Wei was 2015, and in my research it does not seem that it has become much better understood since then.

But defense counsel explained today, I believe the way he phrased it is,

to trigger a duty to investigate, investigator Harris would have had to see something that made him pause and go,

whoa, okay, I need to look at this further, and that's absolutely right.

The first Tang Wei factor asked whether the investigator had obvious reasons to doubt the information that they had.

The 2005 receipt, as I kind of opened with, couldn't have done that.

Investigator Harris never saw that.

So it would have had to be, as the trial court observed, Mara Cock Castro's statements during the interview that triggered that duty to investigate further.

And Mara certainly did bring up a second bracelet, but then she promptly lied about its whereabouts,

never having pawned it, and at the end of the interview, the court will see on page 29 of the transcript,

investigator Harris is all at begging for some sort of explanation,

a further detail about the second bracelet, and Mara doesn't provide it.

And he offers a business card and says, call me if you have any further questions or information,

and share this with the defendant, and have him reach out to me.

The two months goes by between that interview and the application for a search warrant,

and nobody ever calls investigator Harris with this 2005 receipt.

So defense counsel's understanding of the duty to investigate further was accurate,

and he was right that the 2005 receipt was irrelevant to it.

So the defendant could not have satisfied either of the first two prongs of Tang Wei,

and then even getting to the third prong where the 2005 receipt may become relevant,

he still would have failed that one as the trial court ruled.

Under the third prong, the question is whether investigator Harris, if he undertook to investigate further,

would have found this 2005 receipt, and there's just no evidence to suggest that he would.

Again, he tried to ask Mara about the second bracelet, and she was not cooperative.

Nobody reached out with the 2005 receipt.

The defendant was not cooperative during the claims process with travelers insurance.

By all accounts, Mara and the defendant were mostly uncooperative in this investigation,

and there's nothing to suggest that if investigator Harris looked further that he would have found this 2005 receipt.

And if the court has no further questions, the state will arrest on its brief.

I had a question. What did you mean when you said that the court could not consider the receipt?

So speaking, understanding defendant to be making a general ineffective assistance of counsel argument

not necessarily rooted in the duty to investigate, just that you should have brought this 2005 receipt up in the suppression hearing.

As a trial court stated in its order, even if defense counsel had tried to do that,

the trial court could not have considered the 2005 receipt.

Investigator Harris didn't know about it. It wasn't before the magistrate.

And it wasn't like these other pieces of evidence that attorney Rothstein was talking about in which the magistrate did not consider it,

but the trial court did. That is the interview in the video.

Because those pieces of evidence were necessary to evaluate the omission in misrepresentation arguments.

The 2005 receipt was not necessary to evaluate those arguments because investigator Harris could not have made any misrepresentations

as to a piece of evidence that he did not know.

And to the extent that he omitted it, it was not because he was trying to hide it. He did not know about it.

Thank you, Mr. Gagnon.

Mr. Rothstein, do you wish to take your minute?

I take part of my minute, Your Honor.

I just want to address the termination of the interview.

I address this in the brief and it's in the transcript that you have.

Attorney Gagnon said that investigator Harris was just begging Mara Castro at the end of the interview, please, just cooperate.

I think what the court will see that he was doing is he was telling her that they were going to go to a grand jury,

that she was going to be in a lot of trouble.

He was flatly rejecting her continued claims about a second bracelet.

So the inference, I think that the state was trying to make that this was a friendly hand reaching out and saying,

hey, you know, here's my car, just come and talk to me.

I don't think is supported by the audio.

And this is also a point where the trial court actually did find that Attorney Harris's recitation of how the interview ended

was not wholly accurate.

So I just wanted to make that one point, unless the court has any other questions.

Thank you very much.

Case submitted, the court will be in brief recess.
