This is case 2022-03-09, Bradley M. Weiss et al. versus town of Sonopee.

Good morning, counsel, Tony Schuster. I understand you reserve two minutes for rebuttal.

Yes, please.

Please proceed.

Thank you. May it please the court. My name is Barry Schuster. I represent Brad Weiss

and Kathy Shea. The trial court dismissed the zoning appeal based on documents that

were in the certified record, and especially the April 1st decision of 2021. But those were

not available to the plaintiffs when they filed their appeal. Contrary to statute 6763 and

the Sonopee's own zoning ordinance, the zoning board did not provide a copy of the April

decision to the plaintiffs. Because the documents were in the certified record, the

trial court assumed that the plaintiffs knew what the certified record said and what those

decisions were.

The town argues that the draft minutes were available to your clients.

The draft minutes were available six weeks after the decision.

The draft minutes, not the final minutes.

Yes. They were approved six weeks after the meeting.

Okay.

The draft minutes.

The draft minutes were approved on May 25th, and the meeting was on April 1st.

Do you dispute the draft minutes were timely posted under the statute?

Yes. They were not available at all until, well, they were not of context. We were

in the depths of COVID at that point. We still carry a mask everywhere. The sign

at the front of the courthouse door says, be careful.

We were on a Zoom meeting that had, and I pointed out in our brief, it was not to provide

a specific text that we were trying to show you. But during that meeting, the concept

was that everything was in the room like this. We were listening like this.

You and your, by we, with you and your clients participated in Zoom.

We did participate. We were by Zoom. All of the members were by Zoom. Nobody was

in the room except the recording secretary. And on April 27th, you filed a motion

for re-hearing in which you invoked the two bases, which are spirit of the ordinance

and hardship. So where did that come from?

Based upon our recollection of the meeting only. We had no minutes. We were

just trying to recall what was stated. But as the appendix shows on pages 120

and 121, I specifically said that we're appealing on the basis of spirit of the

ordinance and public interest on page 121 of the appendix. I said, we wanted an

expert to testify why it would affect public interest and spirit of the

ordinance. Normally, motions for re-hearing are decided only on the

written material, but the board gave us an opportunity to speak that night. And

again, it was by Zoom. I specifically raised those two points along with

hardship. At no time were we told that no, it's only hardship in spirit of the

ordinance. Public interest is not an issue. We were proceeding on those

three. And when the board heard the case again in June, they did the same

thing. Although they added substantial justice, which the town admits was not

a ground for denial. So presumably at the hearing in June, you, on behalf of your

clients, offered and put before the board materially different information than

the board had before it in April, including a new expert. Is that

right? And that was to address the health and safety concern, which we

believed focused on either public interest or spirit of the ordinance, but we

wanted to address that. And that was new. And that was the basis for giving

the re-hearing. Again, if the court had actually gotten to the merits of

this appeal, you would have been lawful. And in fact, it would have

been your purpose to rely on the new information that was submitted at

that second hearing as a basis for challenging the board's decision. Is

that right? Oh, yes. Yes. That expert was critical because the chair of the

zoning board specifically said he was worried about fire safety. So we

got a fire safety expert whose curriculum VDI is in the record. He's

well respected. And he testified again by Zoom. And the board nevertheless

denied the request. So even if the bases hadn't changed or accepting your

proposition that they hadn't changed, there was a different body of evidence

that you would have drawn upon if you'd gotten to the merits. So doesn't

that speak to why motion for re-hearing would be required for you to

go back to the board and say, wait a minute, you know, now you've got

this expert. And this expert testified. And so you're just wrong in not

following the expert. That's what you wanted to do. So why isn't it

imperative to file a motion for re-hearing so that the board could

have an opportunity to respond to that argument? The motion for

re-hearing goes to the bases for the denial, not because the board

decided to discount a particular witness. The three bases were

hardship, spirit of the ordinance and public interest. Those were the

same three bases. So there was no new basis on which to appeal at that

point. We had only one place to go. And that was to the superior

court. Why not just file a motion for re-hearing and an appeal to

the superior court? Cover your bases. You know, in hindsight,

that might have been a good idea. But even I believe it's the

McDonald case refers to having a waste of resources of going to

places at once saying, we're not sure where we need to go, but

you come here, please. We were confident that we had three bases

of denial. I've never filed a motion for re-hearing based upon

a board saying we didn't think your expert was satisfactory. That

went to the reason for the denial. That went to those three

reasons for the denial. And until the certified record was

filed, we never knew there were two, only two bases in that

able decision. And it's a decision had to be made in July,

and that's when we made that decision. It was the son of the

zoning ordinance, you have to send a letter within seven days

to the applicants about why they're either approved or

denied. Waiting four months simply deprived us of the actual

knowledge of the basis of the decision. And that really, you

know, the council pointed out that spirit of the ordinance and

public interest are related. I know that well, I was the council

in that case. I would have filed something if I thought they

were only two bases, and they were ed in the third. There was

discussion about health and safety, fire safety, we

addressed that. And that's why we brought the expert in. But

at no time, the board ever let us know or say, we only didn't

worry about public interest before.

The town takes the position that the video and audio were

accessible and clear. Do you dispute that?

Well, as pointed out on page 204 of the appendix, when we

went to the zoning board section of the town website,

the video meetings for January, March, and May, and the first

one in June and then July, April and June meetings were not

there. Now it turns out they were on the website in a

different place. They could have been with the fire

department for all we know. But those two meetings were

not available until a year later. This is a situation where

we simply did not have any notice of what had occurred. And we

never received the written material from the board until

the certified record came. And it was even a year later or

10 months later when we were able to view the videos. This is

a situation, again, in that context, perhaps of COVID,

things were shut down. Why the board didn't provide us the

information? Was it COVID on their part? I don't know.

Why weren't these videos included in the zoning board

section, which would be the logical place with all of the

other videos? If we had seen those, we might have been in a

different place today.

You couch your argument in terms of it being an unsustainable

exercise of discretion for the court to fail to find good

cause. And the town responds left the red herring, this

good cause issue. That has to do with adding an additional

claim. And rather, this is jurisdictional. What's your

response to that argument?

Well, I didn't understand that because if, in fact, we're only

to, and if we wanted to add a third claim, the public

interest, that's exactly what good cause is meant to cover.

To say we're adding that, and certainly, the cases talk

about what is good good cause. And good cause in this case

would be to add the claim of the third basis, which we found

out six weeks later about. That would be adding it. It's not

a red herring. It's not even adding a jurisdictional

issue. It's saying, look, the statute specifically allows

good cause. Good cause in this case occurred because of

the limits of the hearing, the failure to provide the

minutes, failure to provide the decision, and only learning

about that weeks and months after the case was filed. So we

were without any information. I've been doing this for

longer than the court has been doing this. I've filed motion

sir hearing time and again, we were without any information

at that point. And it was it was very, very difficult for

us. And pardon me, but you had the information. Your

argument, it seems to me would be the same if if there had

been a live meeting and you'd been sitting there, you'd be

making the same argument. Is that right? Well, if we're a live

meeting, we would be able to raise my hand and have the

discussion just we're doing now. We were not in control of

the zoom conversation. The master of the zoom person, zoom

meeting controlled who could talk when you raise your hand. And

maybe you were recognized. And this was also early in the

zoom process. I was in meeting yesterday, we had live live

text coming through with the audio that we've come a long way

in two years. But you heard the same thing in the board's

deliberation and the board's vote. You heard the same thing

you would have heard if you had been sitting there live in

person, right? Oh, I won't say that what we heard is what is

in the minutes. I'll say we heard discussions about health

and safety. We heard all those concerned about the fire

safety. Those two are criteria for both public safety or public

interest and spirit of the ordinance, we would have said

so why are you denying this? We would have made it very clear

at that point, but we were prohibited from doing that. The

zoom did not allow that for us. You were not able to speak or

have any input. You were just watching. No, we at the hearing

we participated, but when the board was making its

deliberations, we were not permitted to talk at that

point. They closed the meeting, they deliberated and that was

it raised that argument before the trial court, correct? Oh,

yes. But the trial court looked at the record, the certified

record and assumed that we had everything in that we didn't

and that was the unfortunate part of how this case came

about. If the trial court had had knowledge and we didn't

even know that the the audios were not available at that

time, although we did point it out in the motion for

reconsideration, and I think the court simply abused his

discretion in saying, oh, you had it and therefore you should

have known. We didn't have it. We tried to point that out and

the court misunderstood that. I have a few minutes reserved.

I'll save that for the response. Thank you very much. Good

morning, Your Honor. So may it please the court, Laura

Specter Morgan on behalf of the tennis canopy and its

zoning board. This court should affirm the decision of the

trial court is missing this case because the second motion

for rehearing is in fact required because the June

decision added a basis for denial of the present. This is a

case of form over substance resulting in a forfeiture of

jurisdiction of some magnitude. I don't think it is a case of

form over substance. The court has held several times,

including in the kind of going to butcher this name Dazima case

that a second motion for rehearing is required. New

grounds are added to a denial of a variance to give the

board the opportunity to address its when you know

new grounds have been added. Oh, they knew how to do. Well,

interpreting minutes mean 9182 requires minutes to be posted

within five business days. And there is absolutely no claim

raised before that that did not happen. But the official

minutes weren't approved for six weeks. The approved minutes.

Can you rely on the draft minutes and your recollection and

a maybe a video that is or isn't available to discern what the

decision actually was based on. Absolutely. We do it all the

time. Minutes are very rarely approved until the next zoning

board meeting, which is a notice gets sent to the

applicant. I don't know. Yes, and I don't know why the

notice wasn't sent here. Right. So the official notice

from the town isn't sent to the applicant and the applicants

left trying to discern from various sources what the basis

is. But the applicant knew they stated in their motion for

rehearing. They said in their motion for rehearing in his

decision, the board made passing reference to the spirit of

the ordinance, but primarily focused on the hardship

criterion. This decision is an error because the application

does observe the spirit of the ordinance and satisfies the

hardship criterion. Right. So the second time, which was a live

meeting, by the way, trying to figure out a new ground has

been added again. There's no notice that there is no notice

the minutes again. There's no claim the draft minutes weren't

available, although by that point, certainly the April

minutes were available. Right. It was a live meeting. Attorney

shooter was in the room with the board. And he's got to

draw from what he's hearing and we know how these

meetings go. People are talking about all sorts of different

things. Legislative history, what's in their mind? I don't

know. But there are words out there. And so the applicant

has to draw from those words what the basis for the

decision is. And the word without a written notice

confirming. And I certainly have experienced a bit of

surprise when the written notice comes through sometimes

and I've been in the room as have I. However, in this

case, the minutes and the notice of decision are

identical. The minutes say the motion is the application is

not in the public interest. He's concerned about cumulative

impact and the water view from the surface of the lake for

the public at large, replacing larger structures from

what are now fairly small and very well molded into

contours of the train. There is no public benefit. There

is no hardship as there is nothing unique about the

property. Substantial justice is not an issue. And this

is contrary to the spirit of the ordinance. From the

minutes approved minutes. Yes. Yes. But if you look at the

minute and they're not in the record of the September

meeting, where the June minutes were approved, the

changes are all textual. There's nothing substantive in

those changes. And I don't know why I put that time. But

again, the applicant has to then rely on draft

minutes that might change and might not in this

particular circumstance. You have someone who wasn't I

don't know that that would be a proper reliance on draft

minutes. If they could change and have the draft

minutes actually changed, the statute provides a

mechanism to address that the statute says you need to

file your motion for re hearing. You need to file

your appeal. But if the minutes or the most of

decision come out more than five days afterwards, you

have the opportunity to amend a timely filed motion

for re hearing or appeal to the Superior Court. So

the statute complies that there might be changes. There

weren't any here. The minutes are identical to the

notice of suit. Do we think the and I'll let you go. But

the Anna case, Fort Smith case would have been

different. Had it arisen during COVID? I don't know. And

your honor, COVID was never raised below. This whole

notion that the meeting was unsyferrable was never

raised below. And having listened to the videos,

they're perfectly clear to me. I was able to come up with a

transcript of the motion all on my own. The one that's in the

brief I wrote was the issue about availability. As I

understand Mr. Schuster, he was saying, Well, they were

they were there somewhere, but they weren't where we could

find them. Was that issue explored below or argued

below? It was discussed below briefly in the motion

free hearing attorney Schuster argues that the town

potentially and purposefully remove these videos from the

zoning board section of the website. Do you agree they

weren't in the zoning board? They were not in the zoning

board section of the website. So I went on the website, I

searched by date, I easily found them. I emailed the town

manager and I said, What's going on? Why is it not in the

zoning board section? And in the day section, she said, I

don't know. I'm going to have to talk to the IT people.

And again, it was COVID. But this meeting was

entirely decipherable by zoom. And even if it weren't that

issue raised, I've been waived. Sorry.

If we accept the town's interpretation of the

statutes here and the bases for the decision hardship and

public interest or whatever the same bases were for after the

second hearing. But the evidence was all different.

If there were experts and all, is it your interpretation, the

town's interpretation of the statute that a motion for

rehearing would have to be filed in order for the appeal to

go forward? If the original bases were hardship, public

interest and spirit of the ordinance and the second time

it was also hardship, spirit of the ordinance, public

interest, no second motion for rehearing have been

required. Regardless of what the evidence was, even if it

was different, then how would that evidence get before

the trial court?

They haven't it gets before the trial court because it's in the

record as part of the rehearing.

I was under the impression. Rehearing's were a duo.

They are a flat out duo over there. So the relevance of

the two bases being exactly the same is an overlay we've

put on it, right? The need to file a rehearing. It is an

overlay you put on it. Absolutely. Yes.

It seems to be a different decision because there's new

evidence. Well, it is a different decision because

there's new evidence. And in fact, the board discussed

different factual basis for its decision as well. In the

original decision, Chair Simpson, who's an attorney was

talking about health and safety, but he was very

concerned about fire. The ability of fire trucks to get

down there. It's a narrow road. It's a congested

neighborhood. And the closeness of the buildings

for fire purposes. In the second hearing in June, Mr.

Lyons made the motion and he made it very clear that in

addition to the fire concerns, he had concerns about

overcrowding and its impact on aesthetics, right? Because the

fire concerns had been met in part by an address, right?

So we had more. Yes, I'm not sure the board was

convinced there was more evidence on it. Yes. Yes.

I mean, if you look at the the Zama opinion, we talk

about the agreed party must file for a motion for

rehearing that raises any new issues that are thrust upon

the appealing party to hold otherwise would deny the

board an opportunity to correct its errors. It seems to

me that it's not necessarily the bases, but it's new

issues like, hey, there was this expert. There were

these five experts testified. So it seems, it just

seems to me that when you've got all this new

evidence, it suits everybody's purpose and is consistent

with this decision that you have to file for a new

hearing, even if it's the same grounds, but that's not

your position. That is not my understanding of what the

law currently is. Certainly, if this court wanted to

expand the requirement for a second motion for rehearing,

we would all learn to live with that.

Don't go ahead. I don't know. I mean, it depends on

the construction, arguably, of the language in that

statute. I mean, in the decision about what raising

a new issue is and giving the board an opportunity to

address its any errors that made. Sure. The decision

talks about Shaw and Shaw talks about when the

bases agreement do not change following the

decision on the hearing. No second motion for

rehearing is required. They then distinguish this

case from the Shaw case and notes that a similar

situation would have occurred if the board's

original decision had been a denial on the

merits based on one issue and following

the rehearing, the board had admitted its error as to

that issue, but denied the petition of the merits

on a new second issue. Here we have a new third

issue for the basis for denial. And in Dizama, the

court issued sort of a new interpretation, but

didn't apply it to that case. Correct.

Correct. Would that be the right thing to do

here? No, because the law here is very clear

from Dizema that a second motion for rehearing

was required. If the court is going to expand

the requirements for a second motion for

rehearing, that would be applied

prospectively, but that would not apply in this

case, because in the case of second request was

already required. Was the written decision

available in five business days? The written

decision? Yes. I don't know. What happened

was when I was putting together the certified

record, I got a draft notice of decision of

the April meeting. And I said, why isn't it

signed? And we can't find the signed one.

We're going to have the zoning

administrator sign a new one and send it to

you. So that's why it's dated August 3rd,

because it was signed as we were putting

together the certified record. So I don't

know whether the draft notice of decision

was available within the five business

days. But again, even if it was not, the

statute contemplates that circumstance

provides a basis for relief. Thank you very

much. There are no other questions. Thank

you very much. We ask that you affirm

the trial court. Thank you, Attorney

Specter Morgan. Attorney Schuster. I

always enjoy agreeing with Attorney

Specter Morgan on the 3 versus 3 and no

rehearing on the same basis, given the

complexity of some applications, it

would have to be difficult to have a new

motion for rehearing on each new traffic

or building issue. So I'll agree with her

on these issues. Going back to 6763 and

the Son of B zoning ordinance, both of

those require that the decision be made

available within five days. Actually, the

town, it says if the appeal is denied, all

reasons shall be indicated in the denial

letter and on file also in file within

72 hours. That was never available to

the appellants, to the plaintiffs. And

throughout the time that the zoning

board discussed this hearing, there were

about eight different reasons that they

discussed during that spirit of the

ordinance, hardship, contrary to public

interest, contrary to the purpose of the

ordinance, not in the public interest, no

public benefit, substantial justice,

health and safety. This was repeated

throughout and without a written

decision, we had no idea. How should

it factor into our analysis that the

minutes weren't approved until 30 or more

days later? That's the common thing that

happens for a ZBA. They don't meet every

other week. They meet when they have to,

but maybe every other every month. So

you're not going to get the minutes

in a fashion within the statutory

period. Understood. And when the written

request for rehearing was filed, it was

with no ability to see any of the

minutes. When the oral presentation for

the rehearing was made, it was

specifically added to have both public

interest and spirit of the ordinance. So

those three items were on the table for

the board. And as my time is out, I just

like to say that this may be a unique

situation. It should be remanded to the

Superior Court, remand to the zoning

board to issue a prompt written

decision so the parties can proceed.

Thank you. Thank you very much,

council. The case is submitted.

The court will stand in order.
