This is case 1220276, City of Laconia versus Robert Jolander.

Good morning, Karen.

Please proceed.

Morning.

OK.

May it please the court.

I'm Attorney Pat Karen.

I'm the attorney for the appellate, Robert Jolander.

And this case really boils down to two questions.

What does prevail mean within the scope of RSA 6761711?

And what did the lower court mean by scrap?

The two issues do dovetail together.

First of all, and what does prevail mean?

The statute clearly says when a party, you know, when the town prevails,

on an ordinance violation, attorney, reasonable attorney fees are awarded.

Well, is it on any issue that the town presented?

And is it to any extent?

I mean, if they're successful to any extent,

or is it to a majority, to a greater extent?

In this case, the town wanted my client

to remove all of his boats and all of his cars,

whether registered or not, if they deemed them not to be roadworthy.

And pretty much everything on his property.

Well, my client said, I'm not going to do that.

Town brought the litigation.

Wasn't brought by my clients, brought by the town.

And as resulted from the litigation, the lower court said, OK,

you can keep all your boats.

Those are motor vehicles.

So my client prevailed on that issue.

You can keep all your cars as long as you register them.

You know, either the cars have to be roadworthy

or you have to register them.

To register them makes that issue pretty clear.

So my client gets to keep all of his cars,

provided that he registers them.

Now, the town has an expansive view of what junkyard is.

But it did not get everything that it saw.

My client wouldn't have gotten to keep his boats and his cars

as long as he registers them if he had just

capitulated to the town.

So the real issue is, does the purpose of the statute

to send a message to the citizens, do what the town says,

or else?

Because even if you win something,

the town wins anything that it sought after.

You're going to be stuck with a big attorney bill

that you probably can't pay.

So most property owners would say, OK,

I guess I'll get rid of the stuff.

My client wasn't one of those.

He felt he was in the right.

He has a certain right to keep possessions on his property.

In his cases about that, how much, what kinds of things.

You know, the old adage, one man's treasures

and the other man's junk.

Well, the town said, oh, this is junk.

Get rid of it.

My client said, no, I use everything on my property.

What in your opinion did the town prevail on?

They, well, on the scrap issue, which I don't quite understand.

Remove all scrap from the premises.

What that exactly means, the court

wasn't all that clear on it, but they did get that.

And my client does have to register all the vehicles,

especially if they're not a roadway.

But he gets to keep them.

But he gets to keep them.

Mostly, if I was the town, I'd say, yeah, I came up empty on this

for all the pop-up about it.

Did you make the argument below about the trial,

that the town prevailed in certain respects,

but not other respects?

And therefore, the attorney's fees

ought to be parsed out and argue to the trial court,

well, they shouldn't get all the fees.

They should only get this much fees.

Is that an argument that was made below?

I didn't make that argument.

They didn't prevail on the multitude of issues.

And it'd be unconscionable to award

any amount of attorney fees.

Any amount.

Your position was there should be no fees, period.

The statute doesn't say it says prevail.

You get the attorney fees.

It doesn't say you get one.

Does it make any argument if the court ordered

that your client should move all but one vehicle?

Probably not.

My client substantially prevailed in what he was after.

He's happy with the result.

You're looking at it more as a 50% plus one

you need to prevail.

I think so.

At least that.

Prevailing on 10, 15, 20, even 20%.

The statute doesn't say that.

It just says prevail.

And I don't believe anyone, any reasonable person,

would say that's prevailing.

Could you clarify the record in terms

of the vehicle situation?

I read it all, but the number of vehicles

and everything I'm not clear on.

But isn't it true what you're saying

is that as a result of the court order,

your client can keep vehicles on the property

if it goes out and registers them or they're roadworthy,

but they weren't in that state

at the time the suit was filed.

Is that right?

Certain ones weren't.

Okay, but there are certain ones

that now your client, in order to keep them

on the property, has to go do something.

He has, he's registered.

So he did it as a result of the lawsuit.

Yes, even as tractors.

I'm sorry, you said he registered tractors.

Even as tractors.

How many of those?

It's 10 or 12.

So if he did that as a result of the lawsuit,

why isn't that an issue on which the city prevailed?

If the suit had to be filed in order to have him do that.

He's registering a good many of his vehicles anyway.

Some of the vehicles he disagreed with the judge on

whether it was roadworthy.

So instead of trying to fight that,

he just said, I'll just register them all since.

And yes, except the town was looking to have these removed,

that the town's position was,

if they're not roadworthy,

it doesn't matter if they're registered.

We want them off this property.

That was what they, their argument all through trial.

And my client's argument was, well, no.

It's my property.

Got to be able to keep them in some fashion.

The judge clarified and said, well, yeah, you can keep them,

but you got to register them.

At least these.

And there was a list of things of vehicles

that were dean roadworthy that you don't have to register.

Town didn't get what they wanted.

They really wanted, there's 50 or 55 vehicles.

They wanted them off the property.

50 or 55?

Yeah, there's a lot of vehicles.

And are they still there?

They're still there.

And how many of them are registered?

Pretty much all of them, as I understand that.

How many boats are there?

Oh, 35 or 40.

At least there's a bunch of canoes and row boats

and without a doubt, if you look at,

and I provided in the appendix of the pictures

of the property that were presented at trial,

there's a lot of stuff on this property.

But my client says it's his.

He has a purpose for all of it.

It's not job in his mind.

He runs a business there.

He does not.

He's retired.

Okay.

So this is sort of a personal property that he uses.

Yes.

So I thought I heard you say the city may have prevailed

on the scrap issue, but I think you've also argued

that the court misapplied what scrap means.

Well, yeah, we don't know.

Clients, okay.

Certain things, I'll just move it,

but we don't know exactly how much

because the court's little description

doesn't really tell us much.

My client asked me, I looked at it and said,

I don't know what that means.

So nothing else.

There needs to be a clarification on that.

Right.

People actually break into properties

to steal some valuable metals and whatnot.

So the definition of scrap may be difficult to discern.

Right.

My clients have that happen with a lot of his stuff.

Does your client steal blacksmith?

He does.

And the fairing materials still uses those materials?

He does.

He does, especially now, since he retired in December 2022

from the Navy, and now he has time.

And that's why he's been collecting this stuff.

So he can use it, and he's retired.

In your brief, you cite Webster's dictionary

for the definition of scrap.

Why should we turn to that if it's defined

under the ordinance?

I just thought the normal use of the term was appropriate

because the ordinance falls under.

I just said, hey, the judge didn't even give us

the ordinary definition worth.

We don't know from what the judge ordered

what exactly needs to be removed.

We know it's not the boats.

We know it's most likely not the trailers,

nor the vehicles, as long as they're registered,

even the tractors, but what else?

It can't be every bucket of bolts or materials

for my clients' fairing activities,

blacksmithing activities.

Can't be that, otherwise nobody would be able to blacksmith.

And that can't be the purpose of the statute.

And I have no further questions.

That's all I have to say for today.

Thank you very much, Attorney Karen.

Thank you.

Attorney Driscoll.

Good morning, may it please the court.

My name is Joe Driscoll from the Mitchell Municipal Group.

I'm here on the behalf of the city of La Conia

with me is co-counselor, Inspector Morgan.

She authored the brief in this case.

As you can see, we've displayed here

just as an example.

This can be found in the appellate's exhibit at page 112.

It's just to kind of bring into context

what we're discussing here.

I would like to actually jump into-

Can you describe what this is?

For the record?

For the record.

So this is the sugar shack

that has been referred to throughout the appellate's brief.

And as you can see what this is in actuality,

I believe still today at least was

for the multi-year pendency of this case

as it was delayed due to the pandemic.

That's what that sugar shack presently consists of.

It is a trailer with pieces of wood on it.

Really, there are two issues being presented to you.

One is an issue of attorney's fees.

The other is this question of scrap.

Really the attorney's fees issue appears to be sharpened

during argument here as to a question

of what prevail means.

And I strongly urge this court not to get as

factually driven as has been suggested by the appellate,

but more legally driven.

What the town, what the city saw

was a petition for injunctive relief under 676.15

as well as 676.17 for civil penalties, et cetera,

citing the town's junkyard statute or ordinance

as well as the state's junkyard statute.

The city prevailed entirely

as the property was declared a junkyard.

The definition of junkyard was satisfied.

There are items that have been allowed to remain.

And as was pointed out as well,

the order doesn't call for 100% removal.

The order calls for compliance

and if that is not achieved, remove.

So if registration of the vehicles can happen,

if they can be deemed roadworthy,

frankly throughout the decade plus

that notices of violation went on this case,

if the appropriate land use approvals had been acquired,

variance, site plan approval, junkyard permit, et cetera,

all of these items could have remained.

This is not a question that's-

The city still issues permits for junkyards?

Under the statute, yes.

Would he need a variance to get that?

He would need a variance for a junkyard.

This is in the rural residential zone,

a junkyard is not allowed in that zone.

There could be the opportunities

to take a lot of the personal items at issue,

have a building built on the property,

store those inside, conduct blacksmithing inside

as opposed to, I believe in a truck

that was pointed out at the trial level.

So this is not a question of the-

So does the finding of junkyard for the whole property

but the specific violations that say there,

this is a junkyard but it's that.

And so the injunction is going to get rid of this thing

that's pictured here.

Is there any reason to prorate fees

according to level of success, if you will?

I would turn to the Barrington v. Townsend case

where proration did come into play.

That was actually a voluntary withdrawal

of some of the specific claims of issue in that case

that resulted in a proration

that an estimate was given by trial counsel

as to effort that was put in

and 50% was awarded

according to that representation.

It's just because of properties deemed to junkyard,

there may be a permitted use there as well,

a garage or a house or something.

So your first statement that the town,

the city prevailed 100%

because the whole thing was deemed to junkyard

seems to say too much, if you will.

Well, as to the proration issue,

I would point to that those were claims

that were removed.

So the claims themselves were independent claims

that were withdrawn.

Here we have, in essence,

the claim under the state statute

and under the ordinance.

And as a result of that,

this property as well as the parcel across the street

has been deemed to junkyard.

There is no other use

other than the residential use of this.

So this must be returned to that residential use.

There are no other site plan approvals

for any business use, et cetera.

Which is why I say it was the city prevailed

because the use that was being made of it,

judicially determined junkyard,

needs to be removed, it now needs to be returned.

But if there were a house and the guy had a hobby

as a blacksmith in his backyard,

that might be permitted.

That could be permitted again

if he follows the appropriate regulations necessary.

If he is storing all of the metals outside,

that could once again result in a junkyard.

If he's operating a business

without the required approval, that could be it.

If it's a hobby, if it's a hobby,

it's not a business.

And if some outside storage is allowed,

is the definition of scrap clear

as to whether the materials have a use?

This could be, this picture could be stored wood.

I mean, so if the material has a use,

is it necessarily scrap?

I would look to, one, the definition of junk

that is offered in both the statute

as well as the ordinance.

It is a very clear objective standard

of what is occurring in time now.

It is not what's up. Although it's some old language,

the definition of scrap in the statute

has some ancient language included in it.

Well, as to what could be made use of it

or what it once was or an intent,

now we've taken it made it completely subjective.

What the appellant thinks he can do with this pile of wood,

what any craftsman thinks he can do with the pile of wood

is not a part of the statute.

It's not a part of the framework

that has been laid out by the legislature.

I'm a little confused.

I know junkyard is defined in the statute,

but is scrap defined in the statute

or the zoning ordinance?

It is not defined in the zoning ordinance.

And frankly, if we look to a dictionary definition

that was proposed by the appellant in this case,

these items fall squarely into that.

It's secondhand discarded items.

Secondhand item, this clearly was.

There's actually the testimony about this.

So any secondhand item is scrap?

Um, secondhand discarded.

Secondhand discarded, I guess.

Secondhand though.

I believe there's a comma in there.

So it would be two separate pieces stored in this fashion.

So I sell my used car to someone.

If that was then not registered,

not road boarding and stored with the bulk

of one or more others, it could constitute junkyard.

Was the argument made below about parsing out the legal fees?

Or was it just all or nothing?

There was no pro-racian argument.

It was an all or nothing.

The town did not prevail because my client gets

to keep X, Y, and Z.

Again, the lawsuit in this is a two-page lawsuit

is you are using your property

against the ordinance and against the statute.

The items you have there

as a collective satisfy this condition.

It is not a lawsuit about how you have these hundred items

and we need to prevail on these hundred items

in order to have this determined.

So any sort of pro-racian, I don't think is appropriate.

So the court ruled it was a junkyard

and therefore the things that make it a junkyard

have to be removed, absent of variance, and a permit.

But the, so some go and some stay

and that wasn't really the subject of the lawsuit.

No, it is to cure the condition of the property.

And that's why I say and has been maintained

by the city throughout even before the lawsuit

that the necessary approvals can be achieved.

And this sort of goes to the constitutional argument

that's raised later in the appellant's brief

that this is somehow a depredation

of the ability to have personal property.

This is not, this is an attempt

to place this property in compliance.

If the court determined the boats could stay,

are there any permits required that the boats weren't junk?

With regard to junk?

Well, my understanding is the boats were allowed to stay.

So how does that dovetail with the junkyard finding

can they just stay as they are?

So I think that's a question that may take us beyond the scope,

but for purposes of this, yes,

that was excised from the purposes of a junkyard statute

because the court didn't determine it was a motor vehicle

using the statutory definition requiring, you know.

So that was carved out.

Yes.

But before the court, was the analysis ever as granular

as the defendant would suggest here

in terms of pro-ration?

Oh, nothing in terms of pro-ration.

There were discussions in the trial court level

about the defendant testified as to his purpose

for certain items at the trial court level,

but there was no discussion or pleading in the end

about how we feel these 36 items get to stay.

Therefore, you cannot prevail.

You're referring to the fact that there was no motion

for reconsideration grounded on that theory, is that correct?

That's correct.

Thank you.

Well, the fees were awarded right at the time or later?

The fees were awarded after the city's motion

to reconsider because originally the court ruled

that this was a violation of the statute.

We moved to reconsider saying this was also under the purview

of the land use enforcement, which was applied

in the initial pleading.

The court realized that there was an error there

and awarded fees under 676.17.

Back to your question, though, just briefly.

If the boats are allowed to stay, there may be,

those may then constitute a separate use

that is not, it doesn't have site plan approval,

for their land use.

So to say that they could be allowed to remain,

they'd be subject to applicable land use law as well.

So they're remaining because they're not,

they don't satisfy the definition of junk for a junkyard,

but there may be other issues.

That's just not anything that got fully litigated here.

Correct, yeah.

Right, there may be a boat yard storage issue

or something.

Maybe the city needs one.

I don't know.

I just would like to stress that a theme

that we've seen throughout the brief

is adding elements or language to the statute, really,

in order for the appellant to succeed

in what they've advanced here.

676.17 is very clear.

When you bring, though, the complaint

under both the ordinance and the state statute,

doesn't that set up a bit of a conflict

because the state statute doesn't have the fee,

mandatory fee requirement?

So is it sort of doubling your remedies somehow?

I wouldn't say there's any doubling of the remedies.

The $50 civil penalty that would have been assessed

under the junkyard statute was removed

in the place of the 275 afforded under the statute.

As to attorney's fees,

there is no attorney's fees provision under the statute.

It is under 676.17 and it is a shall.

Back in 2004, the legislature saw fit

to protect the other taxpayers in the community,

that they are fronting the bill to have to go forward

and correct these illegalities

that are occurring throughout their community.

And this was an attempt to say,

okay, this individual who is perpetrating this illegality,

you're on the hook for this

because the people in the community should,

that's the source of anything a city or a town does

is the taxpayer.

If there are no further questions,

set for this morning,

I thank you very much for your time.

Thank you, council.

Case is muted.

It's in reset.
