This is case 2022-0237, Lori A. Ordolano versus City of Nashua.

Good afternoon. May it please the court. My name is Celia K. Leonard, Deputy Corporation Counsel with the City of Nashua.

The appellant in this case with me is Corporation Counsel Steve Bolton and my colleague in the bar, Matthew Broadhead, from the Attorney General's Office.

I've asked, we're splitting time, and I've asked for a one-minute rebuttal. I've got nine minutes then, and Mr. Broadhead will take five, so.

This case is before the court on whether or not the city's search for electronic records was reasonable.

The request came in for an employee who had left the city's employee about six months prior to the request,

about requesting two months of emails from the employee.

The employee was an administrative supervisor within the assessing department.

The city did a reasonable search in the inbox.

The city searched the U-Drive.

This is all in the testimony.

And the court found, the city believes erroneously, that the city's search was not lawful because it did not go to backup tapes,

the backup tapes for catastrophic recovery for the city.

Do we still have backup tapes today?

It is my understanding the city does still back up.

Is it a tape?

Is it in the cloud?

Where is it?

That's a good question.

The testimony at trial, and my understanding is, these are tapes.

They're physically, physical tapes that are stored off-site, meaning off of any other city building.

They're not in city hall.

They're not a DPW, the Department of Public Works, because, and then they're literally brought there,

overwritten when necessary, brought back.

So it's not a cloud-based storage system.

There's not a computer where they're stored, where they can be searched?

They actually have to bring them back to another location, to the IT department, I assume?

That is correct.

Yeah.

And beyond that, they then need to be converted.

The testimony sort of danced around it, but as I understand it, it's binary code that the tapes are in,

because it takes up less space.

So then it has to be converted to then readable, searchable, then searched for documents.

But it's undisputed that that process would take no more than a couple of hours?

In this instance, given the relatively short period of time of just emails, this was not, for example,

any and all documents regarding perhaps a planning and zoning amendment that encompassed 12 huge parcels.

Isn't that what we should focus on, this request, as opposed to another subsequent request in the future?

Good question.

No, I'd say that these backup tapes, by the mere fact, well, I'll go back to the statute.

You know, reasonableness under New Hampshire law is the cornerstone for these searches.

Not exhaustive, not absolute.

We can't promise we're going to find everything, even when all is what's asked for.

And the legislature designed a statute for that and said if it's been initially and legally deleted

and is no longer readily accessible to the agency itself here, the assessing department.

How is a two- or three-hour search not readily accessible?

Well, the law addresses that.

The law goes on to say it's readily accessible if it's, they don't mean, they sort of put it in the negative,

they don't mean it's just in the deleted outlet, you know, a few mouse clicks away, not in the deleted out,

you know, the Outlook application has a deleted folder after you delete it.

Sometimes it even then goes to a little trash bucket on your home screen.

But all of that happened in two hours.

That's the chief's point.

That's what we're struggling with, I think.

And that's what Judge Temple said.

Well, two hours, okay.

That's not what happened.

Well, let me be clear.

What happens in two hours is, I think, after they go get, I think the testimony was,

after they go get the tape, then it has to be converted, then it has to be searched.

And isn't the two hours just the conversion?

Yes.

Not the search, right?

That's correct.

Nobody gave an estimate of the time for the search.

That's correct.

That augurs in favor of a remand then.

Well, I think it's not readily accessible under the law without a remand

because it's not just a few clicks, mouse clicks away, to the agency itself,

to the assessing department, or in this case, the administrative services director

who oversaw the assessing department since the employee in question

had terminated employment there, undertook the reasonable search in the outlook.

Are you asking us to come as a matter of law, to decide as a matter of law

to anything on these backup tapes?

Then it is not readily accessible and cannot be produced.

Is that where you're going?

I would say, yes, that as a matter of law, it's the city's position that backup tapes

for catastrophic purposes only are not readily accessible under New Hampshire law.

Well, if we look at Chapter 33A, where there's a long list of particular documents

and how long they should be saved, is it your position that they,

if they're put into this backup tape, they don't have to be accessible

for the period of time that's listed in 33A?

I think that there was testimony at trial that addressed that.

These backup tapes are not available to employees in their day-to-day operations.

This is not where general correspondence, minutes, anything that has to be retained

under 33-A is kept.

There is a U-drive that's actually, that's what's backed up,

that is where things that need to be saved, electronic records that need to be saved.

So to comply with 33A, that stuff doesn't go into this backup tape.

It's saved in the U-drive.

Is that right?

For all the listed documents?

That is the U-drive or some other, you know, sort of, I think there's a S-drive as well.

But those drives that are the drives that are backed up, along with everything else,

are the search, or excuse me, are the record retention, electronic record retention drives,

storage units for the city.

The catastrophic backup tapes are snapshots of those drives.

If, in fact, fire, flood, you know, you name it, corruption, frankly, meaning not political,

by that I meant data corruption, occurs, then even, you know, it's not readily accessible.

We do not think it's readily accessible.

But, boy, it would be good if, for example, there was a set of minutes that was old and put on something

and then it got corrupted.

And, you know what, we have to keep it forever.

So, it's not readily accessible, but we'll go get it because it has to be there.

But that's only if there's a catastrophe.

So, I think that hopefully that answers.

So, the trial court made an express finding on readily accessible based on the credible testimony

of Mr. Miservich.

And the court has no difficulty finding that the emails the petitioner seeks are readily accessible,

again, based on this testimony, and you're asking us to get behind what the court determined,

sitting in a courtroom, listening to Mr. Miservich, and say that he's wrong, trial court's wrong.

Yes, and here's why.

The trial court relied on a standard in ancient coin, which is a federal case,

and FOIA, Federal Freedom of Information Act, does not have the readily accessible language.

In fact, there's...

The what language, I'm sorry?

Readily accessible.

Okay, thank you.

You know, for electronic records.

He's not citing to American court.

He's just making a factual finding.

And readily accessible is the standard in 91A.

I mean, he's made that factual finding, and you're saying that he was, the trial court was wrong,

and we need to overturn that finding of fact.

I think it's more a question of law, how the law is applied to the facts of Mr. Miservich.

Because the law states, the statute says that if it's basically more than a mere few clicks away in the deleted items folder,

then it's not readily accessible, and it's no longer subject to the provisions of this chapter.

It's no longer subject to any search.

Because why would you search for something that's not subject to disclosure?

So there's where we're heading.

And then that finding, he did articulate, Judge Temple did articulate the standards from ancient coin

that were under FOIA, which says that the reasonable efforts to search electronic records shall be made

except when such efforts would significantly interfere, and that's 5 U.S.C. section 552A3C,

significantly interfere.

That was the standard that Judge Temple was applying when he said then that it was readily accessible.

We have an adverb difference here.

Readily accessible, as defined by the statute, it's a few clicks away.

That's why FOIA, which he used, says that it's, you have to search it unless, the electronic records,

unless it significantly interferes with the operation of the agency.

Is your client's real concern that a decision of this court would somehow sweepingly declare

that everything in these so-called backup tapes would be subject to a FOIA request in perpetuity?

Is that your concern, your client's concern?

Yes, very much so.

The, um, it would change a reasonable standard, in our opinion, in the city's opinion, to an absolute standard.

The law provides that things are going to get deleted, even under the record of retention,

and of course, right to know is not record of retention, it's record of production.

Things are not forever.

There are transitory emails.

The testimony here, by the individual in question whose emails were sought,

was that she did her job, she got her emails done, and then she deleted them.

There was no testimony that they were illegally deleted.

There was no testimony that they should have been kept.

There was no testimony she was ever reprimanded for not keeping records appropriately.

Some records get deleted.

When they get deleted, if they're just on the system a few clicks away under New Hampshire law, look at them.

That's a reasonable search.

If you've got to then contact another agency at the city, the IT department,

have an IT employee drive out somewhere to a locked place to get a catastrophic backup tape,

convert it from, you know, we're getting away from readily accessible.

So that also, oh, sorry, go ahead.

You're at lights.

Can I just, one more question?

Is it fair to say that the conversion from the data in the backup tape

would require the city to assemble information into a form in which it's not already kept?

Do you want to say yes to that?

Yeah.

I'll say yes.

What I was really thinking was I'm not a computer.

I do know that there's different versions, but yes, I'll go to the testimony at trial.

Because it's not searchable in the backup tape format.

So you have to do something to make it searchable.

Correct.

And I think very importantly, it's not where the business of the city is conducted.

The business of the city is only reflected.

It's like a ghost out there that we can call forward if we need it.

The business of the city is on those main servers.

Thank you.

Thank you.

I brought it.

Thank you, Chief Justice, members of the court.

My name is Matt Broadhead.

Excuse me.

I'm here appearing as an amigas in support of the city of Nashua.

Although we express no outcome or opinion of the actual final outcome of whether or not the backup tapes need to be searched or not,

what we do take a position on is that the state's primary objective is to achieve from this court an opinion that's clearly tethered to the prescribed statutory procedure governing the access of records.

And I do want to talk about readily accessible, but I do want to mention one other thing.

The state asserts that backup tapes do not constitute governmental records within the meaning of the right-to-know law because they're not actually being used, as Attorney Leonard just said.

They are dormant.

They are dormant.

They are not connected to the server.

They are not readable.

And if you'll forgive the analogy, but the best way to think about them is if a document were to be like a sheet of music for a piano player.

And what that backup tape takes is that document and deconstructs it into zeros and ones.

And it needs to be converted by somebody who can play the piano, but who can also see the sheet music.

And the agencies themselves cannot see the sheet music when it's on a backup tape.

So when the backup tape is restored after some event?

You have governmental records.

It becomes a governmental record.

It does.

But the procedure for getting there was in the court below.

They did not find that the – whether or not the record itself was initially and legally deleted.

That's the standard.

And that's all within the framework of the ATV watch case, which provides that the government bears the burden to show that it's initially and legally deleted.

What does that mean?

Initially and legally deleted?

Well, legally, I deleted means that it is deleted pursuant to a valid record retention policy.

And if the government can show that, and that it was deleted, not retained for some period of time when the request was made, because the statute provides a remedy for that, if it's retained beyond – the electronic record is retained beyond its archival period, you can't just get the point to say to the archival retention record and say, oh, nope, it's no longer a public record.

It actually maintains its status as a public record.

So once it is actually initially deleted, the law provides that it does not have to be reassembled.

To Justice Hans Marconi's point, that if you read the statutes consistent with one another, the act of reassembling that document is no longer required if it's been legally deleted.

But we know it's not initially and legally deleted if it is readily accessible.

If it's readily accessible to the agency itself.

That's the rest of that line.

To the public body or agency itself.

Sure.

The city of Nashua is a public body.

The – it's a public body.

The agency – the reference to the agency itself is, you know, there's a lot of reasons why documents are sequestered per agency, because each agency's mission fulfills a different purpose.

DCYF does not have automatic record access to law enforcement records over at state police and vice versa.

DOT doesn't get access to DCYF records.

That's because there are statutory privileges that are set up that set these silos.

And at least for state agencies, that matters.

Because when you get a record request, that agency is not required to go to another agency to find the requested record.

You have to go to the agency itself.

And if you think about it in context of paragraph four – or three, excuse me, on section four.

If – if backup tapes were a governmental record, they would be required to be maintained at the agency itself and in an accessible manner during their regular business hours.

And backup tapes, by their very nature, are not accessible because they need to be converted.

And they are not maintained, usually, at least for the state and for the city of Nashua, they're maintained by a completely separate agency.

But back to Justice Donovan's point early on, I'm not sure that why – I mean, whether DCYF has access to state police is really not relevant to this case.

It's – this is very – it strikes me as a pretty narrow issue based on the findings the trial court made that these – in this particular case, with these particular records, they are readily accessible.

That's it. That's it. And I don't think we need to worry about, you know, whether DCYF has access to state police records.

Respectfully, Your Honor, I would disagree. The standards that the court applied in talking about readily accessible, they skipped the step.

Because what you're supposed to find first is whether or not they complied with their policy.

And if they did comply with the policy, the burden then shifts to Ms. Artelano to prove that they did it.

And we've cited cases in our –

So the policy being the deletion policy?

Yes. Depending on the type of record that it is, there's a corresponding law that protects for how long it's supposed to be preserved.

And it's got to be maintained for the same time that its paper counterpart is – is maintained.

And – and so then the burden would then switch to Ms. Artelano, who would then be able to prove that there are large gaps in the record produced, for instance.

And that would govern whether or not the – then the court would then apply the reasonableness standard of searching the backup tape.

Thank you, Attorney Brodehead.

Thank you.

We'll hear from the plaintiff for seven minutes and then Attorney Brode for eight minutes.

Is that right?

Good afternoon.

Good afternoon.

May it please the court.

Lori Ortelano, representing myself.

This is all about backup tapes and getting information off of them in a very narrow case – two cases, actually.

Both appeals, I'm hoping, are not going to be used to create a control case that prohibits agencies from conducting searches and providing records that have been moved to storage.

Both requests were made in the spring of 2021.

The first case addressed emails moved to backup within eight months.

The city withdrew the second appeal, and it's now stayed by the court pending the outcome of this case.

But the second appeal involved two months of emails with a request submitted on day 67 from the start date.

So right, tight in, we were looking for those records.

I was.

It's important for the court to understand that with the second appeal, the city violated the five-day requirement to respond to the right-to-know request.

Their failure to respond prevented them from putting a hold on the records, and it gave – given such a short window of retention that the city had, which in the second appeal was only 60 days.

It was not changed to 120 because of COVID.

60 days for assessed help emails.

Because they didn't respond for 24 days, I lost three weeks of data that went on to tape backup because they forgot to respond.

That's a clear violation of RSA 91A, and I'm hoping that the court doesn't rule that backups never have to be restored because now there's a mechanism for a municipality, if they violate the right-to-know law, to claim that they've been initially illegally deleted.

And that was not the case in this case.

The trial court listened carefully, listened to determining if the request was reasonable, and used the federal case ancient coin to determine if the backup should be restored.

So do you agree if it's been initially and legally deleted, then the city or any governmental agency doesn't have an obligation to go search the backup tapes?

I do, and what I disagree with here is they were not legally deleted.

They missed – they were not complying with the retention period of 33A.

The records I was looking for were abatement applications, abatement documents, and abatement questions.

How could those be moved on to backup tape in 60 days?

Those are in the furtherance –

Just five years here.

I know.

They should last longer.

So they're in the – those records are in the furtherance of the official duties of the city government, and those should have been maintained more than 60 days.

And more importantly, at this time period, we were in COVID, sliding our way through.

And the city at that time was accepting abatement applications and questions and requests for documents through the email account AssessHelp.

So all these questions were flooding in, and there were some technical difficulties going on.

Applications were being misplaced.

I put the right to know in to track what was happening with those.

And then I learned virtually half my records had been moved on to storage because the city said they were initially and legally deleted

because the employees in the assessing office were not properly trained on the state statute 33A,

and Attorney Braun will get into that, based on the testimony.

Didn't know 33A, didn't understand compliance, and did not know the city's retention email storage policy.

Just remind me, did the trial court make a factual finding about initially and legally deleted?

Steered clear of it completely.

Yeah, I don't remember that the trial court did that.

That's for you.

How are we supposed to do that if the trial court didn't do that?

Well, I don't know why the trial court didn't do it.

The trial court just focused on reasonable.

They just focused on the fact that it was reasonable, that the time frame was very short.

It was a very specific case.

The IT director came up and said, you know, this is, I can restore these things in a couple of hours, and went with that.

They did not address 33A at all.

As a matter of fact, the city objected to the trial court responding to 33A.

I wrote my petition and requested and stated that they violated 33A.

The city pointed out that there's no remedy for 33A, and you can't fold a 33A issue into a 91 complaint.

Ms. Ortolano, let me ask you, do you agree that the two hours is just for restoration, not for searching?

Sure.

It's restoring, but it's the same thing.

Once they're restored in two hours, then the city does the search off the tapes.

But also, the IT department knows exactly where they're stored.

They are cataloged on the tape, so they can go back to the specific part to grab the records in that time frame.

So it does give a limited pool of data they have to look at.

Is it your position, for example, if you look at 33A 3A, it says building permit applications and approvals should be maintained permanently.

So is it your position that I could go into the city of Nashua and ask for an application from 20 years ago

that's on the backup tapes and that they have an obligation to get those under 91A?

They would, actually.

They would go to their rack storage facility off-site, a big concrete building,

and they would look for those records and pull them off the shelf and bring them to you in paper form.

That's how they do it now.

If there are paper records.

So I think, yes, that's what they would do right now.

They'd go get boxes and retrieve them for you if you wanted them.

But if they're on their tape, don't you agree that they're actually,

the city's then required to recreate the document in order to provide it to you?

Well, I think when they violated the law in two ways, by not following the retention policy,

and on the second case, by not responding within the five days so the hold was never placed on the record.

In this case, in these two cases, I specifically believe they should.

In the first case, the violation of the retention policy is the only thing at issue.

Right.

In the second case, it was both.

And the retention was only 60.

So to the point of there being no remedy for violation of the retention policy,

to assume some town throws out a box of records they should have kept in paper.

What is the remedy?

Do we engrave it?

Declaratory judgment.

I would have had to go in with a declaratory judgment, but I wasn't smart enough then.

I was just starting off trying to figure out how to be a pro se.

And so I did it all in 91A.

Now I know I should do a declaratory judgment.

Declaratory judgment to the point of making them reconstruct paper records?

Well, just identifying that this is going on and let's correct it.

Let's correct it.

Let's correct it.

So, you know, and I think what's important to note is that the IT director could do this

work within a couple of hours.

The second case, he said three.

They had the manpower to do it, and it didn't affect the system functionality at all.

You know, and we have to be careful when we use case law that we're applying things that

are relevant, particularly when we're looking at the cost and capacity of these technological

things.

Stuff moves and becomes very outdated.

So the first request that was submitted, the city denied it, saying they no longer had

reasonable access.

Completely confused me, because they didn't cite the RSA that they were using, which was

initially illegally deleted.

So I didn't understand it.

And I asked them to cite.

My request said, tell me why.

They didn't.

And they didn't provide any brief explanation as to why the records weren't given to me.

And I asked for that.

Under 91, I am entitled to that.

And why I was confused was because in 2019, I did a similar request for 10 months of emails.

And the city, unknown to me, went to the backups, retrieved them, and gave them to me.

I didn't know they did it then.

Fast forward two years, 2021, now we have a supervisor leaving, and I want to see these

abatement applications coming in.

I want these types of records.

And they're denied.

So I filed the lawsuit, not even understanding what was going on.

It wasn't until I got into court that I started hearing, this is a backup tape.

This is initially illegally deleted.

So, you know, I had to slog through a little stuff there.

And RSA 33A, Roman numeral 25 says-

Ms. Ortolano, your red light's on.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

If it may please the court, my name is Gary Braun.

I'm a retired lawyer, appearing pro se to support Ms. Ortolano's positions in these appeals.

And I do think the second appeal can probably be decided based upon what we're doing today.

I think it's really important.

I don't read the evidence to suggest that it would take any more than two or three hours

in each case for the city to conduct these backup tape searches.

And I'd further point out my understanding of the evidence is that Mr. Mercevich, who is

the city's IT director, could walk away from the tapes, let them run, come back when they

were done, and he'd have the data there, and then it could be converted in whatever fashion

it was, needed to be converted.

So it seems to me the burden on the city here is quite minimal.

And the key to the city's case and to the decision of this court de novo and to the decision

of the trial court is 91A414, Roman numeral 3B.

And it says that the governmental records in electronic form shall be no longer subject

to disclosure after they're initially and legally deleted.

And whether the trial court dealt with that or not, I think they did implicitly.

You folks are on a de novo review.

It strains credulity to suggest that Mrs. Brown or Ms. Masrault, and I don't think they were

acting maliciously, they didn't know, they did not comply with 33A whatsoever.

They didn't even know it existed.

They didn't know sometimes that the city had its own email retention policies, which,

by the way, none of them complied with 33A with respect to these emails.

So right getting at...

But isn't the trial court's finding as to readily accessible, the next sentence

in that section of the...

Well, Your Honor, I think to get to legally deleted, first you have to comply with the

law, and then the statute is clear.

A record in electronic form shall be considered to have been deleted only if it is no longer

readily accessible to the public body.

So that is the meat and the crux of this case.

So why would the trial court need a separate finding initially?

Well, I don't know if it did, Your Honor.

But the city has raised it, and I say, and the state and the city's entire case depends

on this, that effectively Mrs. Brown complied with 33A and other email retention policies.

They can't even establish that under the statute, much less that the documents were not readily

accessible, and it's still readily accessible even if it's been moved to a deleted folder

or similar location on a computer, and that similar location is the backup tapes.

You have to look at what the city is arguing for here and the state is arguing for.

It is completely contrary and antithetical to the whole purpose and intent of the statute

of 91A to assure that if the document is readily accessible, if there's a de minimis burden put

on the city to produce it, it must be produced.

And quite frankly, they rely on the Twomey case, which I will remind you was decided before

Fenneman was overruled, before this court has steadily marched away, in my opinion, from

applying per se exemptions and has relied on the balancing test.

If Judge McNamara had used the balancing test in Twomey, he would have come out to the same

result he came out as he did if he used a blanket exemption test.

The burden on the state there was enormous.

Their Department of Information Technology couldn't function if they had to respond to these

backup requests regularly.

That's not the case here.

Mr. Miskovich himself said there were hardly any requests from the public for backup tape

searches, and in fact, he seemed to have as many from employees within the city who needed

documents that had been deleted for some reason.

So, in this particular case, I think Twomey is poorly relied on because it can be factually

distinguished, and in any event, it used a balancing test at the end, in my opinion.

I just re-read the case this morning.

And what Judge McNamara did is he said, I'm going to look at the legislative intent.

This will lead to an absurd result.

If New Hampshire DOIT does nothing but search backup tapes, I'm not going to approve that

kind of action, or I'm not going to impose that requirement on the state.

Why?

Because it was this enormous burden.

Judge McNamara himself and Twomey used a balancing test, and I would further submit

it's consistent with the balancing test used in ancient coin.

What does ancient coin do?

It says, Jesus, if the records are otherwise searchable and disclosable, the third element

of the test is, is there a practical obstacle to doing that?

That's exactly what Judge McNamara did in Twomey.

It was this huge practical obstacle for the state.

The state shouldn't have to do nothing but search for these backup records.

And again, that's not the case that's before you today.

But that's exactly the prospect that concerns the state, is that they're going to start getting

these requests, and they're going to have an obligation to search the backup tapes all

the time.

That's why they're here.

But if you employ a balancing test, like an ancient coin, I think that the court, I don't

think Judge Temple would have reached a different decision than Judge McNamara did under the

facts of Twomey.

And I'm not suggesting that you folks should reach a different result there.

Using a balancing test, it clearly is an undue, excessive burden on the producing party,

the governmental entity, to have to produce that record.

So, to me, Twomey illustrates the fact that the balancing test is not only desirable and

appropriate, it's necessary.

And it will yield justice when a blanket exception will not.

The state and the city wants you to go backwards.

They want you to resurrect Fenneman.

They want you to say that per se exemptions are okay.

They're not.

They don't serve the basis of the statute, and the balancing test is a much better mechanism

for assuring the purpose while protecting the legitimate interests of the government.

So, who is supposed to receive remedial training, according to Judge Temple, and how are you

supposed to interpret that part of his order?

Well, I don't know, Your Honor.

It seems to me that before the appeal came up before you, the terms and conditions of any

remedial order should have been entered.

I don't know if there was a motion for remand or not.

But it is a de novo basis.

If you do send it back for remand on the training, for goodness sakes, make a decision on the

documents.

This has, in my view, been pending an awful long time.

I think those issues are fairly clear for the court to decide.

And if, again, you're going to remand it, limit the remand to the training issues and

nothing else.

Thank you.

Thank you, Attorney Brown.

Attorney Leonard?

Yes, thank you.

A quick point.

Two points.

To your earlier question, Chief Justice, the trial court did find that the records were

readily accessible from the backup tape to the IT department.

There are no IT documents requested in either of the cases.

It was the assessing department.

And the city has one name, but the city has many little agencies.

The assessing department, S drive, is different from the, or U drive, is different from the

legal department.

It's different from administrative services, community development, public works.

They're different agencies.

It is IT that then has to be contacted.

It's not readily available to the agency itself in either.

The other is there was brought up the other case that there was emails also asked for.

What was asked for was emails.

Emails have a different retention period.

They can either be transitory or general correspondence or perhaps relating to a particular project.

It's not forever.

It's not five years.

I believe the testimony in that case was that every abatement application, if one was, or appeal,

if one was requested, was in fact found to exist within the city.

It was, again, a request for emails only that were basically cover letters.

Attached, please, fine.

There was no evidence in the case that what was attached was destroyed and therefore a catastrophic event.

Thank you very much.

Thank you.

Ms. Norrellano and counsel, cases submitted.

Thank you very much.
