This is case 2020-0488 in the matter of Jonathan Merrill and Leah Merrill.

Good morning, counsel. Good morning.

My name is Anthony Muir. I represent Jonathan Merrill.

I'd like to start my discussion with the issue of valuation.

As we discuss in our brief, the housing market has changed substantially since 2019.

The trial court in issuing the 2019 final decree, as this is the second time we're up on appeal,

used an appraisal from November of 2019 for the Hampton condominium,

which was awarded to Miss Merrill as far as the property division.

And it was used for both the property division and allegedly both to be used as well

in consideration of her alimony award.

Property values have appreciated in the residential housing market.

In the November 2019 appraisal, Hampton condominium was valued at $450,000.

On remand, trial counsel for Jonathan Merrill submitted another appraisal,

which was admitted for ID only, which had the property valued at $690,000,

representing a difference of $240,000 in the value of this condominium.

No contrary evidence about the present value was provided,

where the equity in that property was increased substantially

and where the court found that it was bound to use the value from the 2019 appraisal

from the original trial.

We believe that the trial court has earned substantially.

So if the shoe were on the other foot and the appraisal came in at $320,000

because the market tanked, would we still be here?

I think we would, Your Honor.

I don't know.

I think we would in the sense that it would still be an issue for this court

to determine this is a matter of first impression for the court.

The trial court should be looking at the values of property

at the time that it is issuing a decree on remand.

The trial court took the position that it was bound to use the prior values.

There isn't any support in our case law or our statute

that speaks to there being a binding effect of those prior values.

Our position is that this court should remand the matter back down

and we should be able to have the value of the Hampton condominium looked at again.

Well, isn't it within the discretion of the trial court

always in these types of cases to make a determination

as to the data valuation and that there's no per se rule?

That is correct, Your Honor, but that's not really what the trial court did

in terms of the trial judge's reasoning.

The trial judge took the position that they were bound to use those prior values.

An affirmance of that position, I think, would be,

would set bad precedent for future cases, Your Honor,

because there are cases like this one where you may end up having

the final decree of divorce actually issued long after the original trial.

This is the second time this case is on appeal, hopefully the last,

but the idea behind the statute is that a decree of divorce

when it's issued, it's supposed to be as equal as possible

in terms of the party's equitable, equal as a presumption, which can be a rebut,

but there is some presumption of equalness.

Why does it make any sense to try to revalue

or make a request to revalue only one of many marital assets?

It seems to me that if the idea is let's bring everything up to a current valuation,

then it should be everything comes up to a current valuation,

but it seems like you're cherry picking here.

Maybe the business is much more valuable too.

Shouldn't the trial court take that into account?

That is one way the court could look at this.

I think that would likely be better than the blanket presumption

of just having to use the prior values.

Our position though is that at a remand,

the only evidence of a increase in value was with respect to this Hampton property

that I recall I wasn't trial counsel but I believe the record reflects that.

I'm sure I'll be corrected if that's not the case.

Where that was brought into issue, we believe that a remand

with respect to that asset in isolation is appropriate,

but I can see the fact that that does make sense rationally.

That would be better than what the trial court did,

which is saying you were bound by the prior valuations only

because those valuations were not appealed

back when the original appeal was filed with the Supreme Court.

So you would agree that the trial court,

it's within the discretion of the trial court to have made that decision.

You're just saying it was wrong because it felt that it didn't have any discretion.

I think the trial court could have likely,

that is one way this court could find.

Yes, the trial court could have discretion to make that decision.

The trial court's definite purring was with respect to finding

that it was bound to do so and I think affirmants of that would be a problem

going forward in this state.

The trial court justified that finding that it was bound to accept those prior values

because no one appealed the prior values back in 2019

when the original appeal went up to this court.

But we don't believe that argument or rationale makes much sense.

There would have been no reason to appeal those prior values back then in 2019

because as far as everybody knew, that valuation was appropriate at the time

due to a number of factors which no one had control over,

one of which being the pandemic that tended to halt loss of court processes.

So does the trial court not make any observation

and maybe I'm just not remembering the record clearly

as to that it had taken a lot of time and a lot of money to come up with these valuations

and so we would just use the ones that we had in place earlier?

So the trial court looked at three different approaches for what it could do if I recall.

I believe it looked at the idea that it was bound to use past valuations

and that's what it decided that it was going to do.

Another reason why it turned down the idea of using all new valuations

was because, as you said, you're under the fact that it would take substantial time

to value all the assets.

So why isn't that enough to affirm the trial court, that factor alone?

Well, I think with two respects.

One is that the trial court heard specifically or spec-defining that it was bound.

Number two is that there isn't anything to necessarily back up the fact that

it would be substantially burdensome to have these appraisals done again.

Certainly to have an appraisal done the first time is it can be burdensome

but to redo an appraisal is not as expensive typically

because generally the expert is updating that past work.

But the trial court, that's one rationale that it used

but it also looked at the idea which some jurisdictions utilize

of just looking at evaluation of certain assets in isolation

which are bound to be clearly erroneous.

Here we believe that that's what the trial court should have done

because this asset has risen in value by 240,000

and the ultimate effect of using that previous value

when we know we have an appraisal where that value is higher

doesn't end up having a 50-50 property division

which is what the trial court originally suggested should be done back in 2019.

Not only that, the court on remand issued a 55-45 property division

but if we look at the value of this Hampton property

in the context of a 55-45 property division

it ends up being really a 68% property division

in Ms. Merrill's favor compared to a 32% property division

which is not what the statute contemplates.

So in summation of that point I think the key issue is the finding

that the trial court is bound and didn't even have the discretion

to order that the properties be revalued.

If the trial court still determined that this property should not be revalued

we still think that would be problematic based on the fact that we provided

evidence which was submitted for identification purposes

showing an increase in value of 240,000.

In the same vein with respect to the property division

another argument that we raised for appeal is the fact that

the trial court did not consider this increase in value

of this condominium in terms of issuing an alimony order

on the original appeal the trial court vacated the property division fully

and as part of that decided to vacate the alimony award.

So both went down on remand but the trial court did not

and the fact that it urged to consider the increase in value of this property

equally and likewise urged with respect to the alimony award

and not taking that into consideration

because she ends up with 68% of the value of the property

of the marital estate and that's further problematic

because Mr. Merrill as discussed in the record

is no longer able to afford to pay alimony due to the temporary disability

that he incurred as a result of an injury.

So not only is he not getting the benefit of the increase

in value of the property and Ms. Merrill is getting a windfall in that respect

the trial court is not looking at the alimony

the property distribution in the context of the overall scheme of alimony

exacerbated by the fact that he is no longer able to pay alimony.

But real estate is not a liquid asset?

No real estate is not a liquid asset but the trial court

is supposed to look at under the context of the old alimony statute

what the parties are getting in terms of the property.

I think the idea behind that is that

if you are receiving an unequal distribution of property

that may be able to compensate for some of your...

Or if you're getting property that throws off a stream of income.

Exactly, that as well.

And going off of that

the idea of the disability is problematic as well

and what the trial court did with that.

With two respects one is with respect to the ongoing alimony award

what the trial court decided to do was suspend alimony

until his disability runs out

but the trial court didn't issue any requisite finding

with respect to his future earning capacity.

There's nothing in the record to support the fact that

Mr. Merrill once his disability payments run out

that he will be achieving the same income of around 50,000

Is that issue ripe though?

Would that be an issue for when that eventuality happens?

I think it is ripe your honor because

with respect to final decrees of divorce

this is a final order.

Right, but it's suspended right now

so does it automatically reimpose alimony

or does it need to be done by motion

once those factors, once this situation becomes clear?

Unfortunately I think based on the language of the order

it's an automatic triggering effect

which is problematic because if his disability runs out

he may not be earning that increased income that he was earning

and it appears that the trial court's analysis

of the alimony award was based on his income at that time

Is that an interpretation of the alimony order

that we are able to get to?

I believe you're able to get to it

because this is a final order

and it is ripe

otherwise it becomes problematic if this is deferred

because the court does not

So we can interpret whether it's an automatic trigger or not?

Yeah I think you can and I think you should

otherwise if the can is potentially kicked down the road

it would have to be relitigated

we may be up here again on a third appeal

but that appeal would likely be discretionary

because in divorce matters you only have an automatic right

to an appeal on an initial final decree

the final decree is going to be put into effect

so his rights need to be decided right now

Regarding that disability

I think equally problematic is the court's decision

with respect to the proper division payments

over a period of time

the court ordered Mr. Merrill to pay

I believe around, it was in excess of about $3,000 I believe

towards Miss Merrill's property share

because there wasn't anything liquid that could be sold off

to compensate her for much of her portion

and under the property division

but the court didn't take into consideration

my client's finances

especially when you take into light the fact

that he is under temporary disability

and may not be able to earn that income again

But the court could have ordered lump sum payment

I mean in effect the payment over time

is a benefit to your client

and the court exercised its discretion in that regard

It could have ordered a lump sum payment

but I think that would have been an unsustainable exercise

of discretion because there wasn't anything

that could be utilized as far as providing her a lump sum payment

because most of my client's assets are tied up

in the business which he owns a minority interest of

So that's where a lot of my clients

I think believe the vast majority of his assets

in the property division are awarded to him

He doesn't have the ability to cash out his share in that way

So what would have been a sustainable exercise of discretion

in regard to that $178,000?

I think the court it should have looked at

his income and financial affidavit

and found that I believe the record shows

that even if he's earning his maximum income

that he was earning back then

I believe he only had a surplus of around $500

So the discretion comes from the fact

that the court ordered him to pay an amount

that he's clearly not able to report

and there was no contrary evidence

in form of testimony or documentation

showing that he was able to have payments

above that potential surplus in his financial affidavit

So I think unfortunately it would have gone

over a longer period of time

but if the court is going to order that payment plan

it has to be based in some sort of financial reality

and I see I'm out of time

Thank you very much

Turn your mirror

Are you second?

Or I'm sorry, Ray McMillan

Thank you

Good morning

May it please the court

I indicated to the clerk's office

that given the multitude of issues

that are involved in this particular appeal

that I'd be willing to weigh my three minutes

and we could just jump right into it

but bottom line is from our standpoint

the both judges, both Judge Foley

and Judge Lumiere

wrote very extensive long thought out orders

they included references to both the record

as well as to statutory authorities

and case law and what not

and with regards to that

she came to what we think on the remand order

was a very legitimate and well thought out

and crafted order

Can I ask you about the termination of alimony

that appears to be missing from this latest order?

Is there a termination factor?

No there isn't

and the judge did address that in her order

as I say the original order was 24

and when I say the judge

I'm referring to Judge Lumiere

Yes

So her original order was 24 pages

and she did file a clarification order

which added in another five pages

with respect to how she arrived at her decisions

in with some minor modifications

but in her original order of

I think it was May of 2022

she indicated that she took out the triggering

and qualifications with respect to alimony

because a lot of what's addressed in the statute

is already taken care of

like with regards to the death

remarriage and so on and so forth

and those are better aptly handled as a modification

rather than as a triggering fact

that she wasn't bound to do it

So

So what do we do with the changing values

from four years ago to now?

How does that still

maintain a fair and equitable division of property?

So first off I think

the Appellants Council makes too much

to do with respect to the use of the term bound

I think it's a colloquial expression used by the judge

I don't think she's saying I'm required

I think what she's saying is that

based on the existing case law

and based on the research that she did

not only in New Hampshire but in other jurisdictions

with respect to that valuation

that she feels that the appropriate remedy

is to do the first in her three step analysis

which was stick with the original

valuations and that again is very reasoned

for the most practical of circumstances

when the petitioner's attorney originally filed

to have the property revalued

he only wanted to have that one piece

of residential property in which Leah resided

to be revalued

Now as you can see there's a rather large discrepancy

of the incomes between Mr

I'm sorry I should call him between the petitioner

and the respondent

and his salary in a closed corporation

is $188,000 a year

so he's got the financial ability to go out

and get those changes to the appraisal

Leah did not have that opportunity

because she doesn't have the funds to do it

so what we ended up doing is we filed a motion

requesting for a pendant light allowance

to allow us to go out and get the appraisals updated

but we didn't want to do just the one appraisal

because he can't look at things in a vacuum

there's multiple pieces of real estate

and more importantly there's also the valuations

of the business

and that's not quite as easy as counsel

for the petitioner might lead us to believe

in regards to updating

because you're talking about a couple of years

so the judge ended up determining

that it was fair to leave the valuations

the same as was decided by Judge Foley's decree

in November of 2019

and yes there has been some appreciation

but we have a dispute of opinion as to

what that appreciation may be

even with regards to Leah's property

I wanted to be trial counsel

the eight days in front of Judge Foley

and I was also a counsel at the remand hearing

and we did introduce evidence

of which disputed the value

that the petitioner came up with

and my recollection was right around 480

between 450 and 480

which wasn't our original appraisal

that's the amount that Judge Foley decided to use

as evaluation based on the petitioner's appraisal

but in terms of equity

it's got to be all or nothing

so the judge again then

addressed the issues raised by the petitioner

wherein he said that he cannot afford to pay

to have the appraisals done by Leah

so the judge said okay

given the equities in both parties

being constrained by financial circumstances

I'm not going to require that they be done

and that's fair and equitable

and that's sustainable

because it is, it's an unsustainable exercise of discretion

is the review with respect to the property division

and I believe that her decision not to do that

not to require the parties to revalue

and both benefit to either the benefit or debt rate

because you know the business could have gone up

the real estate that's being held by the petitioner

could have gone up

but you can't just do one

without doing the other pieces of real estate

that's an issue we do see from time to time

when a business is evaluated in one point in time

and there's a stream of payments that's required

to be paid over time

and then the business value goes up or down

I agree but one of the factors we also have to consider here

is that the, this case started in 2017

or 2023 and we're still not resolved on issues

which is unfortunate for both parties

you know I both want to get and move on with their lives

but it was Mr. Merrill who filed the appeal in both instances

now I'm not saying that he shouldn't have that right to do that

but those are things that you have to take into consideration

both as counsel and a party as to whether you want to

you know run the risk of delaying things

and pursuing all these issues in front of the Supreme Court

or just moving on with your life

and he decided in both instances to file appeals

so with respect to the issue of the alimony

I don't know what else the judge could have done

without being fair again to both sides

the petitioner got his request for a suspension

allowed by the court

we actually concurred at that point in time

to allow him to get through his surgeries

and recuperation and whatnot

but the court also imposed a number of obligations

with respect to that

and first and foremost was that he was supposed to produce documentation

as to what his disability was

how long the disability was for

the payments which he was receiving

the amounts of income that he was receiving and whatnot

and as of the point that I'm standing here today

he hasn't produced anything

so we don't know what the status is with regards to his disability

as it affects the alimony issue though

I think the court has already indicated that

that's better addressed at a time where he goes back to work

and I don't believe that it's automatically triggered

I agree with the observation that

we would have to go in and file a motion

to renew the payments of the support order

and that's probably not that far down the road

but if he's not satisfied with what happens

with that particular decision

then that can obviously be appealed

so with respect to the remaining orders

that were addressed here this morning

but also contained in the brief

and obviously I don't think either party here

is waiving any of the arguments

that we haven't raised on the oral argument

but bottom line is that the judge

had reaffirmed the orders

with respect to the temporary order

as the court may recall

remand was on a number of issues

asked for recalculation of the property provision

and after everything is all said and done

we believe that that was done in a

again very comprehensive matter

very articulately stated by the judge

both as to the facts that were reduced at trial

as well as the exhibits that were produced

in the existing case law

and the statutory authorities

that it was a 55-45 split

she addressed the issues with regards to the

the payments of the

or lack of payment of the $7,500

by the petitioner

as well as the other issues remaining

in the support order

again each individually

and as she did that

that factored into the division

ultimately obviously the 55-45%

there is an appendix

which is very similar to the one which was

attached to the back of a Judge Foley's

original degree

that shows how those figures were arrived at

I don't think it's problematic that

the increase in value of the condo

was not included that

that would have skewered

the division of the estate

one as we know there are other assets

that Mr. Merrill has available to him

and that includes the value of the JGM trust

which we agree is not part of the

property to be divided between the parties

and other real estate assets that may have been

affected by the market as well

indeed your honor

so those were addressed

and again adequately disposed of

the issue of the

temporary orders that were to remain

in effect during the pendency of the appeal

both on the first appeal

as well as the second appeal

I think we've adequately raised the issue

from a procedural standpoint

whether that is not an accurate statement

as we've made in our brief

the Judge has the authority to do it

and both Judge Foley did it

in his original degree of November of 2019

and Judge LaMire also did that as well

in hers

and the other issues I'm not sure

how much they were

addressed in this oral argument

but the issues with respect to the contempt

against Liash

with respect to either returning

of certain personal property

the issue with respect to testimony

given at the underlying divorce trial

with regards to the issue of

whether there was fault or no fault grounds

even if they had some merit to them

they really are not going to affect

ultimately the division

the marital division because

the court is already

well aware that the divorce was granted

not on grounds of fault

so I don't think that that has any impact on it

and that's all I have to say

thank you very much Attorney McMillan

thank you Your Honor

case is submitted

reports in recess

thank you
