This is case 2022-0321, American Civil Liberties Union of New Hampshire v. New Hampshire Division

of State Police.

Ms. King, you've reserved one minute for rebuttal.

I have, Your Honor.

Please proceed whenever you are ready.

May it please the Court, Jessica King, on behalf of the New Hampshire Department of

Safety Division of State Police, and I am reserving one minute for rebuttal.

In order to consistently and lawfully discharge its legal obligations, the division seeks

definitive answer to the unsolved question of whether 10513B exempts police personnel files

from disclosure under the state's right to no law.

What words did I use that the division is incapable of understanding?

Well, so, Your Honor, when we look to this Court's prior case law, I think it's helpful

to go through four cases.

The first two are 2015 and 2016.

Don't necessarily take this part, this law head-on, but the Duchenne in 2015 talks about

removal from the EES, and it lays out the statutory language that says that 10513B prohibits

opening of a police personnel file.

And it explicitly recognizes that 10513B, in that statute, the legislature has balanced

the interests of criminal defendants against the counter-railing interests of police and

the public in the confidentiality of those records.

Then you get to Ganturt in 2016.

There, a police officer brought a tortuous interference with contractual relations

claim and seeking to come off the lorry list.

There the Court, because this Court recognized that police personnel files are generally

confidential by statute and that there is protected interest in one's reputation, particularly

within a profession, and that interest is significant.

Now, those cases were prior to CECOS newspapers and Union Leader Corps, in that those cases,

this Court overruled the prior practice of making exempt personnel records.

So at that point in 2020, personnel records were open to the public under a balancing test.

Then we get petition of the State of New Hampshire in February 2022.

In that case, the State was seeking a protective order for police personnel files in three criminal cases.

That case also details the statutory construction of 10513B, and it says disclosure is tied to a

particular criminal case, and it's for the explicit purpose of being used as evidence.

And so what the case says is that the statute details a process for turning over to the

defendant's sculpatory and relevant evidence, maintains confidentiality for all other purposes.

And then the Court looks to the California Court of Appeals decision in Alford, and it supports

the reasoning to allow disclosure beyond a criminal case would completely destroy the

carefully crafted statutory process by which such information is released.

But in that case, we're referring to a defense attorney disseminating that information that

he obtained in a criminal case for non-criminal forces.

That's what that language addresses.

That has nothing to do with what we're doing here, does it?

Well, so I would say it supports the reading of the statute that is a statute that is locked

down personnel files, police personnel files, except in enumerated circumstances.

And you can see that through the statutory language, which I will get to, but I would

like to point quickly to the July 2020 case that was recently issued at John Ovy attorney

general.

There, the court found that RS-10513B does not authorize the court to review an officer's

personnel file outside the context of a criminal case.

And so what this court said in petition of state and John Ovy attorney general is that

the court cannot go, or at least in John Doe, the court cannot go into those criminal

files to get those records unless it is in a criminal case.

So what this statutory, or this case history suggests is that this statute is a statute that

only allows disclosure in enumerated circumstances, and it does not permit disclosure to the

public at large.

The court has not explicitly ruled that.

And what the division is seeking today is to get a firm answer on that.

So you're asking us to rule that the statute applies outside the criminal context, outside

exculpatory evidence context?

I'm asking that this statute is a statute that, yes, locks down these records, except

in the criminal context.

What language in the statute supports your position?

The statutory construction.

It's because the statute is, it says, the remainder of the file shall be treated as confidential

and shall be returned to the police department employing the officer.

Doesn't that literally speak to being in the process of a criminal proceeding?

It is in the process of a criminal proceeding, Your Honor.

But what the state, how the state has read this statute is that it has locked down

all purposes.

And what you can see in the legislative history is that the general court understood this statute

to allow release in only enumerated circumstances.

Right.

The statute was passed as an exception to the prior rule.

Correct.

Reaffirming the prior rule that these particular personnel files were confidential, and as

you said, already doing the balancing that would otherwise be applied in a 91A analysis.

Correct.

So the legislature has already done this balancing.

The legislature has made the policy determinations that these records should be confidential.

What is the state's position as to all other personnel records for non-officers in the state?

Are they subject to the privacy balancing test, and this is the sole exception?

Is that the position of the state?

Yes, Your Honor.

So the only rest of the records, personnel records that the state maintains would under

Union Leader Corp and C.C.O.'s newspapers have that balance in the test.

So of all the employees, state employees, municipal employees throughout the state, their personnel

records are subject to this balancing and public access, whereas police officers who have the

highest responsibilities that we give to any public employees, the public doesn't have

the right.

Is that your position?

Yes, and there's a reason for that.

The legislature has already done that balancing test.

Legislature and the ACLU and amici present compelling policy reasons, but those arguments

are for the legislature.

The policy arguments that this is an improper statute.

The legislature really intended to do that.

Wouldn't it be pretty easy to put that language into 91A?

Police personnel files are confidential, not subject to this statute.

That language doesn't exist, does it?

No, it doesn't.

This statute was passed around the time that those records were not considered, there was

no balancing test.

Those records were considered...

Generally confidential.

Generally confidential, doesn't mean nondisclosable, does it?

No, it does not, but what this statute does is make it more than confidential.

When you say this statute, you mean 105?

10513B.

It makes it more than confidential.

It makes this disclosure in certain enumerated circumstances.

This court has previously held that the statute does not need to mention 91A in order to prohibit

disclosure generally.

Just exactly what records are you speaking of?

In terms of what's at issue here?

Yeah, disciplinary proceedings, is that what you're talking about?

Yeah, so the ACL...

You know what?

I bet that the records of those disciplinary hearings are in other files at the police department

other than the particular person involved.

And so the records that the ACLU requested are records of the discipline, and I believe

the exact language...

I'll guarantee you, the chief has a file.

And so what the Superior Court found was that the records were in the file.

They assumed that the records were in the file for purposes of its order.

We didn't have the benefit of Provenza at that point when the court issued its order.

So when we were making these arguments, whether the record was in the file or outside of

the file was not a central question.

With Provenza, what this court has done is recognize that that information is not locked

down.

That information can be found in PAB files.

That information can be found in police standards and training files.

That information can be found in a variety of places in the state.

The division is saying is that when you go to seek in the police personnel record,

when you go to enter into the police personnel records, that is what this statute is preventing.

So the statute doesn't apply to a PAB litigation involving a challenge to a termination of the

state police officer.

That information is freely disseminable under 918?

Once the information is outside of the police personnel file, and it could be at

the personnel appeals board, it could be at a trial in litigation, it could be

in a grievance proceeding as in Seacoste.

A grievance proceeding as in Seacoste, an arbitration decision.

It could be a number of things.

We're not advocating that the information is locked down.

What we are saying is the statute says that the personnel file is confidential except

in enumerated circumstances.

So do we need to decide the case in regards to personnel files and TOTO in general or

personnel files as related to disciplinary proceedings?

I think in TOTO, I think if this is a police personnel file, what the statute explicitly

says is police personnel file.

And this court has previously defined what a personnel file is.

We've defined what personnel records mean in read and play.

And you've defined what a file or record is in New Hampshire Center for Public Information

Journalism.

And so if it comes down to whether it is in the file, whether it is a personnel record,

that is a factual determination that the Superior Court can make, can find, and can dig into.

And it's not an attempt to create a file that is, you can stick anything in there

and it's cloaked in secrecy.

What it locks down is personnel information in the personnel file.

Is that not limited to disciplinary?

Not limited to disciplinary.

What those records have in them are really confidential and really sensitive information,

particularly police personnel files.

They have polygraph examinations that ask very sensitive questions.

They have physical examinations, psychological examinations.

There's not just, we're not talking about just disciplinary records.

What happens is those disciplinary records are wrapped up in the personnel file.

They are part and parcel to the personnel file.

And that's information that, in your view, the ACLU is looking for?

The ACLU has specifically requested that they have requested all reports,

investigatory files, personnel and disciplinary records that relate to any adverse employment action.

So their request was quite narrow.

Reports, investigatory files, personnel and disciplinary records,

which all fall under the personnel records as laid out in read and play.

But that request would include polygraph information?

No, it's not.

Or any psychological tests, I assume.

And I, you know, I can't say what the file includes or what the file does not include,

but I do not think that the ACLU is seeking polygraph information.

But what it is seeking is part and parcel to the personnel file.

Thank you.

Thank you.

You still have two minutes.

One minute.

I'm sorry.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Mr. Bissonette.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Members of the court, may it please the court as you'll Bissonette on behalf of

the ACLU of New Hampshire.

I'll take questions at any time.

Mr. Bissonette, can you just clarify the breadth of the request?

Are we talking about a request for the entire personnel file,

which can include a lot of private non-disciplinary information,

or is this just focused on disciplinary information?

It is narrowly focused to the reasons concerning the adverse employment action

that was taken against Mr. Wilbur.

That is it.

But it would seem that your argument, if we accept it,

goes even broader than that.

It would support broad disclosure, essentially, everything in the file.

I don't think that's true, Your Honor.

In fact, that's precisely why we have a balancing test that exists.

And that, in fact, is the backstop in this particular case,

as it is with respect to the personnel files of any public employee in New Hampshire.

It is a fact-specific analysis, a fact-specific inquiry

that evaluates the privacy interest in non-disclosure

and the public interest in disclosure.

And so with respect to psychology records, medical records,

all of the things that have been raised by the state,

there will be very strong arguments in those cases

that that information should not be released.

So the only issue we have to decide relates to disciplinary records

in personnel files.

Is that right?

I think that's right in this case,

because that is the specific information that is sought here,

the disciplinary records with respect to the adverse employment action

that was taken against Mr. Wheeler.

And I want to kind of ground this case a little bit

and remove it from an academic discussion,

because this case really at its core implicates

whether serious and egregious here misconduct by police officers

in New Hampshire will be secret or will be accessible to the public.

That is what this case is about.

To that point, we can see similar actions, similar alleged actions

on television and all the other jurisdictions.

Do they have jurisprudence on this issue, or are they just different?

Well, in fact, other states have the very balancing test

that New Hampshire has.

If there were an investigation, though,

wouldn't that be subject to disclosure on a case-by-case basis

and balancing?

Say that again.

I want to make sure you understand the question.

If there were an investigation, right?

Yes.

So that particular aspect would already be available subject to a case-by-case review.

Yes.

I think what makes this case a little bit interesting, frankly,

is that it's true that we have some intelligence as to what transpired

because the PAB issued a decision.

I don't think we should be distracted by that,

because what if a PAB decision, what if a PAB appeal is not taken?

What if a police officer decides, I am not going to avail myself

of the arbitration process under my existing CBA?

Things that could occur, and especially would occur in all likelihood,

where the misconduct is so egregious.

Right.

Once the officer realizes that opting for the grievance procedure

subjects that procedure to opening to the public.

Maybe, maybe not.

That's a calculus that a police officer needs to take,

because a police officer is a public official like anyone else.

But I think this case, the fact pattern of the case,

really demonstrates, I think, how problematic the state's position is.

If Trooper Wilbur had elected, I'm not going to appeal this decision

for whatever reason we would have no intelligence.

If there'll be a police officer.

Potentially.

Isn't that the legislature's prerogative?

The legislature has spoken on this, in fact, Your Honor.

And my position is the following.

First, obviously, you look at the text of the statute at issue.

The text of the statute says, in six different places,

in a criminal case, in a criminal case, in a criminal case.

The legislature has been very clear, in my view,

that the contours of this particular regime

applies in a criminal case.

And it is borne out in the legislative history.

But wouldn't a request under the right-to-know law

basically render one of 513 b perfluous?

We don't need it anymore. You just file a right-to-know claim.

Absolutely not. And I want to get to that.

But first, I want to say, when you look at the legislative history,

timing matters here.

When this bill was being proposed, there was a balancing test.

It wasn't the conventional wisdom at the time

that all of this information is secret.

To the contrary, this was discussed by the legislature

at the time that Fenneman had not been decided.

In fact, there was an effort at the time

to put in a categorical exemption on the 91A

that was removed, in part because the union leader testified

and said this would upend the current balancing test.

So are you suggesting there's an ambiguity in the statute?

No. In fact, I think, actually, it's clear,

as I noted before, that in six different places,

the statute says in a criminal case.

And yet, 91A retains unless excluded by statute elsewhere.

Yes.

In fact, I really want to direct the court's attention.

And I want to get back to your question, Charlie,

because I think it's critical and I have some responses.

But Grafton County Attorney versus Canner is very on point on this.

And I would strongly encourage the court to review it.

169 NH319, it is cited in the briefs.

Their question had to do with criminal records that were annulled

and whether or not that particular information

should still be public under 91A.

And there, in the enrollment statute,

there was language that said,

the person whose record is annulled shall be treated in all respects

as if she had never been arrested or convicted.

And the question there was, gosh, that's broad and expansive language.

Does that act as a 91A exemption?

And the court said, no, because in the 91A context,

where exemptions need to be construed narrowly,

to have a 91 exemption, the legislature needs to be clear

and unambiguous about it.

And we have the exact same situation here.

We have a statute that falls outside of chapter 91A,

where I think the text and legislative history show

that it was contemplated to pertain exclusively to the criminal process.

And there's nothing problematic about having different rules

for different processes.

And, you know, so to get back to your question,

which I think is in fact a really important one,

would this blow the system up?

No, the answer is absolutely not.

It makes sense to have different criminal rules

and different rules under 91A.

These are different processes.

But if the records out there were a particular officer

and then there's a criminal proceeding,

why go through in-camera review with the court,

records already out there?

There are two different regimes.

You could easily envision a scenario

in which something may be discloseable

to the public under 91A,

but a defendant may not get it in a criminal case

and vice versa.

A defendant may get information under 10513B,

but the public may not get access to it.

For example, one can envision a scenario

in which perhaps a officer may have allegedly

an off-duty drinking issue.

It didn't necessarily implicate workplace performance.

That officer was involved in a DUI stop.

The prosecutor decides out of an abundance of caution

we're going to release it under the purview of a protective order.

I'm not entirely sure a member of the public

would get access to that under 91A.

I convey that point just to articulate the premise

that these statutes serve different functions.

They deal with two different rights

owned by two different bodies.

One is the defendants and the rule

of the matter of due process,

that they obtain potentially exculpatory information.

And here they different right on behalf of the public.

We've talked about how 91A is not an end-around discovery,

for example.

So in other regimes,

we haven't wanted to blow up the relevance considerations

in discovery by just allowing a 91A request.

Yeah, and the backstop here,

just to reiterate, of course,

though, is again the public interest balancing test.

So this is not a scenario where a defense lawyer,

any member of the public for that matter,

is going to get access to everything.

Well, we can't look at motive in a 91A.

Exactly. It's true. That's true.

But I just really want to convey that, again,

these systems have two different purposes

and they serve two different functions.

And that's essentially what the court concluded in Grafton.

The enrollment statutes, not really about,

it's about not erasing memory,

about erasing a conviction that occurred.

It's about erasing a conviction.

I'll let you go, but is the public interest here

truly knowing what's in this particular file

and what happened?

Or is it, as I recall, a different argument

trying to build a database so that there is some

knowledge of the landscape of police officers

in the criminal defense realm?

Well, I think...

And again, does it matter?

I'm not sure it does matter,

but I mean, here in this particular case,

I just want to, again, stress

that egregious serious misconduct

in the view of the state,

this is, they're choosing to interpret the law this way, right?

Chapter 91A says that you need to construe exemptions narrowly.

That is not occurring here.

In fact, this language is being construed expansively.

It would shield misconduct from ever seeing the light of day.

There is no dispute about that.

Taking this out of the land to public interest balancing,

it is dangerous, and it prevents the public

and will prevent the public from holding

law enforcement accountable.

This is not...

So if we were to adopt your construction

of these statutes, how they fit together,

could someone file a right to know request

with every municipality in the state

and say, in regards to every police officer,

do we want anything related to discipline

in the personnel file?

I think it would really have to depend.

Again, in every case, you may have discipline

that's incredibly minor.

You may have discipline that's particularly...

Well, let's assume, for purposes of his quick,

that every police department in the state

has at least one major misconduct record in its file.

Does that mean that a blank 918 petition...

It would have to be individualized

to each particular police department,

and I think where there is particularly instances

of sustained misconduct, there would be a stronger basis

under the public interest balancing test

for those police departments to withhold it.

That's okay.

That's a good...

That's a good theory.

That's a good news set.

Excuse me.

Part of your theory is, well,

we don't really know what's going on out there,

and we don't have access because there can be cover-ups

or there can be incomplete information.

So sort of to take your theory to its end,

you go to a department and say,

you know, we're not really sure what's going on there.

Give us all your disciplinary records

in the personnel files.

That's the...

That would be what...

I think so, and I don't think this court

should be concerned about that.

That's okay.

That's what Chapter 91 is about.

Transparency and disclosure to the public.

So members of that particular community

can learn what their government is up to here.

But the commissioner would still need to establish

a basis for the public interest component

in order to even get hurt by the court, I assume.

Yes.

And this is the point I'm trying to make,

is that I understand the point.

But isn't it always in the public interest

to uncover bad, supplementary issues?

Yeah.

I mean, I think that...

But the strongest requests that are made

kind of under that theory are those

where there's knowledge by the requester

that there was an investigation,

there was knowledge that a particular officer

was implicated.

I could just tell you, in my practice,

I don't advocate for those types of requests

because they're not always necessarily

reasonably tailored.

So the point that I'm trying to make,

particularly with this request,

and it is a very specific request,

is that even when the public

has a hint of wrongdoing,

has a hint of potential misconduct

and wants to learn more,

under the state's position,

you can't.

We only know what we know in this case.

Only because of the statute, right?

I'm sorry.

The state takes that position only because

of its interpretation.

Its interpretation of the statute.

So let's cycle back to this case.

One could, presumably, do it rather narrowly

by simply stating the statute's means.

Yes, absolutely.

And I think that is obviously

the first part of this court's analysis.

What does the statute mean?

And I think, again, looking at

the four corners of the statute itself,

in a criminal case, in a criminal case,

in a criminal case, that's what it says.

To the extent there's ambiguity

and there isn't, to the,

this court should look to legislative history,

and I really would again encourage the court

to review that history front to back.

It, to me at least,

is very clear that the

point of this regime

was to apply to criminal cases.

That was why it was proffered by

police chiefs, was ultimately

amended.

Was it basically to protect Brady rights?

Yeah, it was designed to kind of

balance Brady rights with

some of the concerns raised by police

chiefs that defendants and their

counsel were engaging in fishing expeditions

of police personnel files.

So that was really the scope.

Against a backdrop where they didn't have

access to those files.

I don't agree. I don't think that's right

respectfully, Your Honor. In fact,

in 1992, when this was being

discussed, the balancing

test was the operative law at

the time. And so when

there was an effort made through this

legislative process to put

a specific exemption under

91A,

people were concerned. They're like,

wait a second, we have a balancing test here.

This was again before Fenderman.

And those concerns were raised.

That language was taken out. If that

language was kept in, we'd be in a different

context. So if we were to decide

that 10513 applies solely

in the context of the criminal case, do

we need to go any further?

No.

I think that would resolve

this particular issue.

And again, traditional 91A

exemptions would apply when these

requests are made, just as they apply

when requests are made for any other

public official. And this interpretation

not only we think is inconsistent with

the text and legislative history, it

would be the police special privacy rights

that no other public employee has.

That was recognized in the legislative

history back in 1992.

When the categorical exemption was put

forward, the union leader testifies

and say, you're going to be giving

special rights to police that no one

else has. That can't be right.

That language was then pulled out.

Respectfully, what's occurring here is

I think an attempt to reimagine

that's actually in ways that

the legislature never envisioned.

The legislature intended and it wasn't

this type of special categorical

secrecy.

I do want to respond just briefly.

Your red light is on.

I'm sorry. Do you have one point?

I just want to say that the notion that

this information could be obtained in

other sources is not an exemption

under 91A and it's not clear

that the PAB information

in this particular case is

exhausted and that there is additional

information that the state police may

take.

Ms. King?

I'd like if I can make it through

to discuss three points.

The first is the legislative history

while the

my colleague focuses on the

1992 version of the 1992

legislative history. This statute

was amended in 2012

and it was amended to

put those three

ways to get these records

into the statute.

And so in 2012,

Fenneman was the law of the land.

Fenneman was squarely the law of the land

in 2012 when this was amended.

The second point is, I agree

Grafton County V. Canner

is an instructive case in this.

The court said that

they were treating the person

as

having an annulment, not the record.

And the court

did not focus on the record there

and they even said

that the county attorney office

and the resting

agency is treated differently

than the court in the state police.

The court in the state police had records

that were

locked down by the annulment statute

and then the county attorney

and the state police did not.

They could release that information.

So you were you Grafton County to help

support your position? Yes, Your Honor.

Obviously state why it supports

your position in your view?

Because that's obviously not the way Mr. Besson at

is the case. Right, Your Honor.

Yeah, and so what

I think Canner really gets to

is this information versus record.

The information of the annulment

is freely available

and to the public.

But where the annulment

statute locks down that record

with the court saying that the court

cannot release the record

saying that state police may delete the record.

The court did

not release those records

that were held by state police

and the court.

And then finally to the extent

that the ACLU

asserts that the state is trying to hide

documents or keep secrets

that's just simply not based in truth.

The state has to follow

the law as written

and the

clear legislative language

and the opinions from the court

lead to the state's interpretation

of the statute. Thank you, Council.

Thank you. Okay, submitted.

Court adjourned for the morning.
