I wanted to, on behalf of the court, welcome students from both Hanover High School in Hanover and Kimball Union Academy in Merritt, New Hampshire, and welcome back both of the teachers. I'm glad you're here. Thank you very much.

This is case 20-22-0544, Appeal of Peter Southworth.

Attorney Rice, I understand you've reserved two minutes. Rebuttal?

I have, Your Honor.

Please proceed.

May it please the court. My name is Anna Rice, and I represent Peter Southworth.

Compensation Appeals Board erred as a matter of law in fact when it erroneously concluded that Peter Southworth had failed to prove his MRSA-infected wound was causally related to his work.

There were essentially three errors of law that led to that decision.

First, the cap erred when it concluded that the framework set forth by this court at Margeson with respect to deciding questions of causation was not mandatory.

Second, it erred when it began its analysis of the neutral risk injury of unknown cause, assessing the question of medical causation before applying the increased risk test to the question of legal causation.

Third, the cap applied a clearly erroneous standard to its analysis regarding that medical causation.

The fourth and final error was an inevitable culmination of the first three legal errors, and this was an error of fact.

It's our position that having failed to follow the Margeson framework, having declined to apply the increased risk test,

and then having elected to address medical causation before legal causation, and then having identified what we would assert is an erroneous standard for the determination of medical causation in a neutral risk injury.

The panel lacked the blueprint necessary to identify which facts were relevant and material to the question of causation.

As a result, it's alleged that they improperly weighed the evidence, made clearly erroneous conclusions, and as we've asserted, most importantly, and perhaps surprisingly,

is that the cap admitted that it actually overlooked an entire section of evidence with respect to causation, that they had not read the citations that were presented.

Understandably, Your Honors, there were more than 900 pages of records, so there was a lot.

But we had provided a curated list of the citations that they would need had they used a neutral risk injury, and they did not read them.

We haven't been provided with the medical records, right?

I looked through the materials, and we have some, we have transcripts, but I had trouble finding medical records.

I think, Your Honor, you should have the, I can't speak to whether you have medical records, and my apologies for that.

Certainly, there should be the appendices to the closing argument, which specifically cited the location of the medical records, and I think abstracted, for example, that there were, in fact, workers' compensation forms finding causation.

Abstracted the opinion of the treating physician, indicating that the mercy of the thigh was.

Can I ask you, in particular, are you referring to the opinion of Dr. Lori Riker?

I am, Your Honor.

And that was before the panel, is that right?

Correct.

And she opined, I could not find that in the materials before us, but it's reported that she opined that it was more probable than not that the source of the epidural infection was from the initial skin infection of the claimant's leg just a few weeks prior,

which is the injury that occurred during the orientation hike.

Is that right?

That is correct, Your Honor.

And that's the nature of her opinion?

That is correct, Your Honor.

Stated more probably than not?

Correct.

Thank you.

That was, that record itself, of course, was contained within the medical records, and was also that specifically part of that sort of curated,

pulled out list of citations, each one of the appendices to the closing argument, again acknowledging, and the CAB had actually made comment to the fact that they found it difficult because there were so many medical records.

So acknowledging that, we had taken care to, by category, say, okay, these are the records for medical causation.

These are the records with respect to legal causation.

And do I understand correctly that the injury occurred in early September, say September 4 of 2015, and that your client went to New London Hospital on the 28th of September and saw Dr. Recker, and then there was cultures were taken at that time,

and it was determined that, at the location of the wound, there was MRSA.

Is that, that's my understanding correct?

Your Honor, I think the dates are actually somewhat earlier.

I think that his collapse was at that time.

Well, I know, I'm talking September 28th, September 29th.

Okay, yes, I'm sorry, I thought we're October.

Correct, yes.

What had happened is after his return, well, as you know, the facts, and I don't want to, if you don't want me to, I won't go through that.

But there was clear evidence that he had incurred some sort of wound, whether it was a cut or scratch, a bite, that's what the cab seemed to be concerned about.

The cab said, well, we don't really know what caused that wound, right?

And there was some emphasis from opposing counsel on that, too, saying, listen, there's no question about that.

There was also a question that hung up the cab, and that was, where exactly did MRSA come from?

You know, where was the genesis of the MRSA infection?

But we submit that that simply means that this is a neutral risk injury of unknown cause.

That's exactly what happens when there's an unknown cause.

What we can say is that absolutely a wound was incurred in the bounds and time of work.

He didn't have it before he left.

His wife specifically saw that he did not have anything on him right before he left.

His partner on the hike, he was gone for several days.

The witness said that he had fallen and that he thought he had scratched himself or cut himself.

And there was a co-worker who was with him who, during the hike, saw it.

Upon return, his wife saw it.

So that places that initial infected wound as occurring in and during the course of his work.

There was no contest about that fact.

Counsel has pointed out.

Right.

The cab even said the parties agreed claimant discovered a spot on the rear of his right thigh

on return to school at the end of the camping trip.

Correct.

What there is a question about is, is it a spider bite?

Is it a cut?

It says various things throughout the record.

But our point is, that doesn't matter.

Because the point is that he suffered a wound of some sort that was infected.

And it's also not contested that that wound had MRSA in it on September 28th of 2015.

Is that right?

Correct to your point, yes.

And so why does it matter how your client got contracted MRSA, whether it was at the school,

or whether it was at McDonald's, or whether it was any place?

If he had a wound that he experienced somehow, either a bite or a fall, while he was working,

and there seems to be no dispute that this was a work-related task, why isn't that the end of the inquiry?

That is the way in which the Department of Labor viewed this case.

The Department of Labor saw it as a dangerous case and found in favor of the claimant.

But I think, arguably or understandably, here the CAF found that because they were unsure of the way in which,

or the type of wound that he had, and because they were unsure of the MRSA,

and because they thought that a MRSA, they named it as a MRSA infection, infected wound, as opposed to a wound.

So as opposed to a wound that had a sequelae of infection, they looked at it as a MRSA wound.

It has one thing.

I think as a result of that, that's why they called it a neutral risk injury.

Because where do you get MRSA?

Well, MRSA is not a distinctly personal risk, nor is it a distinctly employment risk.

That's where the increased risk test came in.

We asserted by presenting evidence from OSHA, CDC, DHHS, which was not generic.

This was the standard publication from our government agencies responsible for the health and welfare of our employees in the workplace,

indicating that there are certain environments in which there is an increased risk of contracting MRSA as compared to the general public.

That was the standard.

And in that standard, it said that communal living, we have some people here who live in boarding schools.

Boarding schools are an increased risk.

This was somebody who coached on turf fields, who there was testimony that he worked and used a locker room that was considered filthy by everybody who talked about it.

You know, not particularly surprising.

He had communal laundry that he used.

He worked in the dorms.

He worked in every one of the settings, practically, that was defined by OSHA and the CDC.

More than that, he had this open wound.

And so that's the five C's that they talk about.

If you have an open wound, that makes it more likely that you're going to get MRSA.

Well, as the proper lens to think about this, the increased risk was when he was hiking with the school.

I mean, that's not the normal thing you do at a desk job or teaching.

But he was out hiking on trails, and at least there's testimony that he fell while he was doing that.

Why isn't that the proper time and venue for an analysis about whether there was greater risk or not?

It absolutely could be, Your Honor.

It's just that the CAB didn't address it there.

And again, that's what the Department of Labor did.

That's how they found it.

But even if they didn't, I think I can get to the environment.

The other issue that I haven't had a chance, and I can see I'm getting close to time,

is the issue about if we do get that, and Your Honors, look at this as an increased risk test.

I think it's absolutely vital that we look at the question of whether or not medical causation,

one should be viewed first in the cases of neutral risk injury.

I don't think it can be.

Why? That's what's interesting.

Yeah.

Why can't they jump to medical causation, and what is the influence of the neutral risk finding?

It's super interesting, I think, Your Honor. Thank you.

The issue is that in Margeson, there is a specific statement that distinguishes neutral risk injuries from all other injuries.

The Margeson court indicated that when we're dealing with non-neutral risk injuries,

we apply Steinberg, the two-part test, legal and medical causation.

But the court then specifically said that's not the case when we're dealing with neutral risk injuries.

Why? I would say it's similar to the presumptive cases, the heart attack cases in Gelinas and Cunningham,

where the court there said that the only question of medical causation,

now I'm not saying he doesn't have to meet his burden, but to meet the burden,

the factual precedent that he has to meet is simply that he has the disabling condition.

Because with neutral risk injuries, and I would say with presumptive cases probably too,

with neutral risk injuries, once you prove legal causation, then you can't then go to medical causation

and say they have to prove, as they said, what, how, and where he got the infection.

That's what he required that he prove, when that's not required in the legal standard.

That's why I'm saying neutral risk injuries are distinguished.

I think the interesting question is whether or not the court in Margeson

actually meant to abolish the requirement for the two-part test.

My position is you don't have to do that today, but if you don't,

then it should at least be the same test that's used in Gelinas and Cunningham.

And in that case, once you prove legal causation, and that speaks to the order,

once you prove legal causation, then the only thing you have to prove is that he has the disabling condition.

Because you can't go back and talk about how it was caused.

But again, to your honor's point, I think that this could have been analyzed as a direct risk.

It just wasn't.

And so our argument at this point has been based on the fact that if we find that the CAP

had the ability to see this, and I think it was reasonable under circumstances to view it as a neutral risk injury,

in that they said it was a MRSA infection, and MRSA infections are neither personal nor work necessarily,

and because they concluded that it was of unknown cause.

Now this court determined that it wasn't of unknown cause.

It was obvious that it happened during the course of employment,

or this court could find, that there was an increased risk by virtue of being out and about in the woods for several days,

sleeping on tarps, and bathing in water, and falling down.

That that was the risk, and that that's unusual, and specific to the nature of employment.

Well, the CAP said you didn't meet your burden because there was no expert testimony.

There was a bunch of CDC materials that you relied on, but there was no expert testimony where someone, presumably,

could have come in and said, well, you know, this work environment is particularly risky because of these factors.

They found it important that that did not happen.

I see amount of time, if I may.

Please, ma'am.

Yeah, we've had this before, and I've been before you on that same issue in duty,

where there was a, there's a belief in the CAP, it seems, that there needs to be expert testimony on these issues.

And we would assert that that's simply not the case.

First of all, we, you need to have some sort of evidence.

It doesn't have to necessarily be expert evidence.

And in his case, he said it had to be expert medical evidence.

And let me point out that he said it had to be expert medical evidence to determine the how, why, and where that the MRSA developed.

That simply can't be the standard when we're talking about a neutral risk injury of unknown cause.

You can't then require medical expert evidence to show what the person doesn't have to show to prove legal evidence.

It's completely illogical.

And if that were to stand, no person with a neutral risk injury would ever be able to have a recovery in workers' compensation.

Thank you, Tony Rice.

Thank you.

Tony Stewart.

Your Honors, my name is Kevin Stewart.

I'm an indemnity company, workers' compensation carrier for Proctor Academy in this matter.

This is a case about two conditions, about whether there was a leg wound or insect bite, as the CAB suggested,

or, and then whether there was a MRSA infection.

So there's two different issues before here.

The CAB found that there was a leg wound or insect bite that's work-related on the hiking trip.

So that's not a dispute.

A dispute is whether this MRSA infection that appeared at some point later was proven to be caused by his work at Proctor Academy.

The board looked at the evidence, said you have not made your burden.

Why does that matter?

If I get a work-related injury here, if I fall down the back stairs carrying a bunch of briefs and scrape my knee and it gets infected a couple days later,

why do I have, in order to prevail on a workers' comp claim, why do I have to prove that this court is more risky than any other location?

The fact is, I have an injury, an original injury that was work-related, and then it got infected.

And it doesn't matter how the infection happened.

Well, the evidence didn't support that this infection necessarily started at that location.

Well, there's a report from Dr. Ricker.

Was that, were the Ricker medical records before the CAB?

The causation opinion from Dr. Ricker was present.

And the medical records as well from September 28th and September 29th that identified MRSA in the wound that was on his thigh that was injured while hiking.

Isn't that, isn't that all present in the medical record?

Yes, absolutely.

The question, we, they adopted our doctor's opinion.

And there was competing medical opinions.

And this is before, this is the board's decision to weigh the evidence.

And they looked at the evidence, and they looked at the only infectious disease expert who opined on this, and that's Dr. Crossley.

And they looked at Dr. Crossley, and they said, this opinion says you can't say that it's from work.

You can't say whether it's from work or from.

But they were only looking at where the bug came from, whether it came from McDonald's or whether it came from the grocery store or whether it came from Proctor Academy.

And why is that the right inquiry as opposed to he got the bug and he got it in a place that, where he sustained a work injury?

Why isn't that the proper way to think about it?

That's a good question.

Crossley looked at all the evidence, because Dr. Crossley had those.

And he said, look, how you get MRSA is through nasal passages, and then it spreads to the rest of the body.

There may be a risk factor, but you can't say, in this case, that that's what caused this.

He said, you get it through the nasal passages, and then it spreads to the body.

And so he said, we can't say that, in factually, that this came from, necessarily, first of all, that it started there.

But also, it is important to say, if you have a cut, and then to say, where do you actually get this infection?

You may not need absolute opinions, but you need someone to say, weighing the risks more at work or at home.

And he said, you can't determine it from this evidence.

You can't say, it's more likely you got MRSA from Dr. Academy than you did from at home.

So someone has to go around and swab various surfaces at the point when the infection develops?

Someone needs to opine that there actually is a greater risk of getting this infection from work than there is from home.

That's what Dr. Crosley looked at, and he said, you can't say that this is more likely to have come from work.

The board looked at that, adopted that opinion, and said, you've had this since 2017.

No one's disputing, he's saying this is how you get MRSA, not necessarily through this infection in the leg, which is their theory.

You get it through the nasal passage, and then it spreads to the body.

But it is a risk factor.

Having an open wound is a risk factor to developing MRSA.

According to the OSHA document, it's a risk factor, but there's lots of factors for risks at home.

Dr. Crosley looked at all these risk factors, and he said, in this case, you can't say that.

Why is it a risk factor for OSHA if you get it through your nasal passages only?

This is our expert.

They presented some generalized documents from somebody.

We don't know who authored it.

He didn't sign up for the proposition that having an open wound is somehow a heightened risk factor.

He looked at all these evidence and said, look, there was a wound here.

But he said, look, in this case, weighing all the evidence, and he looked at the records, you can't say it's more likely that this infection came from work as opposed to home.

Do you agree, though, that it was a work-related wound, that first injury to the hip?

Well, the CAB found that there was some type of, whether it was an insect bite or a wound or something.

And you're not contesting that.

We did not appeal to that.

So that's why there's two separate issues.

There's whether he had a wound, which the CAB said yes.

And then the second is whether this whole body birth infection.

And he was getting treatment.

He went in before anybody looked at the leg.

He went into the chiropractor, and he was having some pain in his neck, and there was no sign of the bug bite or wound at that point.

But so there was evidence in the record that this could have been something, you know, it already had gone on before the infection in the leg.

But the medical, so they decided on medical in the first instance that you didn't meet your burden on medical.

But they viewed the burden as proving where the bug came from.

That's how they viewed it.

Where did you get MRSA?

If you don't prove that it's more likely than not that you got MRSA at Proctor, you lose.

That's how they looked at it, right?

That's part of how they looked at it, yes.

I mean, we do assert that you need to actually prove that you got an infection at work.

That all these infection cases, whether they're COVID or MRSA, you still got to prove that you, more probably than not, you got it at work, you were infected at work.

You don't just get to eviscerate that whole standard that you don't have to prove medical causation that you actually got it at work.

So, to go back to my original question, if I fall down here and skin my knee and it's infected three days later, that's not compensable as a workers' comp injury unless I can prove that I got the bug that infected me from some heightened risk here at court as opposed to going to the grocery store?

Is that your position?

I think it would depend on the fact of that infection.

I mean, this is, we have a specific infection MRSA.

In your case, this is hypothetical, you get hurt at work, cut your leg, the cut is work related.

Then you have a question, okay, there's an infection.

In this case, it's both a question of whether the infection started there or whether it had started someplace else.

There's also the question of, okay, do you have a heightened risk at work that you got this infection, which we don't know what it is.

I mean, if it's a MRSA infection, then there's medical issues to address with that.

If it's some other infection, there may be some other medical evidence about you could have contracted this infection at home if it's a different or, of course, a hobby or something.

But we don't have those facts.

So there's a lot of MRSA in hospitals.

So if I get injured here and I wind up in the hospital because I injured my knee and I've got a wound there and it becomes infected with MRSA when I'm at the hospital,

you'd say, well, that's not compensable because you got MRSA from a hospital and that's where it's much more likely than at the court.

So that's not compensable.

Is that your position?

It would depend, again, on what the medical evidence says, whether that infection started at the hypomedical cut that you got at work or whether it could have started somewhere else.

In this case, it wasn't a medical expert saying that there was a heightened risk from Proctor Academy to get that MRSA infection.

And then the court did go on to address legal causation.

So what they did, they said you didn't meet the burden on medical causation.

Then in their motion to pre-hearing, this issue was raised about legal causation.

And they said, we didn't do legal causation because you failed on medical causation, but we're going to now go on and do legal causation.

They argued it should be neutral risk. They agreed. They said, yes, neutral risk.

And then they said, we didn't do the high risk test before because we ruled against your medical causation.

Now we're going to do it.

And they compared the work-related risk to the non-work-related risk.

And they looked at the evidence. And again, this is their job to weigh the evidence.

And they looked at the evidence and they said, we are not persuaded by your evidence.

This OSHA documents first because you didn't give us the non-work-related risk documents.

All you presented was the work-related risk.

If you want us to be persuaded, you would preside as the non-work-related risk documents so we could compare them.

But you didn't.

And the sole focus of their heightened risk analysis was the MRSA as the injury, not the fall during the hike as the injury.

Is that right?

Well, they determined that there was some kind of incident.

So, yes.

Right.

They're trying to determine whether MRSA is caused by work.

There's some kind of hike risk for work.

Right.

Did they analyze the hike in terms of heightened risk?

Or it's just.

Well, they found a work-related cut or insect bite.

Right.

So they didn't have to do that analysis.

Correct.

Because it was work-related, no question.

Correct.

Well, they determined it was.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So they made that ruling that there was this cut or insect bite.

So then they do the legal analysis, which they've asked and wanted them to do, which was neutral risk, increased risk.

And they did look.

They specifically talked about the evidence.

They said, we're not persuaded by it.

They said, there's OSHA documents.

First, you didn't give us the other side.

But second, it's not to this case.

And.

What about this issue of a differing standard under our case law, Gelinas?

Well, there's nothing in case law that we understand eliminates the need for medical causation.

There you always need to prove medically that the condition is work-related.

So these neutral risk cases on a staircase, the margin is in neutral risk.

You still got to prove.

It's not usually very hard.

I mean, usually you have the medical documentation saying, yeah, just fall down the stairs.

You broke your ankle or whatever.

But you still get to have a doctor that says that.

You don't just get to eviscerate that.

And that's what they're essentially asking you is to get rid of medical causation.

I don't think that's.

But don't they have the doctor who says the MRSA that was found on September 28th was found

in the wound and that's attributable to the incident hiking?

Don't they have an expert who says that?

They say they have a doctor.

Their doctor says, we think your infection came from the cut.

But they don't have a doctor that says it's more likely than not or even more probable

that your infection actually came from Proctor Academy.

And there's evidence.

And our doctor gave the explanation of why you would not necessarily get it from the cut.

You could get it, and you do get it, through the nasal passages that spreads to the body.

And he said, based on all the evidence, you can't say that this is more probably than not from the work injury.

I'm almost out of time.

But I just want to address the documents that they didn't review.

They did not indicate that they were rejecting our views of those documents.

And it was both sides.

They said they couldn't verify some of our documents that we talked about in our written closing.

But you'll see, through the hearing, they meticulously went through, looked at every relevant document.

They found them.

You'll see that in the transcript.

They went through every relevant document, found them during the hearing.

And then afterwards, you know, if there were documents that were relevant, that needed to be addressed,

that would change things, you know, they certainly had an opportunity to present that on the hearing.

And we didn't see that.

So we don't think that there's anything that would change a decision if they go back and re-review these documents,

which they didn't indicate that they were ignoring or rejecting our opinion.

They just said, we can't verify what you said.

Basically, like a motion to dismiss.

They seemingly accepted what we said.

They wouldn't say, you know, we're rejecting that.

And they also weren't documents that, the important documents all were presented.

And they certainly had a chance to present them again if they would have changed their opinion on a motion for re-hearing.

And we didn't see that.

So we don't think there's anything there that would warrant remanning this to have them re-review.

It's not going to change anything.

And if it wasn't error, it was harmless error.

Let me just ask, so if we were to agree with the appellant that this causation analysis is flawed,

it's your view that it needs to go back to the CAB for analysis of other issues and other arguments that the insurer made, right?

Yes, absolutely.

And they specifically found that these other issues were removed because they ruled against the claimant on causation,

which I don't think is an error, but if there's going to be something redone on this case, then those issues would then need to be addressed, yes.

But there are issues other than causation that were pressed by the carrier below, right?

Correct, yes.

So yes, that is our position.

Which weren't reached by the CAB.

Right.

They specifically said they were removed from the causation ruling.

So yes, if it was to be a remand, we are asking that those issues, then they would need to be addressed by the.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

The bottle?

So we didn't contest Dr. Crossley.

We actually thought that Dr. Crossley helped our case.

Dr. Crossley was not asked whether or not there was an increased risk.

Dr. Crossley was asked to determine where the MRSA came from, and that in and of itself is a problem.

Where there's a neutral risk injury, which is how this CAB framed this issue.

They said MRSA is the neutral risk injury, right?

There's a neutral risk injury of unknown cause.

The question as to where the cause is is not relevant to the determination.

The question is whether or not there's an increased risk, and he did not address that issue.

If you look at that decision carefully, what he did do is exactly what we said we needed.

He said that there was MRSA.

He said that the MRSA, and actually, I'm not going to go so far as to say that.

I'm not sure if he said the MRSA and the wound was the same as the thigh, as Richard did.

But he said he had MRSA.

He said the care was excellent.

I mean, frankly, outstanding.

We thought that's all we needed.

So, no, we don't contest his opinion.

We think that opinion helps us.

As you pointed out, this can be decided.

If they concede that the injury at the height is work-related, then any natural sequela of that is going to be found to be related.

You don't then apply a whole other set of testing.

First you do direct risk, then you do increased risk with respect to whether or not the infection that one gets in the wound that they get at work.

This is not an infection that he got in his ear or his eye that I would then have to correlate.

This is an infection in the thigh which the doctor said the exact same strain was then in his spine.

I think that is all of the evidence that we need if, in fact, they're looking at this as a direct risk.

We looked at this with the presumption, as they did, that the entire infected wound was the increased risk.

And if you look at that, our argument is that a government document that was not objected to, that should be taken consideration of, that established under what circumstances there's an increased risk in the workplace, specifically in the workplace.

And then we had uncontested evidence from multiple witnesses that indicated that he had almost all of these increased risks as a result of the way in which he performed his job.

If that is the analysis that is applied, we still would.

And then that gets to the question of what do we do about that medical causation, but only then.

Thank you very much.

Thank you.

We would ask, if I may, that it be remanded and we agree with respect to the additional issues, but we hope that this court will find that there is causation.

Thank you.

Thank you.

All right.
