This is case 2020-0652, Tracy L. Russo versus Greenwood State Pediatry Association, PA, et al.

Good morning, Attorney Murphy. I understand you reserved two minutes for the rebuttal.

Yes, Your Honor, thank you. May I please support? My name's Francis Murphy, along with Daniel Omeroy.

We represent Tracy Russo, the plaintiff below.

The decision below in granting the summary judgment was the product of a fundamental error of fact.

One that I did not catch until I was preparing for this oral argument.

So it's not in my, this argument for these points, not in my brief. This is new to you right now.

The factual error involves where the lower court mistook testimony pertaining to December 28th

appointment and understood it to be a December 1st appointment. Let's pause for a minute in terms of

the relevant dates. Suit was filed on December 21, 2017. So the relevant discovery rule deadline

is December 21st, 2017. So what should, did she know what should she have known before December

21st or afterwards? The essence of the lower court's ruling and is that evidence that was

submitted with the motion of summary judgment pertaining generally to the client's reaction

to the surgery was assumed to have taken place on December 1st before that critical deadline

of December 21st, when in fact it was December 28th. It's most, that factual error by the court

is most evidently seen in the last page of the summary judgment order, page 8,

and I'll read from that paragraph momentarily. But first, page 109. The judge points to

testimony of page 109, which I have here from the transcript, and finds significance in that.

She knew this so that therefore the discovery rule was satisfied. It starts off at the top

and this is on page 49 of the appendix to the breach, page 49 of the appendix to the

breach. You were dissatisfied that the joint had to be fused. Answer, yes. And I was dissatisfied

with the angle of the toe. And when you told him these things, that it is Dr. Seuss of these things,

what was his response? Honestly, I can't remember exactly. And then the prior page, that's page

109, page 108, was it painful whether two toes were touching each other? Yes. And what was

your reaction to Dr. Seuss' discussing a possible second surgery with you? Disbelief, irritation,

anger. These discussions pertain to December 28, not December 1 as wrongfully assumed or

considered by the judge. I'm going to the last page of the judge's order, granting summary

judgment, that's at page 8, and this is on the addendum to the brief, page 31. The court

writes, the summary judgment record demonstrates that by December 1, 2017, Plaintiff began to

question Dr. Seuss' connection with her prolonged foot pain. The Plaintiff's deposition testimony

reveals that by December 1, 2017, she knew that Dr. Seuss was unable to come up with

the explanation for what happened with the surgery and it goes on. The court, the lower

court is assuming that took place in the deposition testimony, submitted in support of the motion

for summary judgment, that took place on December 1, when in fact, it's December 28, and that's

a world of difference. Because the critical date is December 21. Needless to say, it

in raises an emotion for reconsideration. I did not. I didn't catch it for recently. It's

under my brief, by the way. And I didn't warn the court to be wary about the confusion

because the defense counsel cites these pages in the deposition in support of a more general

proposition. It's on page six of the statement of material facts. It says, citing this page

and other pages, Plaintiff was dissatisfied with Dr. Seuss' responses. So these pages

cited for a very limited purpose. Plaintiff was dissatisfied with the explanation of why

she was having continued pain. But the court took rail with it further and said,

this is what she knew generally about before or as of December 1st.

But the court also found that her testimony reveals that by mid-November 2017, she became

aware that something with the foot surgery was done incorrectly. Also by mid-November

2017, the Plaintiff observed that her toe was misaligned. So if the trial court had correctly

read the record as you do, would it have not considered these prior evidence that

she knew originally should have known? There are hints in the record that she was

concerned about what was taking place. But the court's analysis, the lower court's analysis,

is infected by this fundamental mistake. It characterizes everything he reads in the record.

She knew this as of December 1st, but again, that's a mistake. I think what we've got to

keep in mind here is the Plaintiff in this situation gets the benefit of the doubt.

So mid-November is just hints? Is that what you're saying?

She began to have doubts. She began to have doubts.

Buts of doubt.

Have concerns, but that's the right word. She began to have concerns.

But here, she gets the benefit of the doubt by the statutory standard. It's not when she

first started to worry about continued pain. It's when did she, with reasonable diligence,

reasonable diligence should have discovered? So you are giving the discovery rule a prize?

The discovery rule a prize, yes. And the bright line date for the discovery rule is December 28th.

When she's challenging the doctor, why do they have a need of fusion? Why is my toes twisted?

And that's backed up by this other document, which I'll show. This is the record for the

last appointment with Dr. Seusser on December 28th. So you can see the date, December 28th,

down at the bottom of the first paragraph, pain in the second toe is noted. This is the first

time pain in the second toe is noted in the record. L1 and L2 are rubbing. That is left,

toe number one and left toe number two are rubbing. Moving down to the X-ray findings,

the radiographs, L1 laterally deviated with slight overlap of L2. This is the first time these

findings are noted in the medical record. And they're significant, and they dovetail

exactly with the testimony that's on page 108 and 109 in the depositions, which was signed

for a very limited purpose, but the judge thought it was talking about December 1st.

So, again, a plaintiff in this situation gets benefit of the doubt when the court is doing

in a discovery rule analysis, the subjective factual question, when did she, with

diligent, reasonable diligence, should have discovered this? And then the summary judgment

standard is, it's viewed the light most favorable in the plaintiff. So if there are hints of concern

in the record that's as to what's taking place in November 1st, it's going to be looked at

generally, is that really, isn't it a trigger of concern? It's a trigger with due diligence,

reasonable diligence. Did she have the justification for being concerned that she

was harmed by something that the defendant did? So we shouldn't analyze this under the

discovery rule as opposed to the continuing treatment doctrine?

The way, so let me put it this way. I'm not asking for any kind of landmark decision

about the continuous treatment or the fraudulent concealment.

They should be factored into this overriding question in a discovery rule. When was

there reasonable diligence, should she have discovered? So if she's in continuous treatment

and evidence is being hid from her, that gives her a longer time for reasonable diligence.

What is the specific evidence for fraudulent concealment?

So the evidence was that she was told after the fact, when she went to the Boston

appointment, you didn't need the surgery, but beyond that, it's very clear why you're

having this pain. The screws that were put in during this fugitive surgery are going

beyond the big toe into the second toe. Let me ask for a second, was that the first time

that your client ever was told that she was, that the surgery was unnecessary?

Yes. So it was the, and my expert supports this, you only get a fusion when you've got

Haleck's rigidus, that is, there's so much arthritis in there that the toe's not moving.

So because of her age and the condition of her toe, she was not the candidate for a fusion

surgery. And she found that out when she went to Boston on January 8th. And again,

I also found out, in her testimony deposition, within 30 seconds, Dr. Kwan said,

I know why you're having pain. Look at the sex way. The screw was going from the big toe

into the second toe, or the space between the first toe and second toe. So that was

concealed from her. She's asking repeatedly, I'm in continuous pain, and he's saying,

I don't know why you're in continuous pain. But he did, because he's capable of looking at

the x-ray just like Dr. Kwan was in 30 seconds. So the fraudulent concealment evidence is this,

I do not know why you're still having pain. Correct. That is, that is, when in fact he

did know because it was obvious when you look at an x-ray. And has he acknowledged that?

No, but again, in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, that's testimony that could

come in. The jury could agree with that argument that anybody would know that when the screw was

going in like that, that's the reason. So that makes it fraudulent?

It's a purposeful concealment of an explanation of why you're having pain. And if she had

that explanation, then she would not have continued with the treatment. It would have

gone for a second opinion. So your client, the doctor actually took an x-ray of your

client's foot and following the surgery. So he had possession of that information?

Yes, he did. Every appointment you see the record, every appointment you took x-rays.

What standard review are you arguing for?

Oh, I'm arguing for, this is de novo. The case cited, my reply brief, I argue the point

that this is an unnecessary abuse of discretion. Sorry, that's the old standard.

But this is the de novo review because the ruling below was on the pleadings. There was

not an evidentiary hearing. A judge did not listen to both sides testifying what happened

when. It looked at the pleadings and as such, it should have been done with the light

most favorable to the plaintiff. And with this very subjective standard,

when was there reasonable, when with reasonable diligence should she have known something

was wrong? So again, I'm really not looking for a landmark decision here on the continuous

treatment rule and the fraudulent consumer rule. The application of these rules alongside

this standard of reasonable diligence allows for a justified conclusion that the bright

line date for discovery rule deadline is December 28, 2017, when this discussion

was taking place and the light of these new findings, new findings as of December 28,

overlapping the trial complaint under the fort and the X-ray evidence about the overlapping

of one cell over the other. So, Terry, we agree with you that the trial court mixed up the

states. What's the appropriate remedy? Should we remand it for another hearing on

the statute of limitations? I think there's a bright line here for the discovery rule of December 28.

You could, that is so obvious from the record. I think that's, that could be the ruling,

reverse remand for trial, or you could reverse remand for an evidentiary hearing.

So are you saying that those underlined statements in the medical record that that's

the game changer? Yeah, that's the game changer. And if we look at the testimony here on 108,

down at the bottom, she, after December 28, there was another appointment scheduled,

she canceled it because it was talk of revisionary surgery in December 28,

and the X-ray showed the overlap of the toes. But that was the game changer.

When did she see the medical record? I mean, those are statements in the medical record.

That's recording what took place at the appointment. And this is a contemporaneously

recorded, you know, he's making his notes right away. Three plus years later, she's asked testimony,

you know, when did you know this? When did you have this? When did you have that?

She said, well, I think there's waffling there, but this is the, this is the

contemporaneously documented what took place on the appointment.

And the trial court had that? The trial court had that?

Oh, yes, yes, yes. It had all the records, the operative notes,

plus the notes from the six post-operative appointments.

Can I just ask you to clarify we received this pleading from you yesterday?

Yes.

Is this supplemental to what you've been arguing this morning? Or what's the importance

of that? It puts a context on these two pages. The record cites two pages, 108, 109.

I go back to 104 to 110. It puts the context of 108, 109. She's clearly talking about December 28th.

Thank you, Attorney Murphy. Attorney Pygmetelli.

Yes, sure. Thank you. Please, the court. The name is Adam Pygmetelli,

representative of Helen, Kevin Sousa, and with his counsel table, it's Attorney Rosemary Jolley

representing the co-defendants, co-appellees, and I'll be the one arguing for both of us today.

We take the position there is no game changer. The court should affirm

this case. It's clear from other parts of plaintiff's testimony that she understood,

just as Donovan raised during the argument, that she understood, first understood something

was done incorrectly during the surgery as soon as she put weight on her foot.

And the exchange has occurred over the course of a few pages, pages 141 to 143 over a transcript.

So I gather you don't agree that December 28th is the operative date. Is that correct?

Don't agree with that based on our own testimony where she said around about mid-Dovember 2017

is when she recognized something about the surgery had been done incorrectly.

Let's go with, walk me through the theory of recovery for unnecessary surgery.

When do you say she should have known that the surgery was not necessary?

Well, I don't believe you should split out whether she knew, when she knew surgery was

unnecessary, such as like an informed consent type of discussion versus a medical practice argument.

Walk me through that. You're just saying you can't separate them?

I don't think you separate them. And I cited the case of Sutleyville,

where it doesn't really matter whether the plaintiff has discovered, under the discovery

rule, the actual legal theories to be asserted in court, like cause of action.

What matters in the discovery rule is that the plaintiff recognized an injury

and that the plaintiff recognized that injury had a proximate cause up to an event.

And that's what she testified to at those pages, pages 141 to 143.

Why isn't the January visit the operative date when she has conclusive knowledge at that point

of both the unnecessary surgery and the misplaced screw?

Well, I will say just, I don't want anybody to assume that we're agreeing with

the misdiagnosis claim or the misplaced screw claim.

Right, understood.

But January, that would be certainty in her mind.

Certainty is not required by the discovery rule in New Hampshire.

So there's no dispute that the discovery rule was pled and it's being applied?

There's no, well that was the point of the underlying summer judgment proceedings.

We said though, well the event occurred more than three years ago, the surgery,

October 16, 2017, so it was not filed until December 21, 2017.

So therefore, more than three years, then it falls to the plaintiff to assert the

discovery rule, which was asserted.

It's asserted because Judge Delter doesn't mention it at all in this order.

The discovery rule itself.

Well, I mean, I think it's all part and parcel of the decision and the references

to the testimony itself that she had discovered.

An injury, a misalignment of her toe, her ongoing pain, and her testimony was not,

I believe that this was normal post-operative complications.

That was not what she testified to.

She testified that something was done incorrectly, agreeing with my question.

Sure, I, but she agreed with them and it wasn't just one question,

it was over the course of those three pages.

So do you agree with Mr. Murphy that we don't have to make some landmark decision

here?

We don't have to address continuous treatment rule or fraudulent concealment.

This is just a sort of standard, normal, discovery rule issue.

This falls right within the termination of the discovery rule.

Knowing or being reasonably aware more than three years before filing suit,

will be injury and the proximate cause, a surgery.

And do you agree with Mr. Murphy that jump ball goes to the plaintiff?

No, I don't agree with that.

I think I agree with the standard as set forth.

All facts are construed in the light most favorable to the plaintiff.

But in this case, there was no dispute.

There is no dispute in fact.

When you look back to the summary judgment,

pleading the combined statement of material facts, which was combined.

And there is no dispute as to her testimony and there's no dispute as to her

interrogatory answers.

There's no dispute as to her conduct in response to her testimony.

It wasn't just that she believed in mid-November 2017

that she'd been injured as a result of surgery.

She took 39 photos in October and November 2017.

She questioned Dr. Sousa at the visits.

It wasn't just a December 28 visit where there was an exchange of questions.

Why am I having this pain?

That was at every post-op visit is what she has testified to.

But how is a patient supposed to know the difference between normal post-op pain

and pain that is attributable to some sort of alleged malpractice?

Well, that's a good question.

In this case, she did know.

She testified to her knowledge.

I understand.

If you were to look, and I know continuous treatment doctrine,

it doesn't appear to be asserted any longer.

If you look at the varying standards between

the New Hampshire discovery rule and the continuous treatment doctrine,

as it's adopted by the par case in Massachusetts,

there's a different standard to terminate the continuous treatment doctrine,

which is actual knowledge of negligence.

Now, there's no argument that she...

There's no argument either way on the continuous treatment doctrine.

And so we're not stuck with trying to demonstrate

that she had actual knowledge of negligence,

that the court were inclined to adopt that doctrine.

Here, we're just adopting a doctrine of what's in RSA 508-4,

which is knowledge of the injury, and she claims she had that knowledge,

and the relationship to the surgery.

The surgery had just occurred, and the toe was visibly off in her opinion.

And so I believe that she did have knowledge to meet the discovery rule standard.

So your argument isn't even that she should have known.

Your argument is she did know.

Right, based on her own testimony.

But need not demonstrate that elevated standard,

as in the par case in Massachusetts,

unless the court were to adopt the continuous treatment doctrine,

which is no longer being asserted.

Even if the court were to adopt it,

I don't believe that the actual knowledge of negligence standard

should be adopted by the court.

It would run counter to the discovery rule.

It's not the only way to have the continuous treatment doctrine.

It's just in Connecticut where it's aligned with the discovery rule.

As for fraudulent concealment,

I don't know what is wrong with your toe.

There's not a mountain to fraudulent concealment,

loving material fact.

And I think the best case cited on this is the lamprey decision

where the stonemason said he didn't know what was wrong

and why the stones were falling off the house.

Well, as of that time, by virtue of having called the stonemason

to try to solve the problem,

she was on notice as of that date.

And so there's no willful misleading.

There's no fraud by my client, Dr. Suze,

at any of these post-operative visits.

Thinking further about, and I'm a little,

most of my argument was going towards the continuous treatment

doctrine as the doctrine that I saw.

It's no longer being asserted and there are no questions.

I'll move on from that.

As to the informed consent claim itself,

we'll take the same position under Sully Bill

that the statute of limitations lapsed as soon as mid-November 2020 passed,

but there is no expert claiming a failure to inform consent in this case.

There's an expert claiming there is a misdiagnosis before surgery.

That's what the claim is, is disputed.

There's no argument in the, there's no expert opinion

in the disclosure that there was an informed consent lapse.

And as to our own testimony here, just on page 109,

you understood before the surgery that losing your joint,

a fusion was a real possibility.

I did.

You understood at the angle of the toe

that it could be over-corrected or under-corrected.

I understood that.

Those are the two principle informed consent failures

that could have occurred in this case

because those are the issues that came to pass after surgery.

Not only that, but if the court were to say,

well, every misdiagnosis case is an informed consent case automatically,

the informed consent process would become so voluminous to be meaningless.

It would turn into a long hypothetical.

If you have this diagnosis, here are the risks of the treatment I'm recommending.

But if I'm wrong and you have this other diagnosis,

it would go on and on to the point that it would become voluminous

and not really provide real informed consent.

And so if there are no further questions

by the court, I would just conclude.

Ken, I do have a question.

Can you just clarify, is there an informed consent claim

made in the original pleading in this case?

Or is there is?

But you're saying the failure of that claim

is the lack of any expert testimony.

That's right.

If you look at 507P, there's a requirement

for expert testimony on any of these medical issues.

A lay jury can't figure out on its own

whether there's what the normal informed consent process is,

what should be told to somebody before a fusion surgery before.

And the expert disclosure deadlines long past in the case?

Long past in the case.

Did the trial court rule on that?

I don't believe there's a ruling on that point.

It's not an appeal either.

Well, I mean, it was part of the briefs.

I mean, it was briefed.

So to the extent that there's an argument

that the informed consent claims somehow survives,

the discovered rule, which I've argued against,

it should not survive because there's an alternative means

of affirming, which is there's no expert support

for such a claim in this case.

But we can't make that decision in the first instance.

Whether there's expert support?

Well, whether that claim can proceed,

wouldn't we have to let the trial court deal with that?

Well, I think I might be misunderstanding your question.

And I apologize if I am.

I mean, we couldn't do that in the context of this appeal.

To address the informed consent claim.

Well, I think that could be addressed in this appeal.

That was, I believe, briefed, that there's no expert support

for an informed consent claim.

The argument is, as a matter of law under 507,

expert testimony is required to establish a lack of informed consent.

And there was none.

Is that essentially your position?

That's the position.

But the trial court didn't address that issue.

Not addressed by that.

This court can affirm for any reason,

even if it wasn't addressed by the trial court.

And it has been briefed.

So, but I still come back to the main argument

is that the informed consent claim

does not survive the discovered rule

based on the plaintiff's own testimony.

And it doesn't matter whether she could have thought

at the time, well, I have an informed consent claim.

I have a malpractice claim.

I have a fraud claim.

I've reached a contract claim.

It doesn't really matter.

And it's been helped.

It's not just the Sullyville case.

There's other cases as well.

It's also comes out of the Parr case

and the Rosado case out of Connecticut.

So it's nothing unusual about New Hampshire law

that you need not know

for the discovered rule to start to run.

You need not know the actual causes of action

that you plan to claim.

So with that, and I don't believe any questions hanging,

but we would request an affirmance

of the summary judgment order

based on the plaintiff's own testimony,

based on the plaintiff's own conduct and knowledge,

and none of the doctrines asserted

in the Pellet arguments should apply.

Thank you.

Thank you, Attorney Pigmentelli.

Attorney Murphy on rebuttal.

Thank you, Ron.

Again, I want to clarify.

I'm not throwing out the continuous treatment

of fraudure and concealment.

What I'm saying is they should be in play

when you're looking at discovery rule

and whether or not there was a reasonable diligence

that you should have discovered things by December 1.

Is it, are you saying there are components

of the discovery rule?

They're factors.

It's a subjective analysis, subjective factual analysis.

Was there reasonable diligence on part of the plaintiff

where she should have discovered it before,

here before December 21st?

And if you throw these things in to the mix,

she was in continuous treatment right up to December 28th.

She asked, why am I having this pain to November and so forth?

And he says, I don't know.

And I believe there's a good basis for saying he was lying

because it was obvious on the x-ray.

I'm not sure I understand your argument.

I mean, if you're not asking us to enter

into any sort of landmark ruling,

well, I think a fair statement of law

is to recognize that continuous treatment, doctrine,

would be an extension of anything this court has done before.

And it seems like you're relying exclusively

on the discovery rule and fraudulent concealment.

Is that correct?

Fair statement, but I wouldn't throw out the fact

that she's in continuous treatment.

That is part of the subjective analysis.

OK, well, the fact that she's in continuous treatment

is different than asking this court

to extend the law with respect to the continuous treatment

doctrine.

I don't think you have to go there.

And you don't have to go there for the lack of informed consent

count.

As you point out, Justice Gunderman,

that was not addressed by the initial decision,

granting summary judgment.

I filed a motion for reconsideration on that point.

Judge, you never addressed count two, the informed consent.

And there was a ruling denying my motion

to reconsideration saying, I think it's over.

What about the lack of expert testimony?

I addressed that in my brief.

There was an expert disclosure that included opinions

about informed consent.

And then I had an affidavit by my expert

that was a part of the record on summary judgment.

Dr. Wagner is part of the record here,

saying that she was never informed

that there were alternative methods that

should have been available to her.

And a fusion was not appropriate.

He says she should have been informed.

That's an affidavit, which is a small slice

of his whole expert disclosure that was done

and was not part of the summary judgment record.

It wasn't before the court because we

haven't gotten to that point yet.

But it was disclosed to the other side.

Thank you.

Thank you, counsel.
