This is case 2023-0487, state of New Hampshire versus Joshua Kendall.

Good afternoon. Good afternoon.

May I stay and reserve two minutes? Thank you. May it please the court.

My name is Ted Blodstein, and I'm here on behalf of Joshua Kendall,

and I did ask to reserve two minutes. And I will take questions at any time.

So this is a case where I'm focusing, I'm intending to focus primarily

on the ineffective assistance of counsel issues, the second and third issue in the brief.

This is a case where the adversarial process entirely broke down

from the morning of the first day of trial before opening statements through its conclusion.

And it broke down because of former counselor's ineffective assistance.

As the case is about to open, we see this pathetic scene.

It's a pathetic scene where counsel has filed a motion to continue the day before.

She hasn't even attached the Zwicker memo that forms the basis, the reasons for the motion to continue.

She arrives in court an hour after the clerk emailed her to be there,

and 10 minutes before opening statements, she can barely stand.

She's so sick and has been up all night because her husband is sick.

She says she's in pain and she's not prepared to meet the new information revealed in the Zwicker memo.

And Judge Delger gives her a roadmap for dealing with the issues in the Zwicker memo

when he denies the continuance.

He says to the prosecutor, are you able in time to show

that all these behavioral issues were not happening before the charge acts

and the conduct started after the particular acts of conduct?

And that is the standard, and even with that, Judge Delger makes clear

that I don't know if this would be admissible, but certainly the prosecution needs to put on a foundation

and we'll see where it goes.

In that context, later the same day, the most damaging hearsay and violation of Rule 4-4-B

without objection happens.

The same day, the prosecutor asks Andrew, who is the father of the child

and is the person with, you know, was in a pitched custody battle

and was successful, won the custody battle against Chelsea, the child's mother.

The prosecutor asks Andrew, when you had AH, every other weekend,

was she ever hesitant to go back to mom and Josh?

It's hard to imagine a question that would raise more red flags for a defense lawyer

than was she ever hesitant to go back to mom and Josh.

But at least that's a yes or no question, and he said yes.

And then the prosecutor said, did she ever tell you why?

Everything in this question would raise the biggest red flags that a defense lawyer can imagine.

It's hearsay, did she ever tell you, and the why is going to be about some kind of abuse.

And that's when Andrew answered, well, one of these times she said that something about

Josh had pinned mom to the floor and was hurting her and she didn't want to go back.

Andrew keeps on testifying after that sentence.

There's no objection from defense counsel who's been rebuked that very morning, as we discussed.

It doesn't ask to approach the bench.

There is no conceivable strategic reason.

This is why we're here on direct appeal.

There is no conceivable strategic reason to not object to the question,

did she ever tell you why she was hesitant to go back to Joshua Pando?

And the most common thing about the merits of our argument is that the AG in a well-written,

well-prepared brief has not identified even one speculative, hypothetical strategic reason.

Why would a lawyer not object to a question like this?

Why would a lawyer not move to strike the testimony?

This is the juncture where lawyers who are defending against IAC claims will say,

well, here's three possible strategic reasons.

And so we should go back on remand.

This is not appropriate for direct appeal.

And find out from the lawyer herself, you know, is there a reason?

Can you explain the prejudice to the defendant's case such that the convictions are called into question?

Yes. Justice Donovan, it's two things on either side of the scale.

And one side of the scale is a weak case for the prosecution,

not because of anything about this child, but because it's inherent.

It is a child sexual abuse case where there's, of course, no eyewitness, no physical evidence.

There never is in these cases.

And that makes it the type of case that is the most fraught for risk of wrongful conviction.

This court has recognized in its decisions the existence of parental alienation.

It changed a custody order in a prior case where a mother had convinced her children

that her father had abused them and it was false.

So it's a case, the backdrop of the case presents danger for wrongful conviction.

And if you look at the closing argument, the prosecutor says to the jury,

now we don't have to corroborate anything.

The law says we don't have to corroborate the child's testimony, but we did.

We did corroborate it by introducing all this evidence of concerning behaviors of the child

that corroborate for you that this child was abused.

So it was important enough for the prosecutor to put in a, I think it's a seven-page closing argument

and to include that argument.

But that's unrelated to the assault that AH disclosed.

You're talking about the behavioral evidence that came in.

Exactly, but I can't say it's unrelated because the whole problem, as Judge Delverson in a trial,

the problem with this type of testimony is, okay, let's assume that the family members

who are on one side of the custody battle are telling the truth.

Let's assume that the child has exited these behaviors.

What does it mean?

Okay, what does it mean that the child has been wrenched from one family household

to another is saying, is engaging in problematic sexualized behavior?

And so all this stuff is intertwined because the jury, any jury in a case like this would be wondering,

where's mom? This is strange.

The custodial, I mean, I'm not custodial, but the mother, biological mother of the child

who lost custody at that moment when the child was three, where is she?

She is completely absent from this jury trial.

And so that makes all the information more prejudicial because the jury is learning hearsay

and observations about the child's behaviors and hearsay about the assault of the mother.

And then where is their speculation to go when they also notice that neither side called mom?

Mom did not testify in the trial of her own daughter's alleged sexual abuse.

And it invites them to speculate that, well, maybe mom's not here because Mr. Cantal beat her up,

you know, just like the child told her dad.

Maybe mom's not here because all these behavioral changes did happen

and they were caused by sexual abuse.

So this is a trial where you have an inherently weak case, although these cases result in convictions,

they're just inherently weak compared to, you know, a burglar who's caught in the act or something like that.

You have testimony that never should come in and serve to corroborate,

and that's the behavioral evidence which they never showed, a foundation to show that the behaviors

were probably caused by sexual abuse by Mr. Cantal.

Well, didn't he testify that these behaviors occurred after she disclosed the abuse?

Mr. Cantal?

Yeah.

I mean, Mr. Cantal testified that he was innocent and he was found guilty.

I'm sorry.

The biological father.

Andrew.

Yeah.

Say the question again now.

Didn't Andrew testify that these behaviors occurred after she disclosed the sexual assaults?

That's what the state argued.

She didn't verbally disclose a sexual assault.

You know, what caused the custody shift was according to Andrew, who again is at the center of the custody battle

and has a motive, but according to Andrew, he was spending time with AH and she kissed him and actually fresh kissed him.

And that was obviously, you know, if that's true, there'll be a horrifying event for a dad of a young child

of any gender and you'd want to figure out what's going on.

That's what then led to verbal disclosures.

But you don't have a time, you don't have a time point of this is when the abuse supposedly happened

and then the behaviors start contemporaneously with that.

Now, I understand that you have other explanations for the behaviors, right?

Because her custody has been changed.

All the witnesses who can testify about her are saying that behaviors are after the custody changed.

So maybe, you know, bedwetting, maybe that's just an understandable, innocent fact,

but all the sexualized stuff, the jury could have only viewed it the way the prosecutor argued it,

that it corroborates the sexual abuse.

And if it didn't happen, Mama would be here.

Mama would be here in court to say, hey, you know, she didn't engage in any of those behaviors

and no abuse happened.

Why should this ineffective assistance claim come here in the first instance

rather than be with factual development at the trial court and let the trial judge sort it out?

Well, we just think it fits in with the Thompson case precedent.

We know where the child, where multiple witnesses in the jury trial provided hearsay that the child was abused.

The child told me this, the child told me that,

and then the child did not actually provide incriminating testimony and the jury convicted anyways.

And that was the lead case where you determined that there is the possibility of an ineffective claim on appeal.

But isn't that easily distinguishable since the arguably improper testimony wasn't about the abuse,

but it was about this other behavior that happened after the disclosure?

Well, it's about the other behavior and it's about the idea that Mr. Kandall physically was violent towards

the child's mother in the child's presence and the child thought that he was mean and was afraid of him.

But I think that I would acknowledge it's not as overwhelmingly strong a case as one where people put in hearsay

and the child didn't testify as to any abuse.

Obviously, that's the most well-known precedent for a reason.

But we do think that our case is based, being here on direct appeals based on the fact that even the AG's office

is able to come up with speculative hypothetical reasons why a lawyer would remain silent and not object to this testimony.

And that shows us that it is appropriate for direct appeal.

And I do want to ask the lawyer why the lawyer made the decisions that she made.

Should someone ask that?

Yes.

I mean, isn't that what usually what happens?

If you determine that this is not right for review and direct appeal, then that's exactly will happen.

But obviously, that's not part of the direct appeal process.

I just can, but I can't put it either.

That might be the better route.

That's where we would head next.

But you know, the doctrine exists and is very costly and very time-consuming for an attained,

imprisoned person to litigate a post-conviction claim.

So if it is appropriate for direct appeal, we are asking the court to hear it now and decide now.

If it's appropriate.

If the court thinks that there's hypothetical reasons that are rational to allow the custodial father,

who's one custody, to testify that the child told me that there's domestic violence in the household.

If this court believes there's a rational hypothetical reason to do that, then I can't win on direct appeal.

I have to go on to post-conviction.

But if it fits, and we think it does, then this court does have a responsibility to evaluate it on direct appeal.

You describe the first day of trial in the opening moments.

Does the failure to attach the Zwicker memo, the content of the Zwicker memo and whether it contains any new information or not,

is that part of the IAC calculus or is it just sort of frame setting?

No, it is frame setting. It illustrates the point I made in the beginning that when you read this two-day transcript,

it's just a case of the adversarial process breaking down.

There's other things that I can't point to individually.

For example, the entire closing argument by defense counsel is two pages and five lines wrong.

That's not a basis for IAC, but I think it does fit into the category we're talking about now,

which is just there's signs in this transcript that something went dreadfully wrong in this case.

Thank you very much. You reserved two minutes.

Dr. Nikanya?

Good afternoon, your honor.

May it please the court.

I'm going for the state of New Hampshire.

I'm going to spend most of my time on the ineffective assistance issue because that's where we've been,

but I'm happy to take questions about any issue at any time.

Starting at the point that the AG's office made no attempt to speculate as to a reasonable basis for defense counsel's behavior,

I think Justice Bassett said it exactly how I wanted to say it.

I think those questions are best answered by defense counsel in a witness box rather than me speculating from behind this podium.

So I didn't do that in the brief.

But if asked to, I can think of at least one reason why counsel may not have objected to those particular pieces of testimony.

And I also asked this court to think about those omissions of objections against the backdrop of the fact that counsel did actively object throughout trial.

She ably cross-examined people, she gave an opening statement and a closing statement.

We don't know why she didn't object to these pieces of testimony,

but the theory going into trial was that you have Andrew, Kathleen and Andrew's sister Sarah,

this family that doesn't like Chelsea, the defendant and their family.

And so they're contriving a plan to take the victim, take custody away from Chelsea and get rid of the defendant.

So I could see a defense attorney saying in closing argument, letting this information come in,

I'm not aware of anything in discovery that said AAH was afraid of the defendant or that he was abusive to mom or anything like that.

You could stand up in front of the jury and say, this case has been an embellishment since its inception.

And here the story grew larger right in front of you.

There is no evidence that the defendant was ever violent to mom.

There is no evidence that AAH was afraid of the defendant aside from these people who are contriving a story coming in to say that to you.

And was that the best method to go about it?

I don't know.

That's just complete speculation, but it's one reasonable way a defense attorney could sit there and say, this could be playing right into my hand.

Let me see how it develops.

Did AAH ever corroborate that statement that she made to her father about witnessing the assault?

About witnessing the assault?

Witnessing the assault on his mother, on her mother.

Did AAH ever testify to that at trial?

Right.

Was that information to investigators?

I don't know anywhere in the record that she did, Your Honor.

Which is why I go back to a defense attorney maybe could make use of that and say, this is the first anybody's hearing of this.

This is growing right in front of your eyes.

These people are lying.

Which was the theory of defense to begin with.

Attorney Lawson also mentioned corroboration that the changes in behavior provide significant corroboration.

I would make a couple of points to that.

First, the defendant's own testimony corroborated AAH's account to at least an extent.

He fully admitted that he showered with her completely naked.

That was corroborated by him.

Further, there were behavioral changes disclosed to defense counsel in discovery in the DCYF records.

There was evidence that after the allegations were leveled that AAH began to display inappropriate sexualized behavior

in the way of simulating sex with Barbie dolls and humping teddy bears.

The state would suggest that those behavioral changes are much more prejudicial

and much more difficult to explain away than something like bed-wetting or sleepwalking.

As Attorney Lawson pointed out, three-year-olds, four-year-olds, children wet the bed sometimes.

Those might be able to be explained away in a way that sexual behaviors that were disclosed were not.

So defense counsel was on notice that there would be evidence of behavioral changes.

Did the state provide the foundational evidence to admit that, those babies?

So I want to be clear about what actually came in.

When I was reviewing the transcripts, I didn't see the Barbie dolls or the teddy bears actually come in.

But yes, the state did lay a foundation for the evidence of behavioral changes.

That evidence stayed relatively general in my read of the transcripts,

aside from a mention of sleepwalking and bed-wetting.

But the defendant in his brief on page 9 cites to where Andrew himself testified that these behaviors weren't occurring

when I was having her every other weekend, and then they did start occurring when I had full custody.

The question that the prosecutor posed was, since you have obtained full custody,

have you noticed these behaviors cropping up?

So I do believe that that provided a foundation.

But then other testimony did as well, Kathleen and Sarah.

They may not have said it quite so directly.

But the questions were, when you first met A.H. when she came back to New Hampshire, what was she like?

And the descriptions are happy, typical kid, playful, loved, should be outside.

And then the questions are, and over time, how did that change?

Well, she began to pull in and play with her hair, develop nervous ticks when she talked about the defendant.

So there was an inadequate foundation laid for the testimony of behavioral changes.

And even if a court could have found that it was not an adequate foundation,

it was not so inadequate that is indisputable from the base of this record

that not objecting to that overcame counsel's presumption of confidence.

This court has been very clear that it is the extraordinary rare case

where the presumption of counsel's confidence and prejudice can be demonstrated

from just the face of the cold trial record without any further factual development.

The state is not saying that there's no way there's ineffective assistance in this case.

The state is saying we don't know. We would have to speculate.

We don't know why counsel did what she did.

So in the Thompson case, this is the third category of claims.

This is a hybrid claim, where we can see from the record very easily

that counsel did not object to the pieces of testimony that the defendant now argues

she should have, but we don't know why, and we're just left to speculate on that.

And there are reasonable reasons that you can get to through speculation,

and they maybe can be even further informed than I just tried to articulate them

through somebody who was living this in real time and making the decisions in real time.

If the court has no other questions on the ineffective assistance...

Actually, let me move forward.

If the court does choose to address the claims,

the state submits that that is not the best in the interest of justice

because if the court does not agree with the defense counsel,

he will not be able to develop that factual record that I think he,

the court system justice, is entitled to adequately adjudicate these claims.

But on the face of this record, the state submits that the defense counsel

has not met his burden overcoming the presumption of counsel's competency.

Whether or not AH was afraid of the defendant,

that's one of the pieces of testimony that defense argues

should have been objected to on hearsay.

And I would agree that appears to be a relatively strong hearsay objection,

but I don't think it's a foregone conclusion that it would have been sustained.

I think somebody could argue that whether or not she was actually afraid

of the defendant was immaterial to that answer.

What the state was trying to elicit is the why,

for why did sometimes AH not want to go back to her mom?

If the answer was she was just having so much fun at dad's house

she didn't want to go anywhere, then that was an irrelevant answer,

not helpful at all.

So it was elicited just to...

The reason she didn't want to go back was the defendant.

That's what it was seeking to elicit.

Now, I'm not saying I necessarily agree with that,

but I can see the argument such that I don't think it's a foregone conclusion

that a hearsay objection would have been sustained.

But I assume the purpose of the states asking that question would be

she didn't want to go back because she was being abused by her stepdad

or by the defendant, not that the defendant was violent.

Because it's irrelevant whether it was violent to the charges crime,

to the charges that he was confronting.

Can you say the beginning part again, Justice Stoneman?

I'm assuming the state would want to introduce that evidence

to establish that she was afraid of the defendant because of the abuse,

not because of violence.

I don't know that that's true, Your Honor,

but even if that's what the state was trying to do,

that certainly is not what the answer did.

Andrew did not say yes.

She told me she was afraid to go back to the defendant

because when she went back to the defendant, he sexually assaulted her.

So that is not what happened here.

So the question's not relevant.

Why age was afraid to go home?

Why she was hesitant to go home, yes.

I think that is relevant, Your Honor, and the why being...

She could have just said, I don't like the defendant.

That's where I'm kind of saying it's not really...

It wasn't for the purpose of showing that she's actually afraid of him.

It could have been I don't like him. It could have been anything like that.

But yes, it does allow the jury to start inferring that,

well, if you don't want to go home because of him,

that makes it more likely that he did something to you

to make you not want to be there.

And yes, it does allow for that inferential chain to start rolling.

But I don't think that is impermissible.

We went over the lack of foundation issue.

I don't think that this is indisputably ineffective on the foundation issue.

Even if Council had objected to that, foundation is relatively easy to cure.

The state would have asked more foundational questions.

So I don't think the defendant can over...

Excuse me, chill prejudice on that issue.

And if the court does not have other questions on the ineffective assistance issue,

I will quickly address the other two issues.

On the motion to continue issue, as this court is aware and has long recognized,

trial courts are in the best position to determine whether a continuance is necessary.

And so when this court reviews a trial court's order on a motion to continue,

it does so with deference.

And in this case, the defendant had been indicted over two years before trial was set to begin.

And the trial had been continued several times in that span.

And then as Attorney Wildstein explained, Defense Council submitted a motion on the eve of trial

looking to exclude evidence or to continue trial based on a swicker memo

provided to Defense Council on the same day.

And then Defense Council arrived just as trial was set to begin to argue that motion

and left the court with no ability to evaluate the merits before she started arguing it.

And on the other hand, the state expressly disclaimed any intent

to use the vast majority of what was in that memo because it was inadmissible.

The state said that it might use the bedwetting, the sleepwalking,

A.H. kissing her cousins, her young cousins' buttocks

and inappropriate sexualized behaviors.

And for the reasons I've already explained, the DCYF records containing information

of Barbie doll-humping or simulating sex and teddy bear-humping,

these disclosures of behavioral changes were just new flavors of an old product.

Defense Council was aware that evidence of behavioral changes were likely to come in.

And so under those circumstances, it was most appropriate and certainly reasonable

for the trial court to deny the motion to continue,

but to not rule it all on the evidence until the court could see how it was going to be developed

and how it would come in.

And finally, on the in-camera review issue, your honor,

this is an issue as you are aware comes up a lot and this record is unique

in that the trial court in this case had guidance from Defense Council.

Stated that it had reviewed the records twice, that the records were not particularly voluminous

and it still found nothing.

I cannot think of any way this could be conceived of as unreasonable.

And when a trial court decides to disclose information after in-camera review,

that is a decision that goes to the management of discovery

and it is reviewed for an unsustainable exercise of discretion.

It cannot be that defendants can just come into this court,

not meet that burden, not even try to meet that burden,

and just ask this court to conduct a de novo review of the appellate records.

The court procedure here was reasonable.

The order is reasonable as far as I can tell without reviewing the records myself.

And unless the defense shows that trial, excuse me,

the trial court's order was somehow unreasonable or untenable,

they should not be granted de novo review of the victims' confidential records on appeal.

If the court has no further questions, the state rests on its pavers.

Thank you, Your Honor.

So very briefly, and to answer one of your questions,

I can't remember which one of you,

but A.H. never testified that there was acts of domestic violence

by Mr. Kandall against her mother.

She testified that she barely remembered that time of her life.

She testified that she couldn't remember what the apartment that they lived in looked like.

She testified that she couldn't remember what Mr. Kandall,

who had been her father for three years, looked like

and she did not identify him during the trial.

She did not testify to any of the behavioral changes

and tried to make her own connection.

You know, like, yeah, I was doing weird things back then

and I think it's because of Mr. Kandall.

No. The family members who fought the custody battle

carried all the water for these issues.

They're the ones who introduced rank hearsay

that Mr. Kandall beat up her mother

or however you want to characterize that episode.

A very terrifying thing for a three-year-old.

Rank hearsay that no defense lawyer, responsible defense lawyer,

would ever say, well, now I can say that he exaggerated

and made up something new. Let's let this come in.

No. No competent defense lawyer would ever take that position

that in a sexual abuse case it would be a good idea

to let the father say that there was actually domestic violence, too,

according to the young child.

This is a case that should be reversed.

It was a miscarriage of justice.

Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, counsel. He's submitted.
