This is case 2023, 0617, Andover Consulting Group, Inc., versus Goffstown Harvest Christian Church at all.

Good morning, Justices. My name is Michael Scott, and I am here representing the Apollon Tebow Corporation of New England,

which is the indemnitor of the principal defendant, Goffstown Harvest Christian Church.

And my client was also the ultimate purchaser of the real estate that's the subject of this dispute.

The question presented in this case is whether Goffstown Harvest Christian Church was obligated by a February 11, 2016 purchase agreement

to sell a parcel of commercial real estate to Andover Consulting Group.

Despite the passage of almost five years' time, the lower court answered yes to this question,

that, quote, the agreement is clear that the closing will occur 60 days after the end of the permitting period,

and that, quote, because the agreement provided a concrete timeframe when the closing would happen,

the agreement was definite enough to be enforceable, close quote. That's the lower court's finding.

That finding, however, is not supported by the weight of evidence at trial,

and is based on an inaccurate reading and interpretation of the length of the contract.

Should we interpret the contract to be ambiguous then?

Should we interpret the contract to be ambiguous as to the deadline for the permitting?

Yes, I was going to argue that, Justice Donovan, I was.

But before we even get to that juncture,

because in order to enforce the contract, the term is being enforced has to be definite.

So that's why I'm arguing right now, at least with regard to the definiteness,

because the agreement actually states, quote, within 60 days of the expiration of the due diligence and permitting periods.

And the agreement expressly defines the due diligence period as 90 days plus a 60-day extension

if Andover had chosen to exercise that option, which it did.

However, the agreement failed to define the permitting period in terms of days, weeks, months, or years,

nor did the agreement specify whether the due diligence and permitting periods ran concurrently or consecutively.

But isn't it common that a purchase and sales agreement would have a contingency

for permitting and approval without a specific timeframe?

But in this case it didn't. It had no contingency with respect to permitting.

Well, wouldn't you infer that that's a contingency, that the closing happens after the permitting occurs?

You don't call that a contingency?

No, but that would bring into the argument that Justice Donovan was indicating that that would be an ambiguity.

Well, couldn't the parties have negotiated, couldn't there have been a,

well, you've got a year to do the permitting or you've got two years, but that didn't happen

and wouldn't we be inserting a term into the contract that isn't there?

Well, the church just finally construed that the due diligence period and the permitting period ran concurrently

because during the course of this there were representations made by Andover to them

that the closing would take place within six months to a year.

And the due diligence period had a hard deadline of 210 days,

so that would fall in line in giving the church an expectation.

This thing would have closed within six months to a year, particularly since the church had already been working

to develop this property and supplied Andover with all its engineering data.

Right.

But the church was attempting to get permitting for over two years.

Wasn't that the case before they entered this contract?

Correct.

And it faced the same roadblock that the Andover was aware of at the time it signed the purchase of the sale permit

and it wouldn't be reasonable then for the church to expect the Andover consulting to get those permits within a year

without a five-year start because the church had already obtained all the data

and Andover knew exactly where it stood.

It knew where its obstacles were, supposedly.

But if the church believed that the closing would happen in a year,

why would they have continued to accept the property tax payments during the entire life of the case as we have it?

Well, the church was paying the mortgage over the five years

and was struggling terribly with the taxes being paid by Andover

because it had to do that in order to get the extension of the due diligence timeframe.

So it agreed to pay those taxes once it obtained the 60-day extension of the due diligence period.

So that's an accommodation to them and it continued.

So if I'm understanding, Justice Counten, if I'm understanding your question, why did it continue like this?

So the answer to that is the church didn't have a whole lot of options out there, but also it's a church.

It had entertained legal action with the town

and it seems through the record in this case didn't want to entertain additional legal action

which had been very expensive to the church in the past.

But at some point after COVID, when the church had been struggling

to try to pay that mortgage on that property for all that time

and also when donations were down because of the COVID situation,

the church had reached a point of financial distress

and the closing had not taken place.

In fact, there had not even been an incitable hearing for almost four years.

So that was when the court, that was when the church

felt that it was time to move on.

There hadn't been what for four years? I didn't hear it.

There hadn't been what for four years?

A site hearing.

A site what?

A site hearing for the town of Goxtown.

They hadn't yet had the site hearing after four years.

Didn't they have a planning board meeting in December of 2020

that then was postponed to January of 2021 because of the snowstorm?

That's almost four years after the person's death.

But that was a scheduled hearing and the potential purchaser

had been going through a process that whole time, had he not?

They had been going through a process, but as I pointed out to the court,

they even realized that at some point it was futile.

They were not going to get the access easement easily

and they had to close the Kennedy Road downtown vote.

So at some juncture, after a contentious meeting in June of 2020

with the church, the Andover submitted to the church

what we claim is a repeal, a coward agreement

which we claim is a repeal of the original agreement.

They basically said at that point, which appeared to be a tacit admission,

they could not get site approval within any reasonable period of time,

that they purchased the property without getting site approval,

provided the church took a offset value,

the payoff of its mortgage as the purchase price,

that they would get an additional 5% interest in the future development

which could be bought back by Andover for $75,000.

And the position that the church takes on this

is that at that point it became clear to the church

that this was just not going to happen.

Did the church have to wait forever?

But now they even had telegraphed them by Andover

that Andover had little faith it would have

and maybe in seven years after that.

So they proposed what the church looked at

as a repudiation of the original agreement.

Well, it seems if they thought it was truly a repudiation,

they would have stopped accepting the property tax payments.

Well, that paper was a consideration separate

from the overall consideration of the contract

and just as passed it.

It was an accommodation to allow them to extend

the due diligence period.

The fact that it paid taxes, that might,

what they may have felt was kind of an affordable

to stretch the church out and cause extreme financial harm

by not closing on the property when it became clear

that they were not going to be able to do it.

There were steps available to Andover.

They submitted a second indent to the original agreement

that said, hey, you pay 50 grand, we'll pay 50 grand,

and then we'll pay the price that my client

was looking for for that easement.

Easily mitigated their damages, Your Honor,

if they had simply done that and they didn't do it.

Well, you're assuming the church would have agreed

to pay the $50,000.

They signed the agreement.

They did.

They signed the indent.

Andover didn't follow through with it.

It became apparent to the church that Andover

didn't want to advance any money towards that Tebow dispute.

And the church could have a way of litigation

between Tebow and Andover, or the church in Andover,

or whether or not the mechanic road closed

because that had to be closed before this could occur.

The church could have waited this forever.

They were struggling financially.

Do you agree the trial court at page 8 of its order

says that the question here was five years reasonable

and that it's a fact-intensive inquiry

and that it embarks on a very fact-intensive inquiry.

Do you agree that that was the issue before the court

and that it's fact-intensive inquiry?

But the trial court didn't really cite

the whole language of Johnson versus Corsac

because that language says that if time is not

the absence in a person's settlement,

a party will have a reasonable period of time

after the specific closing date in which to perform

its obligations under the contract.

The delay, however, cannot be willful

or cause harm to the other party.

And in this case, the record is replete with testimony

and evidence that the church was being harmed.

Every day it had to pay interest

on a $250,000 mortgage on the property.

It was struggling.

It wasn't receiving donations,

as many donations during the court timeframe

and at that point it became critical.

Do you agree that as a factual matter

there was a two-year delay

in getting the alteration of terrain permit

and that that was largely attributable

to Mr. Tebow not providing his signature?

I understand that, Your Honor.

That was not the principle roadblock to this.

The development couldn't have gone ahead

without alteration of terrain.

Yes, it was not the principle roadblock.

The roadblock was they needed access to the subdivision

which they could not get

and there were so many hurdles

they would have to climb to get it

and a task of acknowledgement by them

when they submitted that subsequent offer

and actually repeated the offer

after the contentious meeting in June of 2020

with the church.

They really did nothing to block my client

from purchasing the property.

They didn't take any extra interest.

It could be viewed quite easily

that at that point they had decided

to go in a different direction.

But the direction should have been

to come to the trial court

and try to recover all of these expenses,

many of which were not foreseeable by the church.

There's no way the church

could see these consequential damages

that they were claiming

or the damages that they claimed were related to the breach.

All these damages at the court,

the local court of warden had to be foreseeable.

They had to be foreseeable.

And there's no way that the

there could be foreseen

that there were these multiple exchanges of agreements

between unsuccessfully,

between Andover and Tebow,

nor the exposing of Kennedy Road,

nor the court title action,

nor any of these things.

And these are what most of the expenses

that were awarded to Andover were generated from.

You don't challenge that those expenses

were actually incurred.

No, we don't challenge they were incurred.

We don't.

But we're concerned that at the end

the only goal of Andover was

to have this type of lawsuit

to recover his expenses

rather than to proceed with the contract

and pretend to proceed with it.

It's clear that there were two different

in answer to your question,

Justice Donovan.

There were two interpretations

of that transfer of title language.

The transaction interpreted

that the diligence period

and the priority period

ran concurrently,

which would be 200 days

or the six months to a year

closing was bandied about by the parties.

But Andover believed

and made it quite clear

that in their opinion

the closing could take place

at any time in the future

subject to their

and of course their subjective

beliefs when they were still

pursuing the permits diligently.

And it was

that was the two divergent interpretations

of that transfer of title division.

That's an ambiguity

and this court has the right to know

to look at that because the local court

said there was no ambiguity.

Thank you.

Scott, you reserved two minutes to turn to Kennedy.

Thank you.

Thank you, Justices.

My name is Donald Kennedy.

I represent Andover

and the plaintiff

and possibly and all those other

things.

We're here

and I'll talk to about our appeal first

is that our appeal is that

we were entitled to consequential damages

and Judge Anderson are in a pain

but he used the wrong

standard and his

motion to reconsider which I brought before the court

he used the word that it had

to be conclusively shown

and that's not the standard and

although he talks about

a lot of times

you know using the words with regards

to

does not require absolute certainty

his whole mindset was

it had to be conclusively shown

and that's not the standard

when you're awarding consequential damages.

So it's a question of law

because factually he makes

findings of facts and he can

find those facts that he finds

and the evidence is what the evidence is.

The key fact here was

the discontinuation of the town road

that the town

meeting was going to have to vote on

and we were almost there

and if you looked at the road

and you were familiar with Gostown

it's a road to nowhere.

You're right

but it's more likely than not

that was going to be discontinued.

How do you know that?

I mean to me it's been a lot of town meetings

and they go off the rails all the time.

5-0

the town clerk testified

that it was going to be

it was just a

clean up the matter I think

the word she used and all that.

It was just the town

the person in charge of the buildings

or the town planning clerk

whoever that might have been

was meticulous and he just wanted all the things.

Actually I don't think you don't need

to have a town meeting to do it

but that's not before the court

at this point in time.

What is the right standard?

What is the correct standard?

Prove

by a preponderance of the evidence

that it's reasonably certain

to result.

How could the court be

reasonably certain that the town meeting

would approve the discontinuance

of the road?

Well the court can be reasonably certain

because the selectmen were supported

nothing is guaranteed

nobody knows but it's more likely than not

which is what the barter is

that it was going to be discontinued

it's a road that didn't cause any issues

it's a road that had no harm

it was just it was an old road

actually 114 came across

the evidence says

in Kennedy Road years ago

back towards on this land and down and out

across 114.

So we have to be reasonably certain

that the voters of the town

by a majority vote would have voted

to discontinue that road.

That's what

that's what the standard is

that's not the standard

that the judge used.

The judge used the standard conclusively

and that's the long standard to use.

You're suggesting that we apply

the standard that you're suggesting

and make a decision as a matter of law

based on the facts already found?

You can do that.

I would recommend it back to the child court

to apply the correct standard.

You can get it back to the child court

and the child court can make a decision

one of the one that wants

to have further hearings or two

okay that's what the supreme court says

give it to me I'll look at the transcript

on the issue in order because it's not

a story right? It's for a judge in the transcripts

you know the transcripts there for anything

so it would be great if the court

decided to do that. I don't think the court

would want to step into that position

of making that type of judgment

for the trial court which is basically

a finding of fact as to

how much consequential damages would be

but I think it's

going to have to be if the court finds Roz

says fine you said conclusively judge

that's not the standard

here's the standard use that standard

now ideally I'd like to be in front of another judge

because this judge

has already ruled against me

and he says fine I'll

I'll attend that standard I will

you know okay that's standing

you still don't win the reasonable

foreseeable based on facts before me

and so it's kind of a judge

and Judge Anderson is a great judge

he writes great opinions

he's very lucky to have him

in the superior court but

he only has I don't know the biases

of the appropriate world but he always has

an idea or preconceived notion

as to what should happen

so what's the I'm just trying

to think this through if it goes back

to the trial court what is the

probative evidence that could

be offered on whether or not it

is going to pass do you bring in

like everybody in the town and have them vote

or how do you do it

the evidence we have could be

sufficient maybe the evidence

will change and it will be oh yeah

you don't need a town vote because

evidence will be presented because there are towns

that don't need town votes which

I was talking to him where he goes

you didn't get a town vote for that no they just did it

so there are additional facts

that could be brought before the court

and with three guys

and we'd be in town to bring additional facts

before the court with three guys to that

and it would be you know

we accept the fact that there was

a breach of contract there was no

repudiation but the issue with three guys

to whether consequential damages are

going to be awarded will be before

the

for the court to reconsider

a remand consistent with this opinion

generally I think the way it would read

so that's

what we're looking for the court to do with three guys

to this matter

what about the repudiation argument

yeah well the repudiation argument

there was no repudiation

there was a clear contract

do you think about it

the

I think I had it down

the exhibit that you talked about

with three guys to the $50,000 agreement

that was trying to work with Mr. Tebow

or Tebow Construction Corporation said hey

and I think it's a

I have it written down here

exhibit

21 page 33

which basically talks about the idea is

hey maybe we can get Tebow on board with this

if we can get Tebow on board with this

then you pay $50 I pay $50

and we go forward

with the contract as it is

there was clearly a richer contract

that's for sure and the reason I would say that

is if you look

at the case laws

and that are there

the parties

intended

they knew this was going to take a long time

this court said

two years it was close to four or five years

that

John Sack was going forward

with regards to this and he couldn't do it

and then what happened was

it just sat on the market and he was trying to sell it

and trying to sell it at $400,000

and it stayed there for

you know

two years and didn't sell then my client

came in and said this is what we're going to do

but it's going to take a lot of time and there was discussions

amongst them and the statement of facts

gives you many transcripts

and the court says they knew what they were getting into

is the time unlimited if it took 10 years

or 20 years

and that's a good question

but the idea is

when he continued to perform

under the contract he being

John Sack about the church

or Harvest is what the court refers to

but at some point wouldn't the church

have the right to say hey

we've been at this now for eight years

the contract's no good

and they didn't do that

and they continued to accept the payments

so I first saw my client

he was telling me this

and I said well

I keep on accepting my payments

so they are participating

and performing under the contract

and that was fine

it wasn't just an ally

this is going to take some time

and so as a result of this taking time

it's going to

the pastor

wanted to

get that money

from he said well pay this

and as his wife said who was the one who did

the works they were losing money

before on the property they could not sell

now they're losing less money

because we're paying the taxes

they had this part of the $200,000

mortgage that was sitting there

recruiting interest and they had to pay the taxes on it

opposing counsel says that

monthly payment was

consideration for another

side deal not the underlying

it's in the agreement if you look at the agreement

right in the agreement that they're going to be paying

after

this side deal it's in the original agreement

that they signed that was the contract

where they intended and the reason why they did it

was because

it was going to take time

and as a result of taking time

they said well let us try to help you out a bit

and we'll continue to pay the taxes

because it was going to take time

it's in the original agreement

wherever that might be

so

because that was one of the negotiating things

actually

when Ryan Billig is testified on behalf

of the end over

he gave the

church

he gave the church the contract

and there were three changes

I think one was

the transfer tax

there was one other one and

pay the taxes and he said fine

I'll pay the taxes because you and I both know

this is going to take some time

so there was clearly an intent

it was clearly in the end of the line

it wasn't ambiguous

and

when you talk about the parole evidence rule

the judge made a finding of

fact that the intent

of the parties was to do this

contract this way

that they agreed that it was going to take time

and the closing date

was going to be left up in the air

consistent with what happened before with the church

and what happened

and what happened

there were deals with people with the problems they had

with this

and so they would be a while in the pandemic

so that slows everything down for a while

and then finally they were

almost there ready to go

they were that close they were like months away

of this five

and if we had the hit ready and we couldn't do it

and everybody said okay fine we can't get it done

and we couldn't get it done we tried

we did due diligence we did everything we were supposed to do

we spent a lot of money

but we didn't get the approval that didn't happen

we were there

we were three months away

I mean we were supposed to have a

a meeting when the planning site was approved

and going to

recommended to be approved

and when we had that

it was supposed to be in December

in classic New Hampshire we had a snow storm

so they first moved over to January

and we were going to be on the ballot

and we had time to do that

so could you respond to

Attorney Scott's argument that

your client's damages were not foreseeable

my client's damages

are you talking about the actual damages

actual damages

obviously the $777

he paid each month was foreseeable

they knew he was going to have to do

all the work

involved with it

and you know the AOT permit

also the

surveyor was a part of the damages

that was foreseeable

the costs that he

did with regards and Judge Anderson

did a great job listening to what damages are

and actually not

so they were just cost of doing business

if the court looks at the stuff

looks at the evidence

and Judge Anderson's opinion

it's clear what he says with regards to

the taxes

the surveyor and other expenses

they're all related to land and developing the land

you got to get the site plan reviews

the fees for the site plans

there were some other things

so to say that after foreseeable

what is foreseeable damage associated with

you know

a development

and taxes

they were consistently being done

there's no evidence to suggest that

in fact they didn't really

I mean he's talking about foreseeable now

but they didn't really complain about the foreseeability

at the time of trial

what I tried to do was

I had a

summary of all the damages

that I was going to give to the court

and they objected to it and the court says

well you can do this but you can cross-examine them on it

and he cross-examined them on 10,000

or 13,000 payment

and Attorney

Ryan Billing has found it

this is for that and I forget exactly what it was for

but it was to a lawyer associated with

with that

the only thing I can tell you as my time is running short

Exhibit 7

which is

Tebow Page 12

is the

timeline and if the court would look at that

it gives you a good breakdown

and in fact as I got ready to admit

that there was no way it came in

I objected

it also said well

it's kind of what it's testifying to

but it helped everybody and actually Attorney Scott said

well it proved to be helpful

the other exhibit

wasn't on

is plaintiff's exhibit 3

which is

I mean

my and over's

matter and that basically is

page 19

of our appendix and that's the check

that was cashed

on 1222

which was I mean that was such an important

piece of that because so much of this stuff

so many of these agonies could say well you know

he stopped accepting the money

or you're not doing stuff

we were working they were

working and as a result of our work

as a result of paying the things we had a contract

the trial court says that

it viewed its major

task to determine the

reasonability of 5 years

and says that

that's a fact intensive inquiry

what

deference do we owe to the

trial court in terms of its

determination of whether 5 years was reasonable

or not

that's a factual finding I think it's clear

also your law I mean I think the

Aaron Motel

that I cite

was a case that I did back in

1988 same circumstance except

this time

the seller was trying to close

and the buyer didn't want to sell

and they went through all the permitting processes

and his old agon was no

that's too long

and they tried to repudiate it

and

what happened was it went to the supreme court

the supreme court says no it was a solid time

you know it made sense

people knew what they were getting into

and as a result they had an agreement

they had a meeting of the mind

and that meeting of the mind

Judge Anderson found today

on this case with regards to this matter

thank you attorney Kennedy

thank you very much

rebuttal

I had the stop sign

so

there's no way

the church at the time

the agreement was the original agreement

was signed could foresee that

Andrew would have to get a lot line adjustment

on the Cotay road accent

the Cotay road access

which was an alternate access point

they could have used to complete this project

there's no way

that the church could have foreseen

that Andrew would go to

one of our separate meetings

rescheduling several times of the town

and those scheduling

things were only

principally about the access issue

that Andrew knew about

at the outset of this agreement

there's no way the town could have

the church could have anticipated

those events

well your client knew there was an access issue

didn't it

I didn't catch that

I'm sorry

excuse me

but the church knew

there was an access issue

they knew it from the outset

but they also knew there was an alternative access

and they could not have predicted

that

for four years

Andrew would hit its head against that wall

over and over and over again

and just the

it's not just that they

set this agreement

in June of 2012

they had set this agreement back in August of

2019 this repudiating agreement

it had been come clear

to Andover

for some time

that this was an immovable object

so with regard

to consequential damages

interestingly enough

it was at trial

it was Andrew's own expert

that after some

discussion with the trial for it

came to the conclusion that

the consequential damages were

speculative

the expert acknowledged that he'd been to many town means

and he knew that those

could go any which way

there was also a lawsuit

a court title action

and there's no way of knowing how that would have gone

but

the biggest thing was

is that the town administrator

who testified in the court

and also Andrew's own expert

had never seen a situation

where within a development

where a psych approval

meeting had not taken place

for a period of four years

there's no way

that this church

even if it was sophisticated in development

could have anticipated at the time

they made that agreement

that all of these things were going to transpire

and generate hundreds of thousands of dollars

in town fees

engineering costs and attorneys fees

thank you very much

so

cases submitted
