This is case 2023 0088 TGN Inc. versus Abigail Mathis Patu.

And please note for the record that the Chief Justice Gordon MacDonald and

Senior Associate Justice Jim Bassett are disqualified from this case.

And, Terny Eggleton, you've reserved one minute for rebuttal.

Yes, Your Honor.

Thank you.

You may proceed.

Good morning, Your Honors, and may it please the Court.

My name is Jeremy Eggleton with the law firm of OR and Reno on behalf of my

client, Abby Mathis Patu.

The problem in this case is that there was no evidence upon which the jury could

have concluded that my client breached the construction agreement.

This is not a wait and sufficiency question.

It's not a matter of the jury having weighed conflicting testimony and

decided against my client.

It's that there was no evidence sufficient to support the final determination.

And to understand that, you have to focus on the timeline.

All of these events, or at least the salient events in the case, transpired over

about a three week period in August and September of 2021.

It began on August 26th, 2021, when my client,

Mr. Noon and the principal of the plaintiff, Mr.

Provost, his general manager, all agreed to meet with the Exeter code

inspector, Doug Eastman, on site to look at some code issues that would determine

some of the material choices that my client was required to make.

And things grew heated, I think, that both my client and Mr.

Noon expressed some frustration about things that had built up over the

course of the summer.

And according to my client in the record, Mr.

Noon at that point said, look, that's it.

I'm off this job.

His own general manager agreed that that's what happened.

And Mr. Provost testified that Mr.

Noon, after that meeting, said that he terminated the agreement that day.

But did he have the authority to terminate the agreement?

Isn't that something that was indiscriminate?

No, Your Honor, that's a slightly erroneous reading.

What Mr. Provost said is that Mr.

Noon terminated the agreement that day.

Did he exactly say he terminated it?

Wasn't it a little more nuanced in the transcript?

It was nuanced from my client's perspective in the sense that she

testified that Mr. Noonan said, hey, that's it, I'm off this job.

But Mr. Provost said when they got back to the office,

that Mr. Noonan terminated the agreement that day.

And it wasn't just something his opinion, it was Mr.

Provost's actual hearing of what Mr.

Noonan said at the office.

The text.

The text at 571, the question to Mr.

Provost was, so the meeting that ended created a situation where there was no

need for you to call back the painters because the contract was over, right?

And Mr. Provost said it was essentially being terminated.

And Mr. Noonan did the terminating, didn't he?

At that point, yes.

Question, that was August 26th, that was correct.

So that was Mr. Noonan's testimony.

It wasn't his opinion.

It's what happened.

Now, why does it matter who terminated the contract first?

Because the lawsuit that began this whole thing

was filed on September 1st, 2021.

Mr. Noonan's testimony is that the defendant, my client,

terminated the agreement through her agent, Mr.

Woods, no earlier than September 4th or September 7th.

The record's not super clear on that.

So at the time he filed his lawsuit,

he did not have a cause of action by his own testimony.

Well, regardless of termination, wouldn't he

be entitled to payment for work that he had completed?

He might be entitled to payment for the work that he had put in

that enriched my client's position in some fashion.

I believe the case law is supportive of that position.

But the question of who terminated the agreement

is an important one to answer, because that

was the allegation that was made.

That was the complaint that was made,

and that was what the jury ultimately found.

Could the jury have concluded that your client calling

the police on workers on the day of August 26

was a termination in and of itself?

No, Your Honor, because I don't think she called the police.

I think she threatened to call the police

because of the earlier termination, which she understood

to have taken place.

And she was confused as to why they were still there

at that point.

It was an expression of frustration, needless to say.

But I recognize that there's conflicting testimony

between the parties about when the contract was terminated.

The salient problem here is that if you accept Mr. Newton's

testimony at face value, which I am,

then the termination could have occurred

no earlier than September 4.

So why the lawsuit on September 1?

The reason for the termination from Mr. Newton's perspective

was what?

My impression, Your Honor, based on the record

is that Mr. Newton had developed frustration

over the course of the summer with my clients,

with his perception of my client's inability

to make choices about materials and directions

that the contract was supposed to be taking.

Was there any allegation of anticipatory breach?

No, Your Honor, and that's the most frustrating part here.

After the August 26 meeting on August 31,

Mr. Newton's office issued an invoice for $48,000

for, I think, Justice Coway, some of the material

you're talking about, these things that

had been done up to that point, which he believed

needed compensating, to have the lawsuit filed the next day

means that my client never had an opportunity

to fulfill the terms of the contract, i.e.

payment, within five days.

And it's noteworthy that both of the prior invoices,

all of the prior invoices, there were two major tranches

that had been invoiced and paid almost immediately,

and then several smaller tranches that had been invoiced

and paid immediately.

So at no point did my client fail

to make payment on a duly noticed invoice.

So there was no reason.

Had she paid, I mean, water over the proverbial dam,

but had she paid that invoice upon receipt,

the lawsuit might have shriveled up and blown away, maybe?

Yes, Your Honor.

I think it's possible that the lawsuit might have shriveled up

and blown away.

But we actually can't speculate on that.

It was just a lawsuit that had been made at this point.

Furthermore, to put someone in the position

of having to defend a lawsuit for breach

with arguments about attorney's fees and interest and costs,

and then use the fact that the person then steps up

and defends themself with equally good faith claims

that the other side had breached,

sort of stops the events at that moment in time.

And you know what?

But isn't the contract clear that they're entitled

to attorney's fees if they need to bring an action

to collect?

Definitely, Your Honor.

The contract is clear on that point.

But my argument about attorney's fees,

and I'm glad you asked this, is different from that.

This was not a collection action.

As I said, my client had never failed to pay any invoice.

And as of September 1, she had not failed

to pay the August 31 invoice.

She hadn't, I think, received the August 31 invoice

at that point.

So there was no failure to pay,

which would justify a so-called collection action.

This was an allegation of breach of contract,

not a collection action.

Couldn't you remedy that by putting $48,000 into a bond

or an escrow?

I suppose it could have happened that way, Your Honor.

Again, speculation.

If you'd placed that money in the court,

would the court have warded the attorney's fees?

I don't know, Your Honor, hard to say.

But on the basis of this agreement, which,

and New Hampshire law requires under the Kessler

versus Gleif case, that an attorney's fees award

has to be unmistakably clear, not just in terms of

whether the two parties can seek attorney's fees

from one another, but what kinds of actions

are permitted to seek attorney's fees for.

And in this case, this was not a collection action.

It was a breach of contract.

But a breach of contract for failing to pay, correct?

No, Your Honor.

There was no failure to pay at that point.

That is my point.

But the judge's introduction to the jury

at the beginning of the case, the transcript at page six,

the judge said the plaintiff claim she is in breach

for failing to pay.

The judge appears to have constricted that way,

but if you look at the actual sequence of events,

when you have to have a cause of action

when you file your complaint,

they never had the cause of action.

It may be that if they had waited two weeks

and my client had failed to pay,

then they might have had a cause of action,

but they didn't at that point.

And this complaint did not claim lost profits

or expectancy damages for not being able

to fulfill the rest of the conflict.

Right.

Contract.

That's correct, Your Honor.

At least what I would say is that I think the complaint

sort of left that open, but at some point

the plaintiff waved to expectancy damages

or fulfillment of the contract damages.

I think because he didn't,

the reality is he terminated the agreement.

He didn't want to work with my client anymore.

Again, turning back to the attorney's fees question,

Justice Countway,

that's an important issue because

the judge himself perceived of the attorney's fees

provision in the agreement as being a prevailing

party clause.

And you can have those.

Two parties can absolutely contract to say that,

look, if there's some disagreement over this contract

and we have to go to court,

whoever wins gets their attorney's fees.

That's absolutely a permissible provision.

This contract did not say that.

It simply was a general fees provision

that shifted the cost to the party,

the nonpaying party,

if the party seeking payment had to go to court

or pursue them in some fashion.

And at the point at which the lawsuit was filed,

there was no basis for it.

And so to then say,

you're forcing my client into a litigation corner

and requiring her to defend this lawsuit,

of course she's gonna come back with her own counterclaims

for breach based on the really uncontested evidence

that Mr. Noonan breached prior to September 1st.

You can't award attorney's fees

under the American rule under those circumstances.

So it just wasn't a collection action.

Now the other, I guess the second argument in our case

concerns the lack of evidence about two particular charges.

And so this goes to whether you remand the case,

having reversed the jury decision concerning

breach of contract or you accept

that the jury's breach of contract decision was valid.

I still think you need to abate the damages

and eliminate the attorney's fees award.

And the damages should be abated by approximately $23,000

because there was no evidence in the record

that with respect to a painting line item

that Mr. Noonan's company had paid

more than $7,500 for the painting services.

So like any general contractor,

Mr. Noonan's company will hire subcontractors to do the work

and in this case they hired a painting company

to do interior and exterior work.

And that painting company invoiced Mr. Noonan's $7,500

and his company paid that $7,500.

However, Mr. Noonan's company then turned around

and charged my client $23,000 for that same cost.

There was no documentary evidence

suggesting that-

That would be a normal, well, normal or not,

there would be a markup from the painting invoice

from the subcontractor to the invoice

from the general contractor to the client.

There would be some, possibly there would be some markup,

I'm not sure if the record speaks to that markup

but it's not going to be a 300% markup.

Is it possible that painting was done

and not invoiced by the subcontractors?

There was painting, the testimony states

that there was painting done by the drywall contractors

who put on a coat of primer at one point.

But in order for the plaintiff to rely

on the value enhancement that accrues to a home

by virtue of the work that was done,

they have to produce evidence of that value enhancement.

So it's sort of unsupported allegation essentially

that this value of this painting was $23,000.

If they had come in with an expert to say,

yeah, boy, you got a good deal.

Instead of the 7,500 bucks you paid,

you got a $23,000 paint job out of that $7,500.

That would be sufficient testimony for a jury

to conclude that the value enhancement

would justify the unjust enrichment spin

upon the breach of contract claim in this case.

That's not what happened here.

In fact, the only testimony in the record concerning painting

is that it wasn't very well done at all.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Attorney Colby.

Good morning.

I think it's still morning, if it pleases the court.

My name is David Colby.

I am here for the Coolidge Law Firm.

I represent Mr. Timothy Jane Newton,

as well as TJN Construction.

It pleases the court.

This is my first time here and I would just like to say

I'm excited and honored to be here arguing this case.

Well, welcome.

This case is not a complex case.

This was a six days of trial

and a half day of two attorneys

arguing their closing arguments.

The jury sat through all of it.

I would disagree with my esteemed brother here

that there was no evidence to the contrary in this case.

That it goes back well before August 26th.

August 26th was...

So address that timeline for me.

Certainly.

Because it is a little confusing

if we have this conversation on the 26th.

We've got a complaint filed on the 1st of September

and apparently some communication after that.

So help me out here.

Well, it's very easy.

Actually, this conversation took place on the 26th

but it was something that was culminating

much farther back during the summer, as was stated.

Two sides to a contract.

One of the things that Mr. Newton was negotiating

with Ms. Patu was that,

okay, if you want certain things,

you can order it yourself

but we have to be able to schedule

the subcontractors at this date and this time.

So you gotta make sure that these things

are there.

That didn't happen.

At least two separate occasions

they'd scheduled Tyler's to come in to do the bathroom.

The materials weren't there as promised.

There were other times

where she wanted to install a wood floor

and he said, well, I can go get it.

She goes, well, it's at a family mill.

Go pick it up.

Well, he went and picked it up

but it's green, which also means

that if it's above a certain moisture content,

you can't install it because the wood will buckle,

it will fail, it will bend.

So then he had to take it from there

and he had to move it to a kiln to get it dried,

which goes into the next problem.

So this was his testimony

but at that conversation on the 26th

that wasn't like, I can't perform

because of your delays.

That's exactly what it was, Your Honor.

As a matter of fact, he'd sent her an email

and as the defendant had laid out

he was shaking and angry

and he had this list in his hand

and he's shaking it at her.

Well, that list was an email

that was actually sent to her on the 19th of August.

So this meeting was not about just code enforcement.

As a matter of fact, that was kind of a side story

to this whole meeting.

The meeting was about 14 items

that had to be addressed for them to move forward.

This project was supposed to be completed

in July of 2021

and here we are at the end of August.

So he had sent her this email ahead of time.

He had told her I need answers

on these 14 things specifically

and they're big ticket items

like, for example, we talked about the flooring.

He needs to know that the basement

is getting coded and sealed

because if not, the moisture that's coming

in the old basement will get up into the wood

and cause the wood to split and crack.

So when was the contract terminated?

And the contract was terminated on September 1st

by her representative, Mr. Woods.

And here's what I can tell you that

Mr. Newman, when he was on the stand

and he was asked, of course,

everything that was alluded to by the defendant

was asked by their attorney at the time, Mr. Newman,

who was, excuse me, Mr. McGee talking to Mr. Newman.

And he suggested certain dates.

What Mr. Newman actually testified to was

when did you get this phone call from Mr. Woods?

He goes, it was on or not the 4th of September.

Could have been the 4th of September, your honor.

4th of September, that was the Labor Day weekend.

September 4th, 2021 was the Saturday of that weekend.

Our office wasn't open.

Then he asked him, well, could it have been the 7th?

And he goes, well, I think I talked to my attorney

on the 7th or before the 7th.

He wasn't sure.

So we're now parsing these dates that are close together.

And then attorney McGee suggested at one point

that, well, could it have been the 14th, right?

And he goes, oh, no, no, no, it wasn't.

It was definitely before the 14th.

But here's the one thing, after 18 months,

or excuse me, 16 months when they were considering this,

that Mr. Newman could testify to.

He got a call from Herman, her agent,

and he immediately called his attorney,

Brian Barrington, of our office.

Brian Barrington immediately files a complaint.

Now, the complaint was drafted by attorney Barrington

on the 1st.

That's true.

However, it wasn't filed into Stratford County

Superior Court until the 2nd.

That's the stamp on it, the red markings on it,

from the actual courthouse.

It was filed on the 2nd.

The 3rd is Friday.

The 4th is Saturday.

Our office was closed.

So he wasn't speaking to attorney Barrington

on Friday the 4th.

I mean, excuse me, Saturday the 4th.

So what's more in line with what Mr. Newman is saying

is that, yeah, he called me on the 1st.

They're telling me I'm terminator.

I believe the words that he said Mr. Woods used

was, I'm taking over as a general contractor.

You're no longer needed.

Now, why was that so important to Mr. Newman?

Part of this meeting on the 26th was for code violations.

Specifically, windows that were too small

were going to be in a bedroom for a handicapped ex-husband

of Mrs. Patu.

These are going to crank out windows

that somebody who wasn't handicapped

would have a very difficult time getting out of.

And he wanted to make sure that the code enforcement officer

was there to approve it or not approve it.

Shudders that would be sliding across wood,

the old-fashioned type of shutters,

they were saying, no, this now has

to be put on metal brackets.

Because if there's a fire, you would never

be able to open them if the wood expanded.

Ms. Patu was not happy with that.

So Doug Eastman was called in to kind of say,

no, you do have to do these things.

You don't have to do the other things.

That meeting was relatively short.

Now they have the meeting about these items that

need to be taken care of, where Mr. Newton apparently

became frustrated.

But Mr. Newton's testimony was also

that it was Patu to say, I'm going

to run your name through the mud,

and you'll let the world on the sea coast again.

And that's at the point where he kind of threw his hands up

and said, I'm leaving.

Now the other thing that's kind of curious is that

wait, wait, one more thing before you leave that.

Why not wait for payment?

Why file for failure to pay rather than, or maybe

you did, file for breach of contract and expectancy damages?

We did file for breach.

I didn't draft the complaint, so I

don't know why that whole analysis for expectancy damages

weren't done.

Right, but that claim that the bill hadn't been paid,

but five days hadn't gone by, so why not wait?

I can't answer that.

I didn't file it.

But what I can tell you, Your Honor,

is that in this time frame, Ms. Patu

went to another attorney, John Bosen.

And on September 9, John Bosen is sending a letter

to Mr. Newton saying, we don't know why you don't have

any workers here.

You've been threatening to walk off this job all summer,

and now it's delayed because of you.

Oh, by the way, there are zero workers there.

Why haven't you sent any workers, and where are they?

Well, that goes back to her threatening to call the police.

That same day, the 26th, Mr. Newton

sent workers back after this meeting.

And they were there installing handrails.

They were putting up something over the kitchen.

They were sweeping and cleaning.

Mr. Provincer, who was there, we asked him,

well, what was this uncommon for you to do?

Had you ever been there?

Ms. Patu said, I had never seen these two men before.

Mr. Provincer said, yeah, I've been there before.

As a matter of fact, I helped build this 12-by-12 screen

in porch, which the defendant is now saying, well, you

will be paid what you will be charged for it twice.

Was that 12-by-12 porch a replacement for the original 6-by-10?

Correct, Your Honor.

So it not only was a replacement, but it had to be moved.

This location that they originally

wanted to put the 6-by-10 was too close to a property line,

so they did not get a variance.

So they moved it to another portion of the house.

And once they were moving it, they wanted to expand it

and make it bigger.

So how do you explain the two $4,500 charges?

Well, it's not really $2,400.

Well, there are $2,4,500 payments.

But here's the reason why.

First, she was given a credit of the original price

of the 6-by-10.

Then there was a $4,500 addition added to it.

It's going to cost you $4,500 more,

so there was a total price to build the screen porch of a

little over $14,000.

She was built for the original porch at $4,500.

This now, the second progressive payment,

or actually I think it was the fourth progressive payment

at that point with the $4,800, was actually

a second billing for $4,500.

We submitted this.

It was questioned at its deposition.

We explained it at trial.

We presented how the breakdown was done.

And he's still out.

It was roughly $5,000 for the cost of the porch

because he was only paid $9,000 for a $14,000 porch.

And the work was performed?

I'm sorry?

Was the work performed?

It wasn't.

Everything was in except.

There was a ton of room ceiling that was not

in, if I recall, and the electrical wasn't done

because they wanted to put a light and a fan out there.

The piers were done.

The floor was done.

The screens were up.

It was usable, but none of the electricity

was put in and the ceiling was still up.

Was she given a credit for the work that wasn't performed?

Usually she was.

As a matter of fact, when they submitted it,

and we did the breakdown at the trial court,

she was given a credit for, I believe it was,

initially $6,300.

And that credit persisted.

That's not part of the $48,000 awarded by the jury.

No.

The $4,500 is not the $6,800.

Got it.

So the credit was effective, if you will.

Yes, and I believe it was submitted along with my brief,

my account's brief for the justices.

So moving to September 9th, Mr. Tugos and Hire's attorney,

Bosen, Mr. Bosen, sends this letter saying,

why aren't there any workers here?

Which is kind of mind-boggling, considering on the 26th,

there were workers there, and she chased them off the property.

There was a video that was introduced to the jury

where she's following them around saying,

I'm calling the police.

Mr. Provincial called Mr. Nunez and said,

what do you want me to do here, Bosen?

He said, she wants you out, pack up, move out.

And the 9th was after even the latest

that Mr. Woods may have called, saying I'm taking over.

Correct.

And with that, too, Your Honor, the billing that was done

was done electronically.

So she had that billing electronically.

When she opened it on August 31st, we don't know.

But it was in her possession on August 31st.

So she got it on August 31st, and was unhappy with it,

and is now calling her clerk of the works,

as he was referred to.

Mr. Woods, as her representative,

who is now calling and firing Mr. Nunez, that lines up.

But Mr. Woods didn't ever said,

we're not paying your invoice, did he?

That was never ever communicated.

That was never said to Mr. Nunez.

But what we do know is, she went to an attorney

on September 9th, and it still wasn't paid,

and that is well beyond the five days.

So, tell me about the attorney's fees provision.

If this wasn't a collection action at its inception,

how does it become one to trigger

the attorney's fee provision?

Well, the attorney's fee provision, Your Honor,

it says any attempt to collect this.

It doesn't say it has to be a collection action.

It uses that qualifying word, any,

whether suit is filed or not.

So, one of the things that you would like to look at

when you're looking at business,

not only the provision itself, of course that's important,

but let's look at the sophistication of the people

who are involved in this.

Ms. Patu claimed she has four master's degree,

including an MBA, and she's qualified

to run an elderly care type of situation.

So, now she's contracting with Mr. Nunez.

So, she's well aware of how contracts were,

or should be at least, from her own testimony.

This provision is set up separately.

It's unambiguous, it's clear of the party's intentions,

and it's a separate signature line on page one.

It's not buried somewhere in the middle of the contract,

or at the end of the contract.

It's the front of the contract.

Top of it is you agree to accept it,

and the next one down is the attorney's provision.

So, it was clear at the time that she signed it

that she should do, or should have known,

from her experience in background,

as well as the unambiguous wording of this,

that any attempt to collect,

whether suit is filed or not,

attorney's fees are gonna be crewed,

and 2% interest.

It's not a, the court doesn't like it.

They've said, or the case law supports it,

we have to have an unambiguous number.

You can't say it's a range.

He said 2%, equaling 18%, over or manual,

and that it would apply with attorney's fees as well.

So, both sides knew what they were getting into

when they signed the agreement.

There is no provision in this contract

specifically outlining the responsibility

of the homeowner, Ms. Patu,

for material selection, timing, those sorts of things.

So, how does the client, if you will,

assess what her obligations are under this contract?

Both for the change orders,

which are additions to the contract,

and as well as the conversations

that she was having with Mr. Noonan.

Mr. Noonan was telling her in the change orders

that says, if you wanna buy your own materials,

which as a matter of fact she did,

which is part of the consternation that he had,

she ordered doors on her own.

They showed up, they were never paid for,

and Mr. Noonan had to pull out his credit card

to pay for the door she ordered.

But those were the forms of credit,

so she wanted it from time, that's fine.

He ordered, she's, to order the tile,

his subcontractors would install it.

And a couple of times that happened,

he's still paying these subcontractors

who arrived on scene to put in the tile,

but there's no tile there.

Now he has to dismiss the contractors,

and no tile work has been done.

That happened at least twice.

Similar incidents with the flooring,

trying to get the flooring in,

trying to get the foundations done.

So it wasn't the 26th.

I see my life is on your honor,

I will debrief you, turn it over.

Thank you.

Your honor, I'm gonna use my minute

to give you the timeline,

because I hear your statement that it could be confusing.

August 26th is when the meeting was held

in Exeter on site.

You'll find that at pages 571 to 575 of the transcript.

August 31st is when my client received the final invoice.

September 1st is the date of the complaint.

It may have been filed on the second,

that distinction is not material for my argument.

September 4th or 7th are the only dates in the record

when Mr. Noonan suggests

that the contract was breached by Mr. Woods.

When was Mr. Woods called?

Do you have that in your timeline?

Say that again, sir.

What did Mr. Woods call?

We don't think he called actually.

So the only testimony in the record

concerning that call is transcript 499 to 500.

Mr. Noonan says it was either the 4th or the 7th.

Not the 1st, not the 2nd, not the 31st.

September 9th, as counsel said,

my client wrote a letter to Mr. Noonan saying,

through her attorney saying,

please get back on the job.

September 14th, plaintiffs attorneys write a letter

to the town of Exeter stating

that the plaintiff terminated the agreement

and you'll find that at Appendix 28.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted, thanks to both counsel.
