This is case 2023-094, State of New Hampshire v. Benjamin Sargent.

Good morning. For the record, Justice Hans-Marne Coney is disqualified in this case.

Attorney Wilson, I understand you reserve one minute.

Yes, Your Honor. Please accord Eric Wilson for Benjamin Sargent.

I would like to begin my argument on the term of benefit contained in the official oppression statute.

There is no definition of benefit contained within the statute, although the companion bribery statute in 640 does have a definition of benefit.

As the state points out in page 14 of their brief, the legislature has chosen to sometimes use the word benefit only in a criminal context,

and sometimes they've done a modifier, chosen to do a modifier of benefit.

I want to briefly address those, those variations.

The bribery statute under 640, 2, and 640, 6 requires a pecuniary benefit laid out in the statute.

The theft by extortion statute on RSA 637-5, the legislature used the word substantial benefit.

The remainder of the, in a criminal context, the remainder of the statute set forth in the legislature in criminal terms only uses the word benefit,

and I want to briefly go through those statutes.

One of them is without further definition, but if you look at the statute and you define benefit within the statute,

trafficking in persons under RSA 637, only the word benefit is used there.

But that statute requires that a person against their will to be forced into labor or commercial sex acts.

And the benefit, obviously the benefit, for the benefit of forced labor, forced, an individual forced against their will

to do forced labor or forced commercial sex acts for the benefit of another.

I think it's clear, we have that statute, that the benefit would be that you would either have free or reduced cost labor,

or you would, the benefit would be engaging in sex acts with a person forced to do so.

A commercial bribery uses just the word benefit, but clearly within that statute, and that's RSA 638-7,

clearly within that statute, the benefit to another would be the harm to business interests.

So doesn't that suggest that the benefit here under official oppression should be interpreted broadly?

I don't believe it should be, Your Honor.

I think if, and I'll just complete both the sports bribery and insurance fraud, those two use the word benefit.

But within the context of those statutes, the sports bribery and insurance fraud, the benefit defines what level of the offense,

if convicted, you would be.

So if it's $1,500 and more under both the bribery statute and the insurance fraud statute, then it's a class A felony.

It's between $1,000 and $1,500, then it's a class B felony, or it's a misdemeanor, depending it's under $1,000.

And the last, at least as familiar as I am, just the term benefit is the banking loan association in credit unions.

And just benefit is used there.

But when you read that statute in a whole, and that's RSA 838-7-701, it says,

no director officer or employee of a bank credit union shall directly or indirectly receive a fee, gift, or benefit from a loan applicant for an inducement of approving that loan.

So when the benefit is used alone in other criminal contexts without definition, you can read, and it's clear within the language of statutes,

that the benefit is either one, a financial benefit or a financial deficit.

It would also be without the modifier, just use the benefit or a financial gain or detriment, a business lost, forced labor or commercial sex to benefit another.

The official oppression statute is really the only statute without a definition of benefit.

It just says benefit.

And as I argue in my brief, this court should adopt, because 6431, the official oppression statute, does rely on the bribery statute for some of its definitions.

In the trial court below, determined benefit to be a momentary emotional or psychological, if any, that the defendant sought to achieve was a sympathetic listener to provide company emotional support, reassurance that one would expect from a close friend.

And that finding is inconsistent with the evidence at trial, and it's inconsistent with some ability to quantify or evaluate what that benefit would be.

Why wouldn't we just use the dictionary definition of benefit?

Well, if we use the dictionary benefit, definition of benefit, I don't believe it would include what the trial court found.

How can you quantify or qualify emotional support from somebody who reassurance from somebody?

That would not be a benefit, because it's not quantifiable.

It's not real, it's not quantifiable.

It needs a benefit, it needs to be tangible.

It needs to be tangible and identifiable.

As I point out in my brief, the official oppression statute got its source from New York law when the criminal code was recodified in 1971.

And the Bartlett Commission, as identified in my brief, was the commission that established the official oppression in New York.

And the official oppression statute in New York has a definition where ours does not.

But the Bartlett Commission said that the benefit would exclude unauthorized conduct or neglect duty, which may be the basis for administrative removal or employee discipline.

And then when the statute was codified in New Hampshire, the comments to the committee report that did that also said that me or bad judgment would not be an offense.

So do you think we should use Heinz's definition of benefit?

Well, I would submit yes, because Heinz's case talks about a substantial benefit that was quantifiable and identifiable.

We'd be amending the statute.

Well, I don't think you would be amending the statute if the court were to interpret benefit that it would be, it has to be something more than intangible or not identifiable.

It has to be something more than momentary, too.

Again, I believe, and that was the trial court's conclusion that it was a momentary.

In fact, the trial court uses the term, if any, but a momentary, if any, benefit of emotional support or a listener.

That would give you that by sending somebody a thank you note.

And should that criminalize is the question.

And that's where we are.

And I'll next want to move on to the sexual harassment policy.

Can I just ask you, are you king void for vagueness argument as applied or facially?

As applied.

In the trial court, prior to trial, I challenged as applied.

And here I challenge as applied.

But I want to talk about briefly the sexual harassment policy.

The court's determination that the defendant violated the police department sexual harassment policy was absent evidence in the record.

T.D., during the trial, I questioned her extensively with policy in hand and outlined and I set some of it in my brief,

but asked T.D. question after question tracking the sexual harassment policy.

There was the record is completely devoid that the defendant made unwelcome sexual advances, made request for sexual favors, made reference to sex or conduct.

No suggestion that was any quid pro quo employment related.

Well, he didn't mention the prospect of her becoming the chief.

I mean, this is all implicit, right?

I mean, we agree it's not explicit, but aren't there implicit notions that you've highlighted that the policies by engaging this conversation with subordinate?

To answer that question directly head on, that according to policy, there has to be a quid pro quo agreement for something that affects employment,

advances employment negatively being disciplined or being reduced in rank.

But there was, as T.D. acknowledged, there was never a quid pro quo discussion.

If you do this or you engage in sexual acts with me, I will get you to make you the chief of police.

Well, it's my understanding.

He said, I see you as a future romantic partner and that eludes to the fact that one day you could be the chief.

Putting those two things together, isn't that a quid pro quo?

But it must violate the sexual harassment policy.

In T.D. acknowledged, there was a lack of evidence in the trial court that there was any discussion about sex or sexual relations.

Quid pro quo.

I guess what that leads us to is when can an expression of a romantic interest, assuming an occurred without a violation of the sexual harassment policy,

result in a filing of finding a criminal conduct.

Where is the line?

The suggestion of we could, you could be the chief, if you could be the chief, is tied to another be the chief.

Just get that there.

But you could tie if the state, the trial court, or the trial court found that there was a link between a suggestion you could be the chief

and some type of violation of the sexual harassment policy, I would not disagree with you.

So as I raised in the brief, where is the line expressing a romantic interest, assuming it occurred?

Where is that line to make it now criminal conduct and violation of a sexual harassment policy?

So do we owe any deference to the trial court in terms of its assessment of the testimony of T.D. and the defendant here?

I think there's some deference, but I think this is a de novo review.

The record is clear that there was no violation of the sexual harassment policy.

And if there was one, how is that an act of his office?

Well, that's the next question I was going to get.

The statute makes it clear that he, for the purpose to benefit himself, he commits an unauthorized act that purports to be an act of his office.

As I laid out in my brief, there can be no basis.

There can be, at no point could the chief of police have the ability or an act of his office, a purported act of his office, be sexually harassed by somebody.

And there is no link.

It is not authorized by his office, and it cannot be unauthorized.

It's just, let me give you an example, because I looked long and hard to find a, but this statute is very seldom used.

I found two cases probably in the last two decades that were used.

One of them was a dispatcher that worked for a police department.

The dispatcher's job was to run record checks.

That was an act of her office.

He was running record checks for a private investigator getting the private investigator the record checks and receiving money in exchange.

Clearly, running record checks is an act of her office, providing for a benefit, financial benefit to a private investigator.

That was on point with this statute.

Another one was an assistant clerk of a court that was receiving funds and fines and marking the fines deferred or suspended and taking the money in an act of her office to receive those funds.

And she gained financial advantage by violating or committing an unauthorized act of her office.

Here, there was no unauthorized act of his office.

How about communicating with the subordinate and asking the subordinate to make a delivery to the house?

That was the testimony of Teeting, but that does not violate the sexual harassment policy.

And that's moving to the vagueness and overbreath argument.

The problem, as far as I see, when you take official oppression with undefined terms of benefit, unauthorized, and harm,

you now couple that because the statute as official oppression requires that events or violations or policies outside of the criminal statute be included

and it's an interplay between the two of them.

So here we have the official oppression complaint bootstrapped with the sexual harassment policy to prove the underlying criminal conduct.

The sexual harassment policy is, you have to know the standards of both and some certainty of what you're charged with.

Here, when bootstrapped the sexual harassment policy to the criminal statute, now dealing with undefined terms within the sexual harassment policy.

What's unwanted? What's sexual?

And it was just fraught with uncertainties in sexual harassment policy as applied to criminal context.

It is void of vagueness as well as overbreath.

Thank you.

Good morning, Your Honour. It's Joe Fisher for the State.

I'd like to pick up on the thread of Mr. Wilson's argument and some of the questions about where's the line between sexual harassment,

which is normally an employment matter, and criminal misconduct.

And that's in the statute itself, which is purports to be an act of the office.

Now Attorney Wilson seems to say that when you engage in sexual harassment or any other sort of unauthorized act,

all that by definition can't be an act of your office, but that's explicitly what the statute is addressing.

People who abuse their office take seemingly official acts for a motivation to harm or benefit someone.

They take these unauthorized act, they act outside the scope of their proper authority in order to confer or receive a benefit or inflict some harm.

And that was the evidence that was before the trial court.

Chief Sergeant issued General Order 22.

It prohibited any officer of the Litchfield Police Department, including himself, from engaging in sexual harassment.

The purports to be an act of an office, that wasn't been too well defended in the trial.

He talked extensively about how he would routinely talk to officers on duty, off duty, while he was on duty or off duty,

while they were on duty, about their duties, what they were doing, their performance, their patrols.

He said he would do not just with TD, but with other officers as well.

He admitted that this purport to be an act of his office.

It seems to me that your argument is such that basically if you violate the sexual harassment policy with the subordinate, it now becomes a criminal act under the statute.

Only if it purports to be an act of your office.

If this was the two of them off duty at a bar and it may have violated the policy in a bit of employment matter, it would not be a criminal act.

So that depends on the location.

It depends on...

If it were in a bar instead of by text.

It depends on the invocation of authority.

Whether he was acting...

Whether the act itself purported to be an act of his office.

As the defendant admitted, his action in this case did.

Well, but rarely would somebody say in my official capacity, I want to have sex with you.

I mean, that's not going to happen.

Not necessarily.

It could be context specific.

The context of this specific case was the chief admitting this purported to be an act of his office.

So if she was off duty, there would be no basis for a charge?

If she was off duty, it depends on each of their interactions, whether he was having some sort of official interaction.

But that was not the record-blush.

She was on duty.

He was off.

But he said I was engaging with her, not as two people, but as a chief and a three-month probationary officer who was on duty.

Justice Bassett's question.

It would seem that every instance of workplace related sexual harassment would fall under this statute under your reading of it.

If it was prohibited by official policy and purported to be an act of an office, it could.

And that's because the official oppression statute is designed to encompass all abuses of office at every level of government.

The reason that unauthorized is in there is because what is authorized for a governor, a justice, or a director may not be the same as a town manager or a police officer or a public works department official.

What is the proper scope of those offices?

What they are allowed to do, what they are prohibited from doing is defined by constitutions, by statutes, by regulations,

and by employment policies, and by the orders of your superiors, or the orders of a chief for the department, like General Order 22 was.

That defined the proper scope of authority for a Lichfield police officer, including this chief, and he violated the policy.

Attorney Wilson wants to talk about all the ways that the policy was not violated during the cross-examination,

but the court said what this came down to was there were these series of interactions.

The defendant had one explanation for them. They were perfectly innocuous. There was no sexual or romantic motivation for them.

This was just scheduling.

And TD said absolutely not. He expressed romantic and sexual interest.

I was very uncomfortable with it, had to report it.

And the trial court said, I don't believe the defendant's explanations, I believe TD's explanations.

The context of these interactions was clearly sexual or romantic.

He disbelieved the defendant's explanation of a non-sexual, non-romantic, purely innocent, scheduling explanation, and therefore found that these were unauthorized acts.

So how easy to read the trial court's order when it leads to a momentary personal, emotional, or psychological gain, if any, from these contacts?

That doesn't sound like proof beyond a reasonable doubt to me.

I would say that that's not the only thing the trial court said was one excerpt that that was part of his motivation,

but the trial court also noted that he was pursuing a romantic replacement, pursuing a romantic or sexual interest.

There was more than this. The trial court was referencing, I believe a case out of New Jersey that talks about the momentary enjoyment or pleasure that someone can get,

which in that context was a firefighter setting fires for the enjoyment of putting out the fires, and the sort of the accolades that went along with that.

But those were not necessarily the only facts in this case.

They were part of what went into the trial court's consideration.

But it wasn't everything. This really came down to were these conversations about having a TD problem and the expressions of interest in the trying to get her to come over to his house,

were these romantic in nature or were they administrative in nature?

And the trial court had competing testimony from TD and the chief, and the trial court believed TD and did not believe the chief.

And as to whether they're of a romantic nature, that goes towards the violation of the sexual harassment policy.

That doesn't get you over the goal line here.

It goes to the violation of the policy and whether he acted with the purpose to benefit himself.

I would submit the same evidence goes to both elements in that case.

About the vagueness argument.

I'm sorry.

What about the vagueness argument?

The vagueness argument with regard to the benefit, the plain and ordinary usage of the term benefit as this court has already addressed directly in Heinz.

Mr. Wilson says that because benefit was defined in Heinz as being substantial, as having some substance being real, that you should read that in here.

However, in the Heinz case, this court took both words separately, substantial and benefit.

You define benefit according to its plain and ordinary meaning.

You define substantial according to its plain and ordinary meaning.

And then you put those together in the context of the theft by extortion statute.

The difference between a benefit and a substantial benefit was the question that Chief Justice MacDonald asked, does it have to be substantial?

Does it have to be real?

And that does have to be the case for a substantial benefit under theft by extortion.

It does not have to be for a benefit under official oppression, trafficking of persons or any other statutes that use the term benefit.

And the reason for that is very clear, which is if the legislature wanted to make this only about financial interests, quantifiable interests,

it could use the word pecuniary as it did in other statutes.

If it wanted to make it a legal benefit, something tangible, something you could hold and not emotional or romantic or sexual,

then it couldn't use the term substantial benefit.

The legislature knows how to use these terms, has used them in other statutes,

and they should not be read into the statutes that where the legislature has seen fit to include a broader range of benefits.

Otherwise, we were rewriting not just the official oppression statute,

but all other statutes, including trafficking in persons where the legislature said any benefit.

We don't care if it's financial, we don't care if it's tangible, if you're trafficking in persons, if you abuse your office,

if you engage in bribery, we don't care what the type of benefit is, it is a prohibited benefit.

How transient can the benefit be?

The case law from other states seems to indicate that the benefit encompasses any number of benefits or harm,

but it has to be personalized.

So it can't be some generalized societal benefit or generalized harm that it has to be to harm a person,

benefit a person or oneself, and so that is the limiting principle.

The trial court found no harm here though, right?

The trial court found no harm.

Do you agree with Attorney Wilson that it's a two part state of mind that there are two components of knowingly?

No, I believe that there are two means raised in the statute though, which is,

you have to know when you commit an unauthorized act that purports to be an act of the office in this case.

The other way to do that is by knowingly failing to perform a duty,

but knowingly committing the unauthorized act that purports to be an act of your office with purpose in this case to benefit oneself.

Then wouldn't that be a purposeful state of mind?

It's both.

The reason for those two wins raised argument, Attorney Wilson alluded to New York.

The Barnes case in New York cited in my brief makes it clear that the reason for two wins raised in this element,

which is based on the model penal code, is so that we are negligence, incompetence,

and other knowing violations of duty or knowing unauthorized acts.

Don't get swept up into the criminal code.

You have to pair that with a purpose to benefit or harm.

So someone who violates an administrative role violates a departmental regulation,

but doesn't do so for any benefit or to harm,

but just because they're a bad employee, that is not official oppression.

The statute does not criminalize negligence or incompetence.

It criminalizes abuse of office.

And that's why the two wins raised work in tandem to make sure that acts that are unauthorized,

that may ordinarily be employment matters, aren't swept up into the criminal code.

And it's what distinguishes this case from the triviality of just being some employment matter.

This was a criminal abuse of office by a chief of police against the only female in his department,

a three-month probationary officer.

He took acts which he admitted were acts that purported acts of his office,

used his authority to try to pursue his romantic and sexual interest to leverage it.

And what were the specific acts that purported to be an act of his office?

The text and conversations that defendant testified, all of them purported were acts as a chief.

So he says that these were not personal conversations outside the context of their employment.

They were the conversations between a chief and a three-month probationary officer

in their roles as Litchfield Police Office.

And it's over the course of what, 17 hours?

With Rick's, I believe so, began on Christmas Eve and concluded New Year's Day.

With regard to the overbreath argument, Attorney Wilson didn't address that.

But there is no constitutional right to engage in sexual harassment.

So the defendant has not identified any constitutional right that would be infringed by this statute,

as applied to him or even facially.

With regard to the evidence below, again, we've gone through the TD problem.

We're expressing a romantic or sexual interest, a romantic replacement.

And his disappointment when TD said, my marriage is fine.

I'm not having marital problems the way you are.

And he expresses disappointment in rather explicit terms about how that messes up his situation.

That, you know, his plan to pursue TD as a romantic partner has now been frustrated

because she's saying her marriage is stable.

He even indicated at one point, going to the reporting to be active office,

that he was pulling Rick and not answering one of the questions that she asked him.

So even if he had not admitted a trial that these all were acts of his office,

the court could have inferred that from the pulling Rick comment,

but it didn't need to because again, the defendant admitted that.

And again, I believe Justice Bassett brought up the premise benefits,

making chief someday, getting a canine, all these implements.

If you stick with me, if you align your interests with mine,

and you can't forget the substantial power imbalance between a chief

and a three month probationary officer in what the chief admits were official interactions between them.

This three month probationary officer could not just hang up the phone,

could not just ignore him, could not tell him to shut his mouth,

did not know what to do because this is her chief talking to her as her chief.

And he's abusing that position as chief

and his ability to interact with her on that level in order to subject her to sexual harassment.

That is quintessentially what the statute is meant to avoid.

Individuals who use their office to try to exceed the scope of their authority

to pursue their private interests or to inflict harm upon an individual.

If there are no further questions, I'll yield the remainder of my time.

The Heinz case came up and this court in Heinz did use Webster's dictionary to define benefit

to be useful or profitable, become protracted or advanced.

The momentary, if any, benefit that the court found sergeant sought was a sympathetic listener,

somebody to validate his concerns.

Mr. Fincham said that TD testified that sexual content was discussed in the phone calls

and you'll see no evidence of that in the record.

At most, she said romantic interests.

The trial court in a footnote, I believe on page 7 of the trial court's order,

in a footnote, the only time he uses sexual desire, sexual intent with TD

was regarding the TD.

The trial court would talk about that the defendant kept saying he had a TD problem

and the defendant wouldn't define it.

The court in a footnote found that the TD problem meant he desired a sexual relationship.

Your response to Mr. Fincham's argument, now I'm actually, I'm forgetting what I was going to ask.

I apologize.

I think I, let me guess what you're thinking.

I just talked to him about it.

Right.

That was an official duty.

Yes.

I'm sorry.

Yes.

The Chief admitted that it was official.

I'm sorry.

Official duty?

Yes.

It was part of my office to communicate with all officers whether on duty or off duty.

He would have the trial transcripts will show he had hour-long conversations in the middle

with all patrol officers, sergeants, lieutenants.

So I think the court could conclude, and I think the trial court probably concluded

that his use of the phone to talk to employees was part of his duty.

That is not the same as committing the offense of sexual harassment.

And again, and I'll end with, there may, the record would show that perhaps at best,

the defendant displayed a romantic interest in TD, but that is altogether different

than what he was charged with in the confines of the sexual harassment policy.

There was no evidence contained in the policy that TD acknowledged.

Thank you very much, Counselor.

Thank you.

Submitted.

Court invites Council in the State for us to please come forward.
