This is case 2023, 0637, appeal of John Dell.

Good morning.

For the record, Justice Hans Marconi is disqualified on this case.

Justice Donovan is not with us physically, but is viewing the arguments and will be participating with us in our deliberation and decision.

Attorney Pigmentelli, I understand you reserved two minutes.

That's correct, Your Honor.

Please proceed.

May it please the court? Good morning.

My name is Adam Pigmentelli of Wrath Young and Pigmentelli.

This is an appeal raising the reputational impact on my client following an erroneous deprivation of his due process rights when the Board of Medicine preceded ex parte unnecessarily and issued an emergency suspension of his license.

We appeal from an order of our, against our motion, denying our motion as an attempt to cure that due process violation.

And we ask that the court overturn the Board's order, find that the product of this ex parte and violative process should be removed from the Board's website.

It's the combination website of the Board and the Office of Professional Licensure and Certification.

The ex parte order was overturned four weeks later at the first opportunity for an adversarial hearing, which my client and I attended.

And following that hearing, the Board found that the OPLC had not met its burden, preponderance of the evidence, to show an imminent threat to life or health.

But this is not just a retrospective analysis that should have been obvious beforehand at the time.

It's a case where prosecutorial discretion should have been exercised.

Just by one example, ahead of this ex parte hearing, which occurred not in the middle of a month, that occurred at the Board's monthly meeting, I was notified, and as you see in the record, that was provided in my appendix,

exchanged emails with the OPLC attorneys involved stating that we would be present if allowed and the response was we would not be allowed to be present for this ex parte hearing.

Therefore, I believe it went forward unnecessarily. There was no emergent need to go forward ex parte when my client was ready willing and able to attend.

Also, the timeline of when the Board discovered the allegations that led to this ex parte hearing shows that the Board did not act imminently, emergently in any way.

But how is this appealed timely given the timeframe between the resolution of the temporary hearing or the ex parte hearing in the website issue?

Well, if I understand your question, Correco, Your Honor, the timeliness issue we appealed within 30 days following a denial of our motion for reconsideration.

Well, but you are challenging the website. Your challenge in terms of due process, shouldn't that have been made earlier and before your client resigned or gave up his license?

That's a great point. The appeal today, though, is as to my client's liberty and reputational interest, not as to his property interest, which is affected by this ex parte order.

And so I believe it is timely because we sought this relief after he had voluntarily resigned his license to after his career had essentially been destroyed by this ex parte order.

And he saw no practical ability for moving forward as a physician any longer.

And at that point, he became a private citizen and his reputational, the reputational impact of this ex parte order should have been considered and was not.

This turns to the October 4th order 2023.

Can we just go back to the May 4th Board of Medicine meeting? Was there regularly scheduled meeting of the Board and they took up the ex parte order?

Yes, in an executive session. And it was taken up in an executive session. I'm not sure exactly when it was taken up.

I provided them the minutes of that meeting, at least just to demonstrate the date. And there are several references to executive session and disciplinary matters.

But the point was, in advance, we were notified informally and we were told we could not attend to avoid an ex parte proceeding, which was unnecessary given the timeline of when they discovered the allegations that they said were an imminent threat to life and health.

To be more specific, some of the allegations were provided to the board in October 2021. Others were provided April 8th 2022. And then the board waited until May 4th 2022 to proceed.

You don't dispute the legality or constitutionality of the board taking immediate action where public safety may be threatened.

No, but there should be some kind of showing to show why the board must proceed ex parte as opposed to giving some form of notice or allowing the person to appear.

And maybe due process can be used flexibly and maybe the amount of notice doesn't have to be the statutory time for, I believe it's 14 days or 30 days.

That could be shrunken and say, we're going to be considering your matter based on these complaints tomorrow or the next day. You can attend if you so choose.

There may be some times and certainly are where ex parte action has to be taken because it's an emergency.

Something has to be done immediately. For example, a physician who suffered a severe health issue such as a stroke who should not be practicing any longer right away.

Something needs to be done like that day to deny that person a medical license so that there's no practice, no further practice.

But in this case, they waited. They sat on the allegations until the monthly meeting. And then even after the meeting, there was no imminent risk.

The board did not treat it as imminent because in order to suspend, it was not even issued that day. It was issued May 6th.

So if they had acted more quickly, you wouldn't have a complaint?

Well, I would still have the complaint that they went forward improvidently with an ex parte hearing. But the reasoning would be a little different.

It would go more towards the merits of whether it was truly imminent and whether they could have shown there was an imminent need.

It seems to me sort of broadly speaking, you're asking us really to micromanage the affairs of the Board of Medicine in a way that we're very ill-equipped to do.

Well, I'm not asking for a factual determination of any facts that the Board determined.

The facts that are before you are, the timeline of when the complaints were made to the Board, when the Board met, and when the Board issued its order.

None of that is in dispute. I'm not asking for a second guessing of that finding.

It's not what I'm asking for and since there was no showing that ex parte and ex parte process was required in this case and it was not treated in an ex parte way, such as an emergent way.

For example, going back to some of the October 4th order denying our request, some of the things that the Board wrote in there are incorrect statements of due process.

And so the denial of due process was the denial of giving us a fair hearing on that motion to remove the materials from the website.

One of the things that the Board wrote to justify its decision was that ex parte process is commonly used, such as for TROs, but it's not commonly used for a temporary restraining order.

If you show up to court and you haven't notified or served your opposing party or opposing council in advance, you better have a very, very good reason for why you're proceeding ex parte.

It doesn't happen commonly.

Doesn't it happen all the time in domestic violence cases where a petition comes into the court? It's ruled on ex parte, significant deprivations of a defendant's rights before a hearing.

And quite commonly at a hearing, the defendant is vindicated.

And so that gets to the imminence, the imminent threat.

And I can think of some examples where, for example, someone has a firearm that has been fired around a spouse and threatening language is used.

That is an imminent threat. Something must be done immediately.

But to be more similar to your case, take the domestic violence petition that alleges misconduct but that isn't sustained at the hearing.

Right. So that's where I think what should have happened in this case.

It shouldn't have been sustained. There shouldn't have been an ex parte order because four weeks later, when they finally heard from my client at an adversarial hearing, they found that there was no imminent threat.

Another thing, how is your client's reputational harm, in light of his surrender of professional license and what he stipulated in terms of surrendering the license, how is there any harm to his reputation by maintaining this public record of what actually happened at the Board of Medicine?

Right. The voluntary surrender is essentially a form of a settlement with the Board.

And the language in the voluntary surrender is one line describing what had happened, as opposed to the ex parte order, the notice for the emergency, for the adversarial hearing and the orders that came out of the adversarial hearing, describe what happened in immense detail.

And it negatively impacts his reputation. And all of those, the statements in there are not accurate. They're not proven.

Isn't there a great interest that the public has in knowing what happened here in the sequence? And you may say that it was wrong or it was badly handled, but to erase the record or have the sequence and what happened disappear would defeat the whole purpose of the open government?

We're not looking to erase the record. The materials would still be subject to 91A sitting with the Board. They just would not be published on the website. Just as many other orders issued by the Board of Medicine, including in this case, are not published on the website, there's a certain amount of discretion that goes into what they publish and what they do not.

So that's what we should be micromanaging, whether or not something gets posted on a website or not. Not whether it's available to the public if they want to go look at it, but whether it's put on a website. That's what we should be second guessing.

If it's an ex parte order entered into improvidently that is then vacated at the first opportunity, yes, that's what I believe should happen. That's what we're arguing for.

As a matter of law it should never have been posted. That's your position? As a matter of law it should not have been posted? Or as a matter of the Board's discretion it should not have been posted?

I think both.

A matter of the Board's discretion, I mean that's the Board's discretion.

They have to exercise their discretion with good reason. They can't do it arbitrarily or capriciously. For example, also it cannot lead to an unreasonable or unjust result.

And that's the result that has happened here. The ex parte discipline was reversed at the first opportunity.

The ex parte discipline shouldn't have existed even under their own statute. Even under their own statute there was no imminent threat to life or health which they found at an adversarial hearing which should have been known at the time.

But you do concede that even if the orders were taken down off the website they're still subject to the right to know act.

Right.

And would be producible upon a request by anyone.

That's right. Just like every other order such as the order in this case denying a motion to exclude certain evidence.

And the very orders on the motion for consideration, denying the motion for consideration, those were not published on the website either.

So they do exercise some form of discretion as to what they post and do not.

And when you have an ex parte order entered into the way this one was addressing, now we're not appealing based on property rights.

This is his liberty interest.

But going into that ex parte hearing there was a property right at issue.

There was his reputational, his liberty interest at issue.

There's article 2b of the New Hampshire Constitution.

Was that raised at the time?

That issue, no. It was not raised at the time but reputation was raised at the time.

What statute authorizes the appeal specifically under 541?

I believe it's authorized under RSA 329 and 31014 subsection 3.

Now I know 31014 subsection 3, it's preceded by two paragraphs.

One says it relates to discipline.

The other relates to denial of a license.

But this matter is that although the disciplinary matter ended and we're not appealing from discipline, this matter is attendant to discipline.

It's not a one-off the way the nurse anesthetist case or appeal of Barry which is unpublished.

So you're saying the website posting is intended to discipline?

Well, it's a part of the discipline.

To continue to maintain it on the website is a part of the public discipline.

It's also part, you know, and I do take the argument seriously from the state that there is a right for people to know.

But when you have an ex parte order that's vacated, what it does is, and I see the red light on,

what it does is it denies my client the ability to respond appropriately, which he was denied at the time.

Thank you.

Attorney Pignatelli, you reserve two minutes.

Attorney LaBardi.

Good morning.

May it please the court, Laura LaBardi representing the Board of Medicine.

Transparency in government action is a matter of great public interest.

And the OPLC's policy of posting all disciplinary orders on its website

promotes transparency in the conduct of public business and is consistent with the right to no law,

Part 1 Article 8 of the State Constitution and RSA 329-8.

The orders that the Board determines to post on the website is also consistent with the federal requirements

with respect to what orders need to be sent to the National Data Bank.

The OPLC applies this policy uniformly to ensure that all similarly situated licensees are not treated differently.

By denying the applicant's request to remove orders relating to him from the website,

the OPLC and the Board treated him the same as all other similarly situated licensees,

which was entirely reasonable.

Is there any discretion in determining what gets posted on the website?

I would say the discretion is in the policy determination of what will be posted.

And the OPLC has determined that all orders that are disciplinary orders should be posted.

So while it's true that certain orders such as structuring orders or preliminary orders aren't posted,

all disciplinary orders are posted.

And they're the same orders that have to be reported to the National Data Bank.

So when an emergency suspension order is issued, that must be reported to the National Data Bank.

If that order is later vacated, as occurred in this case, then that order is posted.

It's important to post all of these orders on the Board's website to ensure that the public has easy access to these orders.

While an individual could go to the Board and make a 91A request,

there is no law prohibiting the Board from having a policy that makes it easier for the public to access these orders.

And there's no dispute here that these orders are public.

There's no legal requirement to take the order off.

And the Board and the OPLC acted reasonably and fairly by treating the appellant the same as it treats all other applicants.

So any other applicant or any other licensee who has had an emergency suspension order later vacated,

those orders appear on the website and on their physician profile as well.

With respect to the due process arguments,

the appellant waived those arguments by voluntarily surrendering his license.

And in any event, the Board complied with the applicable statute and rules.

There's no direct challenge to the constitutionality of the statute in this case.

There's also no real allegation that the Board failed to comply with the statute.

The allegation is that because the Board later vacated the emergency order,

it should be removed from the website due to reputational interests.

In terms of reputational interests, conduct that a physician engages in in the context of his professional capacity is not private or personal conduct.

The physician knows that it is a privilege to have license as a physician

and that their conduct in the capacity of a physician is being regulated by the Board of Medicine.

And the Board's primary responsibility is to protect the public.

When it is when information is received that suggests that there is an imminent danger to patient health and safety,

then the statutes allow the Board to immediately suspend an emergency, suspend a license.

Well, it was immediate about having a hearing at their regularly scheduled meeting,

at least some period of time after counsel for the physician was on notice.

That is a good point.

Typically an emergency suspension hearing would not happen at a regular meeting.

But here the complaint appears to be more with the OPLC prosecutors, not with the Board itself.

It is the Board who makes the determination whether there is an imminent danger to health and safety.

When the information was presented to the Board at their meeting,

they immediately made the decision that this was an emergency situation that required a suspension just for 10 days until a hearing could be held.

Emergency suspension hearings are always conducted ex parte.

That is what the statute envisions.

That's also what RSA 541A 33, 30 paragraph 3 with respect to all boards.

Does ex parte mean they're held in an executive session?

Aren't they public meetings?

No, it would not be public meeting because it does deal with reputational interest and harm.

So it would not become public until the Board issues the emergency order.

So in the event they would hold ex parte because if this information is presented and the Board denies the request,

then that would not become public.

So the public proceeding begins with the emergency order.

So back to the board has authority to immediately suspend, under the rules.

Correct.

But how, I guess getting back to Justice Countway,

I understand what you're saying about OPLC and the prosecutors,

but still the board was the one that was vested with the authority of immediately suspending.

And when an allegation comes in on April 8th and you're immediately suspending on May 4th, that doesn't seem very immediate.

And I think that goes to the point that John Doe is making here.

There is no immediacy.

And why couldn't they have waited the two more weeks to May 27th?

Well, that goes to the, they had a 10-day hearing and the order was vacated.

So the extent that these allegations did not rise to the level of an emergency, the order was vacated.

The court after holding the required hearing made that determination and that satisfies due process.

A post-deprivation procedure satisfies due process if your situation requires that the government take immediate action.

And concerns dealing with the possible risk to public health and safety is such a situation that requires immediate action.

But if the board exceeded its authority and had no authority to make an immediate suspension 30 days after the allegations came in,

why is the order being posted?

I don't believe there's any legal basis to find that the board did not have authority to make an emergency suspension.

The statute says that when the board received the information, it shall, if it makes a finding that there is a risk to public health and safety,

it shall issue an emergency suspension order.

When it received the information at the hearing, it made that order.

The fact that the OPLC prosecutors perhaps did not bring the information to the board as quickly as they should have,

it is the board that has the professional experience and the expertise in determining when a situation rises to the level of imminent harm.

So the board didn't have the information until that meeting, is that right?

It hadn't been submitted to the board.

Board members didn't have it available to them?

I'm not aware based on what's in the record.

I don't believe so.

I mean, it sounds like from the records that the OPLC received the complaint was investigating the allegations and the OPLC contacted the physician,

which is typical before an emergency process.

They typically will contact the licensee to see if they would agree to a temporary suspension.

These hearings are always exparte.

It would make an extreme burden on boards, which are primarily made up of volunteer members that only meet monthly,

to have to have an adversarial proceeding any time that an emergency situation comes before them.

So in this case, it followed the, there's no challenge to the constitution of the statutes.

The board complied with the statutes.

Again, the appellant waived his challenge to the due process arguments by not going forward with an adjudicatory hearing.

There's never been a determination on the misconduct allegations.

The 10-day hearing simply found that there was, this was not an emergency situation that required him not to practice.

There never was a hearing on the misconduct and whether or not it occurred.

The appellant could have gone forward with an adjudicatory hearing to essentially clear his name,

but he chose to voluntarily, voluntarily give up his license to practice.

Do you believe that 329, I believe it's subsection 17, provides for appellate review or not?

No.

That statute relates to appeals from disciplinary action, I believe.

So if he had gone forward with an adjudicatory hearing and had been disciplined by the board, then there would be a right to appeal.

But there's no right to appeal from a request.

And again, what's before the court here is the request to remove information from the website.

And that is not an issue that can be appealed to this court.

So we're here on certiary review.

And it was entirely reasonable for the board and the OPLC director to determine that the information should not be removed from the website

because it was consistent with the policy of the OPLC to post all disciplinary orders to the website.

And removing this appellant's orders would have been treating him differently than other licensees.

So it was reasonable to treat him the same as all other licensees to keep the information on the website that is consistent with OPLC's policy.

How would notice an opportunity be heard in this situation consistent with, for instance, superior court practice and TROs?

It's different because here there's a specific statute that provides for an emergency suspension, ex parte, and then a hearing within 10 days.

So ex parte means that the accused can't appear and offer evidence?

They appear at the hearing.

At the ex parte?

Yes, no. I mean there's nothing that would prevent the board, I think, from allowing a licensee to attend, but there's nothing requiring that.

So the proceeding does not commence until the order is issued.

The order is essentially the notice to the physician of the allegations against him.

And the hearing must be commenced within 10 days.

And it's similar to a notice of hearing.

So when the board commences a disciplinary proceeding, not in an emergent situation, they would issue a notice of hearing which again would explain the allegations against the physician.

That would be public as well.

So the emergency suspension order is similar to a notice of hearing in that it presents what the allegations are.

And they also give a notice that the physician can come to the 10-day hearing to contest those allegations.

So again, a post-deprivation hearing satisfies due process when circumstances require immediate action by the government.

In this case, the legislature has determined that when that physician poses an imminent danger to life or health or patients, that's the kind of circumstance that requires immediate action.

The 10-day hearing after the issuing of the order protects a physician's due process rights to a hearing.

And here the board and the OPLC acted entirely reasonably in keeping the orders on the website consistent with its policy, which treats all licensees the same.

I ask that you affirm the decision of the board and the OPLC. Thank you.

Thank you, Attorney LaBardi.

Attorney Pigmentelli.

Thank you.

Just to address a couple of the questions from the court.

This is an extraordinary type of matter, the type of matter contemplated by some of the cases that were submitted in the briefing.

As far as I can discover, this is the only time the board of medicine has issued ex parte discipline and then vacated it at the first opportunity for a hearing.

And in the order that the board issued, it said there was no imminent threat to life or health, established, proven at that hearing.

There wasn't at the first ex parte hearing either.

And it may just be a slip of the tongue, but I think I heard this idea of the standard being possible risk to safety.

It's not possible. It's imminent risk to life and health. I'm not being critical of counsel, but it's imminent risk.

And there was no imminent risk in this case.

But the allegations were very serious, the issues that were raised.

Right. And then when you start looking at them, what they are is they amount to what are claimed to be inappropriate discussions about sex with patients.

With one patient in particular.

A lot of this evidence, by the way, at the ex parte hearing came in as double or triple hearsay as well on top of everything else.

I come back to the bagling in the vial cases, which are the ones I primarily relied upon at the time before the board.

Do you agree that this should be treated as a petition for certiorari and that the standard should be that standard that we apply in those cases, which is highly deferential?

I think the standard under certiorari or under 541 are pretty similar. I think I saw the appeal of Dell case. They sound very similar in their description.

But this one is a tendon to discipline is not a one off like the nurse anesthetist case or another case appeal of Barry, which was earlier this year and unpublished.

So this is a tendon to discipline. It was not just a one off it related to discipline that had occurred.

So I don't think it should be a certiorari.

The other issue I want to discuss too is this idea of give due process being given as the right to present your case at a meaningful time in a meaningful manner.

That had already passed.

And so I come back to a big Mark Twain fan.

The lie gets halfway around the world while the truth is tying shoes.

That's what happened here.

I have a meaningful opportunity, even though he was ready, willing and able to attend.

Also, I come back to Bagley. I see the red light is on.

So I would ask for a reversal based upon the arguments today.

And thank you.

Thank you very much.
