This is case 230083, Jonathan Stone v. City of Claremont.

Good morning.

Decado, I understand you reserved one minute.

And I understand Attorney Bisonette, you'll be handling the argument for that side.

Good morning.

My name is Peter Decado.

I represent Jonathan Stone.

I wanted to begin by telling you that my first lesson in contract law came from my father who had an eight grade education.

And he had told me that a man's word is a man's bond.

Later on, as I became a lawyer, I became familiar with Article 1, Section 8, and Article 1, Section 23 of our Constitution.

And familiar with the U.S. Constitution, Part 1, Article 10, about the impairment of contract.

I want to go back in time in 2006.

There was a contract made between the City of Claremont and my client, Jonathan Stone.

They had agreed at an arbitration that in lieu of presenting some 30-some-odd witnesses that they would settle the case.

And they settled it with a negotiated resignation.

The City of Claremont got something.

Mr. Stone got something.

That was the certainty of a result.

Within that stipulated award, because it was approved by an arbitrator, there were certain agreements.

One of them had to do with confidentiality of the agreement.

It contained language, however, that said, unless it violates the law or unless ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction, the settlement agreement would remain confidential.

That's the only paragraph where that language occurred.

The next paragraph said that the City of Claremont agreed to purge the record, purge the person in the file.

As far as I know, the word purge means to get rid of.

As it turned out, instead of purging, the City of Claremont decided that there was another file they would put it in.

And they put it in.

I can't recall exactly what the name of the file was.

I had called it an other file.

I believe the City of Claremont called it an investigation, an IA file.

However, they didn't distinguish between IA files with findings and IA files without findings.

Because what happened here is that when this case was resolved, they turned the clock back.

You see that language in correspondence with the New Hampshire police standards and training.

So the City tells the police standards and training would turn the clock back.

We turned it back so far that there are no findings.

And so there was no finding of moral torpitude.

There was nothing that desertified Mr. Stone.

He was free to become an officer.

So Mr. Decado, how is it that your client has standing to raise this issue?

I'm sorry.

How does your client have standing under 91A?

I hope that he has the same standing that Provenzo had in his appeal.

So if we go back, the record reflects that Judge Tucker said, I'm sorry, let me go back a bit.

The City of Claremont initiated a petition for declaratory judgment.

They felt that was the best way to raise the issue.

And, incidentally, in that petition, they said that Mr. Stone's privacy rights were considerable, substantial, his privacy rights.

Because the City knew about that agreement.

In any event, they brought it to Judge Tucker's attention, and Judge Tucker dismissed the petition for declaratory judgment

and indicated to the City that he would prefer that they treat this as a right to no request under 91A 4 or 5 Roman numeral 4.

Are you making any claims under RSA 91A?

No.

So you've waived any claim that the exemptions are under 91A to your client?

The 91, let me answer the question this way.

The Judge gave us a right to enjoy file a petition for injunction.

I think that's pretty close to what happened for Provenzo.

Mr. Provenzo filed a petition to enjoy.

So at the time, the only party where Mr. Stone and the City of Claremont, the interveners came in and raised the 91A request.

Mr. Fisher had originally raised the complaint, but he never became a party as such.

The interveners came in and raised the 91A.

So you're simply seeking to enforce the stipulated award as opposed to making any claim that these records are subject to the balancing of privacy interests under 91A 5 Roman 4, correct?

That's a hard question to answer.

I'm here because, you know, three quarters of this case.

The way you brief the case seems limited to the contract claims.

My feeling is that there's a collision here between impairment of contract and the right to no.

I want to enforce that agreement.

I believe it should be enforced.

I don't know why it shouldn't be enforced.

These folks feel that it comes under the right to no.

As we're sitting here today, given the state of the law, would you agree that it cannot be enforced given this court's decisions in the right to no decisions, including venom and being overruled essentially?

I would say I'm sitting here today having watched the right to no law.

But I want to say the law from 2020 kept track of it emerge, but it wasn't that way in 2006.

My question is sitting here today.

Is the contract enforceable given the current state of the law?

I believe it's enforceable.

And here why?

There were no findings.

There are no cases that I believe you've ever seen where there was a contract and there was an allegation.

It comes down to whether it requires allegations to be disclosed to the public.

The city of Clamont and their memorandum even said this will appeal to the Prairie in interest of anybody that reads the newspapers.

And it will.

And it will embarrass and humiliate my client and embarrass and humiliate a bunch of other people in the city of Clamont if Mr. Stone decides to defend against that.

So is that the right to no law?

Does it require the public to know the allegations are 17 years old?

The question is whether the contract is enforceable or not if it violates public policy.

All right.

That's what the lower court said.

It said it violated public policy.

But I'm saying that the public policy we ought to look at was in 2006 or 2007.

But otherwise you'd have an improper retrospective application of a change in the law.

That's the way I feel.

And I read the C.C.O.'s United and the union leader case carefully and I saw the discussion about thyroid diseases.

And there's one paragraph in there about reliance.

And in the course of your looking at whether or not the C.C.O. should be upheld here, you came to the conclusion that there was no reliance on the old law.

We rely on the old law because in Fenneman was in play and it had been in play for I think it was 1993 and went back in 2006.

So that's the law of the case when it made disagreement.

And so that's what we relied on.

That was the public interest of public right then and back then.

When Fenneman was there, I think the information would have been considered confidential.

One had been disclosed to the public.

And then you had the emerging law in 2020 when things changed.

I understand that things changed.

So peace justice, I'm not trying to avoid your question.

Under today's law it gets disclosed but I don't think it should be disclosed.

I think it's a retrospective law and I think my client is caught in that trap.

So do you agree that if we find that agreement is void because it is against public policy?

That's as far as we have to go.

That's the end of the case.

Your client loses.

I certainly feel that if you find it void because it's against public policy, I'm not sure I can prevail.

But I do hope that you will look at the retrospective nature of my argument.

Because there were expectations.

There were expectations back in 2006 or 2007.

I can't believe anybody in that room when they made this agreement started coming.

And so we're kind of shocked.

The grievance was with respect to its termination.

Isn't that correct?

I would say yes.

It's a little more than that.

There were four grievances covering I think maybe four or five IAs.

So do you agree that the agreement only applies to a number of the information requests that are being made here, not all of them?

I do.

And I haven't said much about the first date, but just so I put this on the record, there are eight disciplines.

I believe that there are oral reprimands, verbal reprimands.

And on their face, consistent with the collective bargaining agreement, they lasted for one year.

So I think the issue is, what's the public's interest in seeing a verbal reprimand or a written reprimand that occurred 17 years ago?

But it seems you agree that the stipulated award, the settlement agreement, does not apply to the first seven?

I think it could be eight, but I agree with you.

It doesn't cover it.

All right, so the extent they're involved in the litigation, you don't have a right that you're trying to enforce to keep those from becoming public?

Quite honestly, it's the least of our problems.

I think we're concerned with the others.

We're concerned with the ones that were grieved.

But at least I wanted to bring to your attention that the CBA at the time said that it would go away.

And the understanding of the grievance procedure pursuant to the CBA at the time was that it was a confidential procedure.

Exactly.

Otherwise, why would people avail themselves of the grievance process?

That's true.

I think everybody felt it was confidential.

That's all I have for now.

Thank you.

And unless there's other questions.

With the letters prior to these standards, the letters prior correspondence between the city and police standards prior to the agreement, what are they covered by?

That's a good question because I think Mr. Fisher asked for those.

I think these folks asked for those.

But they shouldn't certainly be seen in the vacuum because, again, I have no problem with the public seeing the stipulated award.

But that's how the government worked.

That's what their government did in 2006.

And if the object of the right to know law is to disclose how your government was working, that's how they operated in 2006.

So getting back to the correspondence with police standards and training.

It just seems to me there's some scurrilous charges sort of in the beginning.

But at the end of it, because they're saying it was moral turpitude originally.

But at the end of it, maybe the public ought to know the fact that they turned back the clock.

Those are their terms.

They turned back the clock far enough so that there wasn't a finding of wrongdoing.

There was no finding.

So I said in my brief, using the criminal law as sort of an analogy, this was placed on file without finding.

Would it be a circumvention?

Would it be contrary to public policy to have an agreement that would circumvent the decertification process under New Hampshire law?

The circumvented.

The police decertification process under New Hampshire law?

In 2006, I think this was appropriate.

And I've seen, for example, in 2003, even the legislature passed a bill saying they're going to begin a commission.

Because it was confusion about what the right to know law applied to.

Well, I guess, I mean, my question is under existing police standards rules at the time the chief notified the director of the police standards and training council.

He said that there had been, and filed a form B, that the officer had been discharged.

And then the inquiry back from police standards was, well, does he meet any of these criteria for being decertified?

And the chief responded back, well, I believe it appears that he does in effect.

And the effect of this agreement is to halt to any further proceedings under the decertification process of police standards.

And isn't that a concern involving public policy?

It did put a halt to it because the end of it was in furtherance of the agreement.

They said, that is, the city said to police standards and training that turn back the clock and there were no findings.

You can back the clock, but you can't undo the events.

It may implicate the police standards rules.

Well, this also wasn't decertified. It was free to become continuous enough.

So that's what happened.

I know there's a public need to know the volleyball here that the ball went over.

I don't know.

Thank you, attorney.

Thank you.

We'll be there in one minute.

Attorney Bissonette.

Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.

May it please the court, Gilles Bissonette, on behalf of the intervenors here with me at council table is attorney Greg Sullivan,

that represents Intervenor Union Leader Corporation.

I understand that the intervenors will have the full 15 minutes as the city has waived our argument in this case.

I want to get to the core of what this case is about and what I think the threshold question really is,

which is how do we look at the 2007 stipulated award here?

And in particular, it's purging and confidentiality provisions in the context of a right to know law request.

And I think here that stipulated award doesn't apply.

And that's for several reasons.

First, I just want to set aside right away, IA reports number one through seven.

They are not covered under the stipulated award.

There is no basis for withholding those documents under the stipulated award.

Their traditional 901A principles apply under those principles, the balancing test,

favors disclosure to the extent that 901A exemptions are even being raised at this point,

which is not clear to the intervenors.

So I just wanted to set those aside because with respect to the stipulated award.

Is it the city's responsibility or the individual's responsibility to raise that privacy interest for both?

Sure.

I think that goes to the core question with respect to whether or not a reverse 901A action is permissible.

And I think those concerns are to be raised by the government agency.

A court, not the particular individual.

It is our position that reverse 901A actions are inappropriate.

But that does not mean, though, that third parties that may have privacy interests

cannot voice their concerns to the government actor, the government body,

with respect to their particular privacy rights.

That decision does fall on the government entity.

They are the gatekeeper of the records, and it is ultimately their determination.

But isn't that what happened here?

I mean, the city manager effectively invited Mr. Stone to intervene and uphold his privacy interests.

Yes, but that decision at the end of the day, though, is on the government body.

The government body took that into consideration and ultimately concluded

that the public interest here prevailed over the privacy interests.

And we think that those in that sort of...

I mean, the city manager had concluded that this...

Obviously information should be disclosed, but then invited the officer to intervene

and former officer to intervene and effectively overcome the city's decision.

That is true.

And in fact, that is what happened in the original lawsuit that was dismissed

and the Superior Court there did effectively invite a lawsuit that the officer could bring

if the officer disagreed with the city's decision.

And we respectfully disagree with that approach.

Obviously, the permissibility of reverse 901A actions was not addressed by the Provenza case.

And I think there are real costs that can...

I'm sorry, you're on...

I'm just interested in what is the textual basis for precluding a reverse 901A.

Sure.

I think when you look at RS 91A7, it says that any person aggrieved by a violation of this chapter

a petition to Superior Court for injunctive relief.

And here we think person aggrieved means a member of the public who's been aggrieved

by a decision on behalf of a government body to not produce information that's been requested.

But isn't that in tension with a number of cases that we've decided the Caremark Health case

and also the Union Leader versus New Hampshire Housing Authority.

Both of those cases, they have the names of these entities that have gotten involved,

intervened in the case to assert their privacy rights.

We've been doing that for 20 years.

That's certainly true.

And I don't think the issue has actually been raised affirmatively in those cases

with respect to the priority of whether or not those actions are appropriate.

And in fact, I think it was largely assumed that is okay.

But we contested, and in fact, in the FOIA context and with respect to other states

that have interpreted their right to no law, it is mixed throughout the country.

But in this case, we have a contract that somebody is standing to enforce.

Isn't that different?

It actually might be.

I want to get to that point at its core here.

And before you leave this one, we read the privacy exemption in light of the amendment

to the Constitution solidifying a person's privacy interests.

That has to do with informational privacy.

But what that is designed to do is protect individuals from government intrusion

with respect to their privacy rights.

This is the reverse of that, which is why...

Actually, the government is disclosing or making the decision to disclose.

Well, I would also submit, though, Your Honor, that what would be occurring here

is the prevention of information concerning the government from being made accessible to the public.

And I think that is a fundamental...

Concerning the government and concerning a government employee.

Well, here we are dealing with, Your Honor, public records dealing with public officials.

Well, here are public to their public, if they're exempt.

That's true, but here, Your Honor, dealing with a public servant,

a public servant where there have been some real concerns raised

with respect to the nature of what the officer did in his official capacity.

And a redefinition retrospectively of whether that's a public document or not.

Yeah, I want to get to that core of retrospectiveness.

But first, I want to get to the outstanding question,

because I think this is important.

I do think, under our position with respect to reverse 91A challenges,

there is no standing to raise the contract as a specific exemption under 91A5.

Setting that aside, I think that is a separate question

from whether or not just as a party to the contract, right?

Mr. Stone has the ability to seek an enforcement of the contract.

Those are two separate questions.

So I think at its core, again, what this case is about is assuming he is standing,

apart from 91A, to simply seek enforcement of the contract,

what does the contract mean?

That is, I think, really what this case is about.

And I would like to get to just the Sonsmarconi's issue and question raised

with respect to retroactivity, because I want to be clear

that I don't think there's anything impermissibly retroactive

about concluding that these documents should be released in this case.

And I want to start with just the plain text of the contract,

what the city and Mr. Stone actually agreed to in this case,

which I think is critical.

Respect to the confidentiality provisions, there is not blanket confidentiality.

It does not say that these records shall be confidential in perpetuity period.

What it says is there is an expectation of confidentiality,

but then key provision being accept to the extent required by an order

of some other agency, court of competent jurisdiction, or by law.

There is an understanding among the parties that the law can change,

that there could be a moment in the future in which the law

notwithstanding this initial expectation.

So is this contract void, then, mutual mistake of fact?

Do we dial it back to...

I think you only would need to conclude that it is void as a matter of public policy.

If you agree with Mr. Stone's interpretation that this...

No, it is a void because the parties didn't contemplate

what they understood to be confidential was going to change.

I don't agree.

They...

That may be true if they said there was categorical confidentiality,

but that is not what the parties understood or agreed to.

Under the terms of the contract, they specifically carved out exceptions

and exception here that says explicitly accept to the extent

required by an order of some other agency, court of competent jurisdiction,

or by law.

There is an understanding here that the law can change over time

and the law then could be subjected to the documents in question.

So I reject the notion that what was expected by the party

was categorical confidentiality.

I do think the court would only need to address the issue

of whether or not this contract is void against public policy

if it agrees with Mr. Stone's interpretation

that it provides for categorical confidentiality.

I don't think you necessarily need to get there if you conclude,

as I think would be appropriate,

that there was a critical limitation in the confidentiality provisions here

and that those limitations ultimately worn out when the law did change,

when this court did overturn the Venom and Decision in May of 2020.

I think the same is true with respect to the purging provisions.

The purging provisions of this contract do not say

that these documents will be destroyed,

that they will never exist within the Claremont Police Department.

No.

What the contract says is that the city shall purge these documents

from his personnel file.

It does not say that they would be purged in other locations,

that they would not be purged, say, for example,

if the city of Claremont wanted to collect all of their IA documents

so they could have a mechanism to determine how their IA process

has unfolded and has been purged.

And so I also would encourage this court to reject the notion

that this contract required wholesale destruction of the documents.

I don't think that's what it says.

But if this court does conclude that there would need to be

destruction here under the contract, that is where, again,

Your Honors, we think that this would violate public policy.

And we think the courts are quite clear on that.

When you look at other courts that have addressed these questions

that I won't kind of go through the litany of all of them.

They're in our briefs.

But why the courts have reached those conclusions is

because an agreement's confidentiality provisions cannot

form a public records law, especially where the whole point

here of this contract, I want to be very clear,

was to limit public access.

That was the goal.

That was the desire.

And this is an important principle that those provisions cannot

be enforced if you believe, if you interpret it as requiring

wholesale confidentiality and destruction.

It can't be enforced because the public would have lost

a remedy here under our public records law.

The public was not a party to this contract.

But if these provisions are to be enforced,

the public would be subjected to a contract that they were

not a party to.

What's going to be disclosed didn't reach a conclusion.

So given the posture of this settlement agreement,

you're getting sort of incomplete or one-sided disclosure

because it didn't go to trial.

There wasn't a final decision.

So how do we deal with that?

It's no more one-sided than with respect to documents

and criminal cases that can be public when they are,

say, placed on trial without a finding.

Those documents are similarly public

because there is an intrinsic value in the public

knowing how that proceeding was handled and managed

and the decisions that were made by relevant actors.

Isn't there a sustained finding that the discipline

is meted out?

Yes.

In fact, I wanted to get to that.

Certainly, that is true with respect to number

I files 1 through 7.

They were all indicated, right?

I don't think there's any dispute there.

With respect to 8 through 14 minus 11 through 12,

which we are not seeking.

I want to be very clear about that.

There still was a determination by the department

that there is a protective order,

so I don't want to get into the contents.

But there was a relevant finding there made

by the city police department.

But even if they were not...

It was grieved for some of them.

Yes.

No, I think that's accurate.

But even the fact that this is not adjudicated

if we were to credit the conclusion by Mr. Stone,

I still think that the information should be released.

Similarly, in the Preventive Case,

where that information was released,

even though there was a non-sustained finding there.

How should it affect our analysis if at all

that Mr. Stone was a candidate for public office

and now holds public office?

I think it only magnifies the public interest in disclosure.

Here, I think there's a public interest,

regardless of those facts,

given the fact that we're dealing with a police officer

on the job.

But I think that only enhances the public interest

in disclosure.

And I just want to close,

because I know that my time is...

I'm sorry, your honor.

I just...

This contract was signed after the IA's

had been sent to police standards.

So, and obviously police standards is not a party

to this contract.

And so the...

I mean, do we have to think about the purging requirement

and confidentiality to the extent it has any breadth

in light of the fact that the documents had already been...

the IA's had already been sent over,

pursuant to police standard rules?

The answer is no, you do not.

Those documents are wholly separate.

And in fact, they were created and disseminated

outside of the employment,

human relations process.

Those documents were disseminated for the police standards

and training council to make an evaluation

concerning whether or not there should be

certification consequences which are wholly unrelated

to the separate employment function that exists

with respect to the city of Claremont.

So, in our view,

those documents clearly should be released

for the reasons explained in our brief.

But why isn't that sufficient?

Well, because it's unclear...

Frankly, it's unclear to us from documents

what was transmitted to police standards and training.

That was my question.

I mean, the record that I've seen doesn't appear

to have the attachments with...

Yes, I think that's right.

And in fact, Your Honor,

I don't even think we have in the record

the March 27, 2006 notice of termination

for various reasons.

So I think any documents that will relate

to PSDC we think could be released,

but I do want to acknowledge that I think it is difficult

for me to evaluate based on the record

what was transmitted to PSDC.

I just want to close here, again, to be clear

that nothing in this case implicates retroactivity.

We are simply asking in a manner

no different than any other right to no request

that the law, in effect, at the time this request

was made and under the law that currently exists today,

that that law be applied to documents

that currently exist in the department's possession.

The same was the case with Provenza,

with respect to documents there that were created

before May 2020.

Same was the case with respect to the same

Seacoast newspaper decisions,

documents there that were ultimately released

because of this court's decision.

And here the legislature hasn't done anything retrospectively.

The statute is unchanged,

and as this court concluded, in Matt Blaisdell,

at common law, appellate decisions

are presumptively retroactive,

and that is the case here.

But again, the contractual provisions here

do not mandate purging and confidentiality,

as Mr. Snow suggests in our...

Thank you, Attorney Bissonette.

Attorney Decado.

I think it's amazing that the city of Claremont

at that arbitration tell us that

purging it from the personnel file,

they were going to create another file.

It would be part of the agreement.

They're going to purge it from the personnel file.

Maybe the parties to that arbitration

should have known that.

Thank you.

Thank you very much, counsel.

Case ended.

Court's in recess.
