This is case 2023, 0754, state of New Hampshire versus Casely Shandorf.

Before we begin the first case, let me just say that we're going to sit on this case and then take a brief recess because the Chief Justice is on the next two cases.

So Mr. Eaton, please begin.

Thank you, your honors. May it please the court. Michael Eaton for the appellant, Casely Shandorf.

I reserve one minute of my time for rebuttal. I'd like to focus on two issues this morning.

First, the evidence was insufficient as to intent where the defendant unequivocally objected to sexual activity with a minor and contemporaneously provided an innocent explanation as to why he went to meet the persona.

In second, this was a classic bait-and-switch entrapment where the police created a crime that Mr. Shandorf did not intend to commit without any individualized suspicion as to either Mr. Shandorf or any group he was associated with.

So I'm happy to take any questions at any time. Can we start with your second point first? Of course, yeah.

So with respect to entrapment, as this court said in Campbell back in 1970, the doctrines meant to prevent the government from beguiling innocent though ductile persons into lapses which they might otherwise resist.

And that's exactly what happened here.

The state conceded at trial that Mr. Shandorf had no intent when he responded to that advertisement to engage with sexual relations with a minor.

He intended to set up an appointment with an adult woman. And the police took advantage of that motive.

How does the actual age of the person in the photograph play into the intent argument?

Yeah, so the photograph was of a person over the age of consent, 17 about to turn 18, as the officer had testified.

And that's kind of the problem with these bait-and-switch operations, is posting photographs that happened in Loft said it happened in DeMair, the Florida case,

where people are seeing an individual who is not a minor or above the age of consent in drawing the rational conclusion that they're talking to an adult woman.

And that combined with the fact that this was an adult's only website, that Mr. Shandorf's own experience was that he had never met an underage person before

and that people often misrepresented their age as younger than they actually were.

So, you know, the court in Loft said, the court in DeMair, they analyzed these issues.

And it plays into the intent because Mr. Shandorf is going into this with the motive, with the intention to have sex with an adult woman and not a minor.

When you say that's bolstered by his contemporaneous statements, are you talking about the texts or about his interview?

The texts, yeah. And there are a few that I'd point out. The first is when he acknowledged the disclosure from the police that the persona was underage,

it was a flat and an unequivocal objection. That's illegal and I'm not going to do that if you are underage.

Unlike, you know, the Farrington case, for instance, one of this court's cases, where instead of responding by rejecting sexual activity with a minor,

the defendant in that case said, well, I might be able to deal with that.

And then all of these cases that we can look at, whether it's Farrington or the First Circuit case, Hinkle or Lofted,

they all look at how the defendant then proceeds after the disclosure of the age.

And in the cases where entrapment arguments fail, the defendant starts engaging in sexualized commentary or sexual innuendo directed at the age of the persona.

But aren't you asking us to replace our judgment for the juries? Because this isn't in front of the juries. It's a factual issue, isn't it?

It can be, although there is, as this court has found, there is a basis to find entrapment as a matter of law,

when no juror can find beyond a reasonable doubt that there was no entrapment.

And I think that that's the case here. There is reasonable doubt. Certainly, as to Mr. Shandorf's intent,

there's reasonable doubt as to the inducement that the police used to take advantage of his original motive and transfer it into luring him into this crime.

Should we analyze the intent issues separately from entrapment, or are they really interwoven?

The cases, as I read them, do kind of conflate the two analyses. I think they're related, but they are different.

And so entrapment sort of assumes that the crime has been committed, or in this case it would be the attempt to commit the crime.

And of course, if there is no intent, there is no crime. But I think the analyses can be borrowed from each other in terms of both issues.

What I do want to point out is I think a noteworthy part of the text communications.

And that is after Mr. Shandorf unequivocally objects to having sex with a minor,

after he provides that alternative innocent explanation for going to meet the persona.

I'm just going to go to see if you're legit to make sure you're not underage. He uses that term legit.

And then in response to that, the police officer acting as the persona says, LOL, well, I'm legit.

That I think your honors is perhaps the strongest fact for both the entrapment defense and the intent issues.

Isn't that undermined by your client's statements to the police after he was arrested?

He admitted that he made a mistake, it was an error in judgment. Are those admissions? How do we fact that out?

No, no, they're not admissions as to the intent to commit the crime. Of course it was a mistake.

He could never know for certain whether this person was or was not underage and he ended up being arrested.

So taking that chance, even to just go see, to verify, I think anyone would say that was a mistake

because it ended up in a big misunderstanding that resulted in his arrest.

But that was the lapse in judgment. It wasn't a lapse in judgment to go meet with the intent to have sex with a minor.

The lapse in judgment was he should have just moved on. And he explained that at trial.

That would have been the wiser decision to say, you know, this doesn't seem like a minor and his suspicions as to that were true, as it turns out.

But the persona did tell him that I'm 15 years old, at least three occasions, right?

Yes.

And the persona did tell him that she was too young to drive?

Yes.

So that information, what do we do with that?

Yeah. Well, two things on that. So the first is that information preceded the indication that she was confirming she was not underage.

So she says, I'm 15. I'm not old enough to drive. But then she says, I'm legit, which I think in the context it's clear and certainly irrational inference sufficient to overcome reasonable doubt or the reasonable

doubt standard. But after she confirms she's legit, there's no indication that she's saying she's underage.

So all these issues precede her confirmation or at least her parent confirmation that she's not underage.

And I think, you know, it's not uncommon, certainly Mr. Shandorf's experience is that people misrepresent their age.

It's also not uncommon in these internet type dating things for people to enact, you know, scenarios or fantasies.

And courts have acknowledged that. It's right there in the advertisement. It references scenarios and fantasies.

Mr. Shandorf could simply have believed that that's the fantasy she was playing out. That's a scenario she was playing out.

That's what her customers, for lack of a better word, liked. Not him. He objected to it. He said, it's not going to happen.

And, you know, I'm going to go see, even if you're not underage, or even if you're not underage, he still said I'm not committing to anything.

Didn't testify as to the 0506 on the man's shirt in the picture?

Did Mr. Shandorf testify to that?

I don't recall him specifically testifying to that. I know Officer Collins did, the woman who was depicted in the photograph.

I do think that's certainly another indication that the photograph is someone of someone over the age of 15.

And even the police said during the conversation that it was an old photo, which of course it would have been if the shirt said 0506.

But in any event, I think that's where the entrapment comes into play. That's where the intent issue comes into play.

Does the fact that the police officer indicated that the photograph was a 15-year-old in both the PC, Affidavit, and his police report

factor into any of the second prong of the entrapment analysis, or could it?

I'm not sure. I'm not sure, Your Honor. I think it might go to the motive issue to some degree.

Detective Gilbert talked about this at trial. He conceded that bait and switch is definitionally entrapment.

And he also conceded that his training didn't require knowing an intentional misrepresentation with respect to bait and switch.

So I do think that his belief, erroneous as it was, that he was using a photograph of a 15-year-old girl,

you know, it certainly doesn't cut against entrapment. I think it might support that this was, you know, that the whole course of events was trickery in the context of it.

Mr. Eden, the state argues that your reliance on Lofsted is misplaced and that the case can easily be distinguished as your response.

Yeah. You know, I think that the state may have misread Lofsted.

It distinguishes Lofsted on the basis that the defendant in that case said no to having sex with a 16-year-old or 15-year-old girl,

but agreed to meet the 16-year-old girl and the state points out that Nevada at the age of consent is 16.

But that's not what the case is about. The case is about soliciting commercial sex from an individual under the age of 18.

And so it's the same issue. Here we have a 16 cutoff talking to someone who initially purported to be a 15-year-old.

In Lofsted it was an 18 cutoff talking to an individual purporting to be 16 years old.

But otherwise everything about that case is the same.

Skip the games, the same website, the same bait and switch, the same types of encouragement and pressure.

In Lofsted the persona encouraged the defendant to, you know, to come.

Are you coming? Are you coming or what? In this case we have you coming.

Hey, hon, you on your way. Question mark. Guess I'm going to go to bed then.

In Lofsted we have indications that the persona was in need of money and in this case we do as well.

In Lofsted and DeMair and Lewis and some of these other cases we have assurances with respect to the persona's experience.

She's hosted before. She's booked on the first night. Everyone says, I told for my age, I'm legit.

So we have the same sort of pressure and encouragement and inducement that we had in Lofsted.

Here we even have the statement, I need a short thing. If you're not a short thing, thanks anyway.

Exactly, yeah. So I think this case, your honor, fits neatly within the Lofsted analysis.

I think it fits neatly within the entrapment defense and it can be found as a matter of law that this was in fact entrapment.

You argue that this is an extraordinary case in which dismissal with prejudice is appropriate rather than a new trial. Why is that?

Yeah, in terms of the entrapment claim or?

In terms of the Brady violation.

The Brady violation, yeah. This case, in this case, the proceedings were about four years long.

He was interrupted by COVID and the flagrancy I think with which the state with held evidence, redacted exculpatory evidence is no worthy.

More than three years before trial, the trial court chastised the state, said it's not your job to decide what the defendant gets and what the defendant doesn't get, ordering it to turn over exculpatory evidence.

More than three years before trial, the defense specifically requested, and it's not required under Brady to specifically request exculpatory evidence, but the defense did nonetheless specifically request the MOUs in question.

They specifically requested the training materials and the state not only dragged its feet but objected on frivolous bases.

And of course with the MOUs, they weren't disclosed until nearly the end of trial.

The defense was able to present that defense to the jury, wasn't it, that the ICAC guidelines or directives weren't followed here?

The defense was able to, yes, elicit testimony that the ICAC standards were not followed, but Gilbert's testimony was, I don't have to follow them.

They're not mandatory. And that's what the defense was unable to rebut because the MOUs were never disclosed.

And because they were disclosed at the end of trial and Gilbert denied any knowledge of them, the defense wasn't able to introduce them as evidence to rebut that specific false testimony.

Thank you very much. Your red light's on. You have one minute of reserve.

Ms. McCoola.

Thank you, Your Honor. Good morning. May it please the court. Adriana McCoola for the State of New Hampshire.

I'd like to start by talking about the entrapment argument in this case, and I want to answer your question, Justice Countway.

Intent should be separate from entrapment in this case because entrapment was an affirmative defense.

And so the state had to prove all of the evidence of the elements of the two charges in this case at trial.

And then the defendant to succeed on his entrapment defense had to prove the elements of that entrapment defense by a preponderance of the evidence.

And so they are two separate arguments and two separate standards of proof for this court to evaluate and determining was there sufficient evidence that the state presented of the charges

and then was, is entrapment as a matter of law undisputed on the record for this court to say we must order a new trial?

And that's what this court has held is the case in Campbell and the case is following it because typically entrapment is a question for the jury.

This court can overturn a conviction if, as a matter of law, the entrapment defense is undisputed in the record.

And in this case, the entrapment defense is disputed in the record because there is different testimony about whether this was entrapment or not.

Not only from the state's witnesses, but also from the defendant who testified clearly on direct that he was not tricked by this persona.

This was not something that he didn't understand was happening.

He knew that he was texting with somebody who claimed they were 15 years old.

His argument was that he was not predisposed to commit this crime.

Well, he wasn't tricked because when he went to meet with her, he had this path in front of him that had two roots,

and one of them he had spoken about in his text that if you're 15, then we're not going there.

Well, that's in the middle of the texture on her, and that's true.

He does say, you know, if you're underage, that's illegal, and I can't if you are.

The persona, though, immediately responds with, all right, I'm sorry.

If you change your mind, I'm here.

He then immediately responds, no, I didn't, meaning no, I did not change my mind.

And then he asks, how old are you?

Don't want to end up getting arrested.

She again reiterates for the third time that she is 15, but that she acts old for her age and that she cannot get in trouble either.

But it's your call.

Has Mr. Eaton correct that the last exchange on the topic is where she says, LOL, well, I'm legit?

She does say that on the next page of text messages.

LOL, I'm legit, but I don't play games and I only like sure things.

Thanks anyway, though, implying.

Thank you for interacting with me. You're not coming. That's fine. Thank you.

His response to that is to ask if she is law enforcement.

She says, no, are you. I cannot get in trouble.

He says, no, I'm not. And then he confirms in that same text message 10 p.m. then.

And she says, yeah, you come in still want the full service in BJ 75.

And he says, yeah, may do more time and donate more.

So he has confirmed I am coming for the services that we've already agreed upon with me now knowing three separate times you're 15 years old.

And I may do more with you when I get there and pay you more for that service.

And then the rest of the text messages are then coordinating what time she'll be picked up.

He tells her what to wear, which he explains at trial is because I didn't want her to wear something suggestive.

I didn't want my coworkers to know why I was picking up a prostitute.

He then they then talk about what car he'll be in.

So she knows where what car to look for when he arrives at the apartment complex.

They text about where to meet at the apartment complex.

So all of the text messages after the, yeah, may do more and donate more are coordinating.

His arrival there to pick her up to bring her back to his hotel.

So at no point is this persona forcing him to come pick her up, playing on his emotions or his sympathies or saying I or threatening him to come,

which is facts that this court has held in other cases shows entrapment by the police or that inducement plus something else.

None of that is present in any of the text messages, but certainly not in any of the text messages after she says, I'm legit.

When he's already acknowledged, he understands she's underage.

And so this idea that he testifies to a trial that he was just going there to pay her the $20 to see if she was old enough.

The jury clearly disregarded that as an irrational outcome of his thought process based on these text messages.

If that had been the last text message, I'll come and pay you $20 to see who you are.

The outcome of this case at trial may have been different, but that was not the last text message.

There were many text messages after that coordinating this arrival.

But the text messages afterwards don't change the fundamental nature of what you just said, which there might have been a different result.

They were logistical considerations regarding how and when they were going to meet up.

Right, which implies that he then is agreeing to meet up with someone he now knows is 15.

Well, or that he's going to meet up with somebody to figure out whether she's 15 or not.

And that was certainly his argument at trial, and that certainly seems to be part of the argument on appeal.

However, if we're talking about the intent and sufficiency, when circumstantial evidence is the only evidence that you can use to prove that element,

you do have to exclude all rational conclusions consistent with innocence.

And in this case, based on the text messages, that is an irrational conclusion to draw,

that he is just going there to pay her $20 to see if she's overage.

Especially when you read the text that says, yeah, I'm coming, I may do more and pay more.

So not only is he willing to do what he's already agreed to, he's interested in doing more.

He doesn't say in that block text, but I may also just pay you $20.

Or I may just come for free and see who you are and then leave.

That's not what he's agreeing to do.

It may be something he said earlier, but by the end of that text communication, that's not where his mind is at.

How should the actual age of the photograph, the fact that it said 0506 in the picture,

and the fact that the police officer misrepresented the age factor into the analysis of inducement under entrapment?

So it should factor very little in this case, and that's because the officer at the time,

when he wrote the PCF of David, didn't know that this person was under 17.

But looking at the 0506, wouldn't that be clear?

So I see that, but when I look at the photo, at least the one that's used in the ad,

I can't really see that right off. I have to look for that 0506.

I don't know what the actual photo, I think the photo somewhere is an exhibit that was presented at trial.

But I don't know that it's that clearly visible in the ad based on the size of the photo in the ad.

But doesn't that tie into the discovery violations as well?

No, because that picture was provided to the defense and the date of birth of that officer was provided to the defense

and the defense called that officer to testify a trial about how old she was in the photo.

I mean, it was ultimately provided, but when they asked, I think the officer's email said that the person was 15,

the other officer, so it was in the police report, it was in the PCF of David,

it was in a subsequent email as part of the discovery.

So, I mean, from looking at the record, it appears that the defense was pulling teeth just to get that information.

In this case though, whatever the age of that photo doesn't really play into this idea of inducement plus,

which is what this court has held entrapment is based on.

The police have to induce plus something else.

And this court has held in LaRose, which is 157, New Hampshire 28,

seven different facts that this court has looked at to determine that entrapment.

One is using intimidation or threats, another is playing upon the defendant's sympathy.

That case was a drug case, so the persona played upon the defendant's fear of withdrawal from narcotics

or telling the persona, telling the defendant that they're suicidal and in desperate need of money.

That's not present in this case.

None of those seven factors, I have them all written down, I can go through them,

but none of those seven factors are about using a photo of somebody who is 17.

Aren't those all drug cases?

Likely, and that's because I think most of the cases that this court has handled relative to entrapment are about drugs.

But this court has held in those cases that for entrapment to be a defense as a matter of law

that allows this court to overturn a conviction, you need this government inducement

and mere solicitation is not inducement.

And while we may not have any fact specific examples about cases like this,

this case is just simply mere solicitation.

It is similar, I think to LaRose, even though LaRose is a drug case,

because in that case the defendant claimed that entrapment that it had proved,

he had proved his entrapment defense because he had said I had been clean from drugs

and this persona met me at a party and he used drugs with me,

this undercover detective, and then he asked me once can you sell me drugs

and I said maybe, and then he asked me later at a different party can you sell me drugs

and he said yes. However, the state had presented evidence in that same trial

that while this undercover agent had asked him, had done drugs with him at a party,

the defendant had already been going to parties at which cocaine and other drugs had been being used

and it was possible that the defendant had used those other parties before he met this undercover agent.

But wouldn't the analysis be different if the photograph was in fact a 15-year-old

as opposed to the photograph was in fact an almost 18-year-old?

I think it would depend on what that photograph looked like

and that's why I think that's why to me the factor of how old a person is in the photo

is a small factor that this court should consider

because 15-year-olds can look older or younger as well as 17-year-olds can look older or younger in any photo.

So the fact was there was a photo of a teenage girl

regardless of whether she was 14, 15, 16, 17, 18

and in the text messages that persona told the defendant

three separate times I am 15

and said a fourth time I'm too young to drive implying under 16

and so regardless of what the defendant thought about the photo

he was told four times I'm under 16.

That should have been enough for him to know that when he agreed to drive to meet her

he was meeting an underage person.

So are we supposed to look at the photo and make our own assessment, individual and collective assessment

looking at that photo as to whether that's somebody who's 15 or 16 or 17 or 18?

I don't think you need to do that in this case based on the arguments that are raised on appeal.

The first argument is sufficiency of the evidence for the intention

and based on there being this innocent

explanation for why he went there.

But his innocent explanation for why he went there, at least at trial

was not necessarily based on the photo or that her age was listed at 99.

It was based on his text message where he said I'll pay you $20 just to see.

That's what the defendant is saying was the indication of his innocent mental state.

So would you be making the same argument if there was a photograph

of a woman who was clearly in her late 20s?

It's hard to say because I don't know how that photo of a woman in her late 20s

would play into the rest of the facts. Especially where you have clear text messages

in this case where someone is saying they're under 15 or they're under 16.

When those text messages are sent the defendant's

agreement to go meet somebody who he has been told numerous times is under 16

and who also hasn't sent him any additional pictures because he asks for a picture

for verification and none is provided. His agreement to go

and his agreement to continue to engage in the services he's already agreed to

pay her for is in evidence of his intention to

still continue to engage with someone he believes or he has been told is under

16 regardless of what the photo looks like.

I believe in this case, although I did another case very similar to this

at the same time, but I believe in this case there was testimony from the detective

that people often lie about their age online and also use photos

that are not maybe exactly accurate as to how they look as did the defendant.

The detective commented on that to explain how it's

possible for underage people legitimately underage children or

detectives posing as them to be on these adult only websites. There are

workarounds to that. You can put in a fake birthday, you can list your ages 99.

Children do that on a daily basis to get on these sites as does the detective.

The defendant talked about there being many times when he met other women, adult

women for sex, that their photo was not accurate to how they were in person

and that they often lied about their age and made themselves older.

So whether this was a 29-year-old woman in the photo, a 15-year-old or a 17-

year-old, the defendant even said, I don't trust what I see

online because it's often inaccurate.

Why was Mr. Eaton's response to my question about Lofted and why

it's distinguishable or not? Why was that not correct in your view?

I think that case is distinguishable from the state's perspective

because there was more evidence in that case of this

inducement plus that this court has held as one of the elements of entrapment.

And I say that because in the text messages back and forth between the persona

and the defendant in that case, the persona identified herself as a 16-year-old

which I understand they were investigating this violation

of the commercial payment for sex, which is the age for that

is 18, but the age of consent in Nevada is 16

and so if this commercial piece wasn't part of that case, he was engaging

with somebody who could consent to have sex with him outside of this commercial

thing. In addition to that, while they were texting,

the 16-year-old persona and this defendant had agreed to certain services

but then as they continued texting, she continued to offer more

services to induce him to come over. That's not what happened in this case.

This persona only ever offers or only ever agrees to do

what this defendant has offered to do, which is B.J. in full service.

She never presents any sort of sex act. Also, in Loft said

when the defendant sort of is wary about going, she says

as an extra inducement, well my 15-year-old friend is here

and you can have sex with her too and that's when he says no, no, no, that's a big thing

that's a big age difference. That's illegal. Why isn't it an additional

inducement here to say LOL, well I'm

legit? It's not an additional inducement here because

before that, she's already indicated numerous times she's 15, which is always

illegal in New Hampshire regardless of what you're investigating. Which he knows, which is why

he said he wouldn't do it. Right, but in her

saying, well I'm legit, I know my red light is on, can I continue

this? I think the word legit is

unambiguous, meaning I don't know that this persona understood what he meant by

legit. Did legit mean she was a real person? Did legit mean she was an adult?

Or did legit mean she was ready to meet and do these services?

So her saying I'm legit is not extra inducement to get him to come. It's saying

I'm legit, I'm a person. Thanks anyway though if you don't want

to come. Thank you. Thank you very much counsel.

Mr. Eden, would you like to use here one minute?

I'll just know

that the standard for entrapment is not inducement plus, it's opportunity plus.

I think that's why Justice Countway's question about the photo really

gets at this issue because if Detective Gilbert

had just posted a photo of a 15-year-old girl if he had

done what some of the other police did and like records in and Hinkle and have

some indication that this person is young, is underage in the advertisement,

that's an opportunity, that's it. Mr. Shandoff responds to that?

Fine. But what he did here was he allowed

Mr. Shandoff to arrange a time, a day, services

to be provided, a price to be paid, all before he finally discloses

well by the way I'm 15, sorry about that. And then he later says

I'm legit. Can I just ask with regard to

I'm shifting gears completely, but you have alleged in your brief

a NAPU violation when the state failed to correct, is it

Detective Gilbert's testimony that they should have corrected in your mind?

Correct, Your Honor, yes, specifically the mandatory nature of the standards.

Okay, my light's on. Thank you very much. Thank you very much, counsel. Case is submitted

and the court is in brief recess.
