This is case 2023, 0156 K. N. LaRiviere versus Thomas King, M.D. at all.

That's correct.

You reserved two minutes for rebuttal.

That's correct, Your Honor.

And then we'll hear from, I believe, Portsmouth Regional Hospital first for 10 minutes, and then Dr. King for five minutes.

Is that correct?

Yes.

Please proceed.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Good morning.

May it please the court.

Matthew D. Nomenuti for the Appellant K. Naomi LaRiviere.

In 2016, Ms. LaRiviere trusted the defendants to perform a total left knee replacement and provide safe and appropriate post-operative care.

After the surgery, but before discharge, she awoke in pain finding that the CPM machine that her leg had been affixed to had fallen off the bed, breaking her leg.

The injury required numerous follow-up surgeries, and she continues to suffer to this day.

We are here before you because summary judgment was granted against Ms. LaRiviere inappropriately.

There are genuine issues of material fact, and when the evidence and the inferences they're from are viewed in the light most favorable to the non-moving party, a jury could easily find in my client's favor.

What were the claims alleged in the complaint?

Is it just medical malpractice, or was it negligence in the complaint?

We don't have the complaint in the record for some reason.

It's been a long time since I've actually looked at the complaint, but I believe it's medical malpractice, failure to supervise, and medical negligence.

I believe there's a fourth count, but I think it was effectively a restatement in just slightly different terms of one of the other two counts.

So a garden variety claim of negligence was alleged?

Sorry?

A garden variety of negligence was alleged?

I believe so.

It may have been medical negligence.

I do not recall.

So do you agree that the governing statute is 507E2?

Yes.

Yes, that's the universe we have to think about.

Correct.

Did the evidence satisfy that?

That is absolutely correct, Your Honor.

And why would that statute apply to a garden variety negligence claim if it was included?

I don't believe a garden variety negligence claim was included.

I believe it was just a medical malpractice negligence claim, a medical negligence claim.

So you needed an expert to prove that?

Correct, yes.

And ultimately the three prongs of 507E2, the applicable standard of care, that the standard was breached, and that injury occurred as an approximate result of that breach,

had been established by the plaintiff's expert, Dr. Hartschorn.

He had unequivocally stated that the standard of care here phrased many different ways,

but ultimately boils down to, as the court put it,

that simply that CPM machines are placed in hospital beds in such a way that they very rarely fall off.

The hospital's own documentation regarding the training of how one of these machines is positioned

shows, including in photographic form, that the rail on the bed right next to the machine is in the up position,

preventing it from thereby falling off.

You say he says that they very rarely fall off.

Did he say that they can only fall off as the product of medical negligence?

He did not, but he had effectively indicated that he can't,

he's never even heard of one of these machines falling off.

It's possible that it could have fallen off in the absence of negligence, I suppose, but...

Isn't that fatal to the case right there?

It's not necessarily, because if you, as long as you have a possibility or a probability,

then it is sufficient to establish a quantum of expert testimony.

That's Goudreau v. Keenan.

But he apparently was unable to say that more probably,

this is the standard of care, and more probably than not,

the fact that this fell off the bed was the product of consequence of medical negligence.

He didn't say that, right?

He did say that.

He, in fact, said that he was with certainty that the injury that was sustained by my client

was entirely consistent with her recollection of events

and inconsistent with every possible, or sorry,

every alternative explanation for the break that had been proffered by both defendants.

And the only real conceivable way that a machine could fall off

is if you're violating this standard of care.

If you're failing to ensure that medical equipment cannot fall

and hurt a post-operative patient.

So how is that Dr. King's negligence?

Wouldn't that be negligence of perhaps the staff at the hospital?

But do you agree that at least with respect to Dr. King, there's no case there?

Well, as the attending physician, I suppose,

I don't know exactly the specific word for it, he's the doctor in charge.

He had ordered it.

He was in charge of the supervision to ensure that this care was appropriately given.

And the factual question of whether it was Dr. King or hospital staff

or the apportionment of that responsibility is currently unknown.

It's up in the air.

But that sort of factual uncertainty is not fatal to the case.

In fact, that sort of factual uncertainty is specifically within the realm of the jury

to suss out and resolve after hearing the testimony of both sides.

Why was there no affidavit testimony description in the summary judgment record

of how this thing fell, of what happened?

Because we don't know exactly how it fell.

We know that it fell because the very particular nature...

Did the plaintor ever describe how it happened?

The exact on the record?

The exact mechanism of how it fell?

No.

Or her observation of what happened?

Or was she not conscious?

She was post-operative, heavily medicated, quasi-conscious.

And so her recollection was she woke and there it is hanging off the bed.

Dr. Hartschmidt specifically found that after review of the X-rays,

which took quite a long time to get, in fact post-deposition,

that the nature of the fractures could only have been caused

by what he called a distraction force and valgus force,

which is a pulling and book opening sort of combination,

which is consistent with this machine sliding off, falling off the bed,

dangling off the side with the patient.

Was her testimony in the summary judgment record?

It was not.

But it was...

That version of events was included in Dr. Hartschmidt's initial report

and it relayed as he heard it from that patient.

Can I go back to Justice Bassett's question about 507 E2?

You understood your argument to be that expert testimony is not required on the standard of care?

I believe that it...

There's a few layers here that expert testimony was provided regarding the standard of care.

But then even if it wasn't, that would not be fatal to this case

in these particular circumstances because this is...

Effectively, as was said earlier today,

we can't be expected to have people leave common sense at the door.

You go to the hospital to get a surgery and you trust and expect

that you're not going to have medical equipment that you are attached to fall

in such a way that's going to break your leg.

Does that apply to all three elements of the statute or to standard of care?

I believe it's just standard of care.

This court hasn't really addressed that particular prong in much detail.

No, I'm sorry. Not a great question.

Is your argument that a lay person could discern the other two elements of the statute

without expert testimony?

Not necessarily.

The case law is very clear that the third prong, the proximate cause,

must be proven by expert testimony, but the case law is silent as to the other two.

And the plain phrasing of the statute indicates that the plaintiff has the burden

of proving by affirmative evidence which must include expert testimony

of a competent witness or witnesses.

It doesn't necessarily say that each of those pieces must be given by an expert.

But regardless, that's irrelevant because Dr. Hart-Schorn did indicate

that what the standard of care was, he indicated that this injury occurred

in a very unique way which is entirely consistent with my client's report of events.

And by extension, the only way that that could happen is if the standard of care was violated.

The standard of care as articulated by Dr. Hart-Schorn, as articulated by the court,

or even as articulated or demonstrated through the training materials.

Will you say by extension? Who's supposed to make that extension?

Is the jury to make that extension? You say by extension.

Yes, because we don't...

Is that the jury is supposed to make that leap?

Yes.

But in an ordinary case, I agree with you, but that's writing 507 E2 out.

I mean, the law says that in these types of cases, the expert has to make that leap.

It does not say when the expert has to affirmatively state that leap.

That's the burden for the plaintiff to prove at trial.

And there's nothing...

So you agree that ultimately the plaintiff has that burden?

Oh, undeniably.

You just say that doesn't have to meet that burden at summary judgment,

but rather only at trial.

In the previous cases from this court regarding 507 E,

where the upheld summary judgment for lack of an expert have something in common.

The expert isn't qualified to testify to all of these elements.

It's somebody from a different field.

Dr. Hart-Schorn is an orthopedic surgeon.

He does these surgeries that are in question here.

And so he is undeniably qualified to speak to all of these elements.

Other cases like Smith VHCA, for example,

the sole expert for the plaintiff was not qualified to be able to speak.

It was in a different field of practice.

In regard to Dr. King, who's an orthopedist, and Dr. Hart-Schorn's an orthopedist,

doesn't Dr. Hart-Schorn say specifically that the surgery was performed consistent with the standard of care

and it was consistent with the standard of care to order this CPM machine?

At that position he did indicate that the surgery itself was performed.

It seemed like a good surgery.

And ordering this machine was also standard of care consistent with the standard of care.

It was consistent with the standard of care.

And what was it exactly that Dr. King did that in your expert's view was a violation of his standard of care as an orthopedic surgeon?

That it would be failure to ensure that the CPM machine was positioned,

being utilized as appropriate, as ordered, as according to the policies and procedures in place.

But are there any facts on that record which support any conclusion as to how the machine was placed?

My client's testimony, which...

But there was no affidavit, right, in front of the trial court of your client?

I don't believe so.

However, she did report the positioning from her understanding to Dr. Hart-Schorn,

who in turn relayed that in his report.

So from his understanding, the reliable reporting of the client,

that what the positioning was.

And the positioning was that she had a concern that it was placed on the bed without any sort of support,

any sort of strapping down, anything like that.

And when she had a previous surgery from Dr. King, which went flawlessly,

or nearly flawlessly, the CPM machine was utilized correctly.

And when she was sent home, it was utilized effectively there as well.

So when she was hooked up to the CPM machine after the left knee surgery,

she expressed concern that it wasn't being affixed.

She was already somewhat familiar with it, having had it done on her right knee,

and it went so well that a month later she was going back to the left.

Thank you, Attorney Manuyan.

Thank you.

Right side.

Kasotis.

Good morning, Honors.

These are court.

Alicia Kasotis from Wadley-Starn-Peters on behalf of Portsmouth Regional Hospital,

and I'm happy to take questions at any time.

I think it's well-established actually in the case law that all three elements of the statute

have to be met through expert testimony that's been established in a number of cases,

both with respect, well, I would say in Smith certainly talks about it.

There are several cases where this court has held that 507e requires that all three elements

be proven through expert testimony.

How would that happen if no one observed the event?

So assume the patient was not conscious and no staff were there or admit to being there

or how would an expert speak to the mechanics of the incident?

I think the expert would, well, at a minimum the expert should still be able to talk about

what should have been done in the situation.

I think what we are missing here is any indication of how something happened,

who was responsible, not just how it happened, but how it shouldn't have happened.

I mean, there's really just no...

Isn't that what this expert talked about?

Other than to say that it shouldn't have been positioned in a way that it should fall off the bed,

but he hasn't said what...

What more can he say?

How it was positioned, how would it...

Put it in the middle of the bed.

Why is that expert...

Why is that fact something that has to be dealt with by the expert?

He talked about proximate cause.

He talked about the nature of the injury.

So why do we need an expert to confirm that something wasn't done right?

Because I think otherwise you're allowing the jury to not rely on the...

This is really...

It comes down to common sense and it's not applying a statute

and stricter requirements that the legislature saw fit to put in place for these cases.

So here the trial court indicated that the evidence in the summary judgment record

does not rule out the possibility that forces outside of defendant's control

caused the CPM machine to fall from plaintiff's bed.

Is that the standard on summary judgment?

Isn't that a disputed fact?

I would say no, because plaintiff has failed to meet.

Does the plaintiff have to rule out all other options?

The trial court here relied to a great degree on the fact

that some third party could have come in

or some staff person or the plaintiff could have moved,

but is that really the plaintiff's burden on summary judgment?

Well, I would back up just a little bit.

The reason I think that came out was because in objection to the defendant's motions

for summary judgment for the first time,

plaintiff suggested that she was going to rely on the doctrine of racips a locuter

in order to prove the case

and saying that essentially this couldn't have happened any other way.

And why wouldn't that be appropriate?

It wouldn't be appropriate, number one, because it wasn't appropriately pled.

It wasn't appropriately disclosed by the expert.

And furthermore, contrary to previous statements,

the expert specifically said during the deposition,

well, first of all, I don't see any way how this expert could ever establish

that the mechanism was solely in the defendant's control the whole time.

This patient did not have a one-on-one sitter.

Certainly she was left unattended at certain points.

And moreover, he acknowledged in his deposition that these machines don't often fall off the bed

and that absent something like movement from the patient, it would be unlikely.

But again, wouldn't that be a fact?

Wouldn't that be a fact for the jury to determine?

Well, no.

I would say that because racips it doesn't apply,

well, essentially, I think there are a number of problems.

The plaintiff has not met her burden of proof for standard of care or breach.

And if she can't meet those, because she bears the burden on them,

all other facts are rendered immaterial.

That's per silatex in the United States Supreme Court.

So I think that...

So she's unconscious and wakes up and came over because no one saw anything.

I think there are experts who can talk about things theoretically.

Certainly, I think that if you're qualified, you can talk about how CPM machines get set up

and how they should be positioned on a bed.

So let me ask you this.

If Justice Bassett is in the hospital and he walks down the hallway

and slips on a pool of water, is that a malpractice case?

It's not.

It's just a negligence case, right?

It is.

But we don't have that claim here.

We just have medical malpractice.

Even if we had a garden variety negligence claim here, 507e and the Smith case

make clear that this would fall within it.

But this is an allegation against...

And I didn't mean to say...

If there were a different set of facts filed in the same case

that there was a garden variety negligence claim for, that might be different.

But these injuries that she's alleging she suffered result out of medical...

It's a medical injury and she is bringing action against the hospital vicariously

for its employees.

So they are actions against medical providers for medical injury.

And so all of it has to come in through 507e.

So here, do you acknowledge...

I think you think this is different what I'm about to propose than this case.

But it seems to me that you acknowledge that even in the absence of direct testimony

by the patient here about while I was awake and I saw it fall off,

which we don't have here, that if there had been an expert who had said,

yeah, I'm familiar with these machines and I'm familiar with what the hospitals do.

And yes, these things should be bolted to the bedstand

so that this can't happen and here that obviously didn't happen.

So that's the standard of care and it was breached.

If that had happened, you wouldn't have an argument here now.

We would be much closer, yes.

And that could go to the jury then about whether or not that's sufficient or not.

I mean, it's legally sufficient to get to the jury, that opinion, if it were there.

I think the standard of care had been established and there had been a breach.

In terms of what would be needed to show the breach, I'm not...

I guess it would depend.

But I think that the standard of care certainly requires at least as much as what you said there.

That experts all of the time talk in terms of theory

when they don't know exactly how something...

I mean, they often, even providers, because they don't often remember,

the particulars of a case may talk about the way they do things all of the time

or how they know things are done in a hospital.

But here there isn't even that opportunity because these machines don't get bolted.

So the conclusion that was drawn by this expert was that it's placed securely in the middle of the bed

so that it can't reach the edge and fall off.

Wouldn't that be sufficient?

I mean, same scenario because these machines don't have that option to be bolted to the bed.

I believe that Dr. Hart-Schorn, in response, along with his affidavit that he submitted,

which I would still argue should not have been considered by the trial court

and shouldn't be considered by this court since it was designed specifically to defeat summary judgment.

I would say that the fact that the affidavit included multiple CPM machine manuals attached to it

indicates that Dr. Hart-Schorn really didn't know how this particular model should be affixed

or what had been done differently.

But this particular model doesn't get affixed.

The trial court had that documentation in front of it.

In terms of the trial court order.

Yeah.

But it did.

Dr. Hart-Schorn didn't know that, which I think is relevant as well.

So, I mean, really, we have to think at the end of the day about what the jury would hear in this case.

And what he has is, I don't know who did it.

I don't know how it happened or what they did wrong.

But because she was injured, someone did something incorrectly.

And that's really, it's not racipsa, it's strict liability.

And this court has appropriately declined to extend that into medical malpractice cases.

But it's not just that she was injured.

It's that a medical device provided by the hospital caused that.

I'm sorry, so...

Well, the conclusion that the device should not have fallen off the bed

and but for that fall, her injury wouldn't have occurred, would be part of that assessment.

Certainly.

And but for is part of proximate causation.

But she can't get to the legal causation if she can't prove what the negligence or what the breach was.

So if she can establish a standard of care and she can't say what the breach was,

then she certainly can't tie the breach to the injury and get to proximate cause that way.

I think part of the problem is that the focus always has been on this case from the plaintiff's perspective,

proving that but for, focusing on the fact that this was what caused her injury versus the fall at home.

And there just was never any real attention paid to the other elements of the statute.

So you're saying, I mean, cause in fact that this, even if you assume that she was injured because this fell off the bed with her leg attached to it,

even if you assume that these statutorily required elements are not there, so she can't win.

Yes, I would say this is exactly what the summary judgment statute is designed for,

is to prevent cases like this from going to juries and having them speculate on things,

because that's all they would be able to do in a case like this, truly.

Thank you very much, Tony Catenza on behalf of Dr. King.

Good morning, I'm Beth Catenza from Salloway and Hollis.

I have the pleasure of representing Dr. Thomas King.

He is an orthopedic surgeon in this case.

He did perform the surgery.

He is not an employee of the hospital.

So to what extent does he have supervision over the hospital staff?

There are no facts or evidence in the record one way or the other on that issue, Your Honor.

I think the court is understandably struggling with the lack of evidence in the record in this case,

and the attempts to use race Ipsiloc order to get around that.

As was argued below, this case was pending for two years, and they didn't take a single deposition.

They didn't ask the person who set up the CPM machine how it was set up, where it was supposed to be set up.

None of that happened in this case.

There was a changing council mid case, correct?

There was, but...

And there are allegations that certain records were not available from the hospital too.

Isn't that right?

That's the allegation that the...

That's not my issue, Your Honor, but I would submit that at pages 21 and 25 of the final transcript.

Council for the plaintiff conceded that there were no material records that were discovered after all the rest of the records were given.

And Dr. Hart-Schorn had the X-rays at the time he issued his second report and his third report.

And none of that changes his deposition testimony, which is at appendix 208, page 117 of his transcript.

He's not testifying against Dr. King for the CPM machine falling.

And then later in the deposition, he's not offering the opinion that anything Dr. King did or failed to do caused the harm here.

And there was no evidence in this summary judgment record.

No affidavit from the hospital or Dr. King that the machine was set up properly.

That's true, Your Honor.

And is it the standard that the plaintiff has to rule out all possible other causes for this event?

As he said in his order, the record does not rule out the possibility that forces outside of defendants control cause the CPM machine to fall from plaintiff's bed.

Is that really the standard on summary judgment?

I don't think we need to reach that issue, Your Honor, because I think the standard is they have to prove 507E2 that this legislature has had in effect for decades to elevate the standards for medical malpractice cases.

For reasons just like this, bad outcomes happen in medicine, and that doesn't mean that anyone was negligent, which is essentially what is being argued.

So if the television falls off the wall onto the patient, is that medical malpractice?

I would say that that would be not a claim against a medical provider, so that would not fall within 507E2, Your Honor.

And we would just submit that none of the three elements have been proven as to Dr. King and ask the court to affirm.

Thank you very much.

Thank you, Your Honors.

For summary judgment to be properly granted, the case has to be so one-sided that one party must prevail as a matter of law.

It's a direct quote from Anderson v. Liberty Lobby.

This is not so one-sided. Clearly, the court had recognized that there were all of these different possibilities to explain the exact mechanism of the falling, but that it fell is key here.

And Dr. King acknowledged in the medical records, Appendix page 220, Dr. King's own discharge summary, she reported the CPM machine, she was in, fell off the bed with the leg in it, and she twisted the knee.

And following that, she was still ambulatory in the hallway, then she went home, and so forth, establishing that this occurred during the hospital stay.

This idea that we have to be able to prove with absolute certainty to survive summary judgment that the exact way that this machine fell is dramatically hiding the standard.

And it makes it impossible for pretty much anybody who is postoperative to sleep, anything like that, to ever prevail in a case.

That's what the statute says. She suffered a medical injury, and the statute says in the instance of medical injury, you need to do this.

That the medical care provider failed to act in accordance with such standard is the phrasing.

And they did fail to act in accordance with the standard, and we know that because the machine did fall.

Do you take issue with Ms. Katenza's statements that she made about your expert, saying that there were no alleged breaches of care by your client, by her client?

The context of that is very important. This whole idea that we're focusing on intent to testify against.

At the very beginning of the deposition, I believe it's page 8, there was questioning establishing that Dr. Hart-Schulman was coming at this from an objective perspective.

He was not viewing himself as an advocate. He was trying to come at this even-handed way, and wasn't about to jump and point fingers where evidence simply did not exist.

Thank you very much.

Thank you very much.

Any other cases submitted?
