This is case 2023-0319, petition of Annalie Dolls LLC.

So I understand Attorney Driscoll you'll be arguing for 10 minutes and Attorney Locke for five minutes.

Attorney Mechell, I understand you reserve one minute.

One minute, thank you Your Honor. Friedrich Muckel on behalf of the petitioner, Annalie Dolls LLC.

I'll take questions at any time, but I do want to say one thing first. I don't want anybody to overlook this.

We're here because in 1994, effective in 1996, the legislature fundamentally changed RSA 35421 Roman IV.

The prior standard was something that I'll call it's pretty flexible, and that the commission had to make decisions

and act, quote, act on all matters before it in as expeditious a manner as the law permits.

There's no hard deadline at all. The legislature repealed that language and stuck in the 24 month requirement.

And what I hear, or rather what I read from the respondents in this case is 24 months doesn't matter. Ignore it.

It's some loose standard. And if you accept that interpretation of this statute, you render the amendment meaningless.

And we go back to the pre-96 standard, and that doesn't make any sense, and it conflicts with all rules of statutory construction that I understand.

The other point I want to make is that respectfully, the respondents, none of the respondents in this case, correctly understand or apply the rule of rule.

And that is absent and explicit legislative pronouncement of the appropriate mode for enforcing mandatory time limits.

If there is no explicit method, then you go into this analysis that the respondents engage in. And I'll stipulate that if RSA 354A21 Roman IV didn't have this binary close or commence,

and it only said commence within 24 months, then you go into the rule analysis. But that's not what the statute says.

It's got the word close, and in between close and commence is the word or. It's a binary mandate, and that's what the commission must do.

If we agree with your position, what becomes of any cases that may be before the commission that are beyond 24 months in a need beyond the three-year deadline to remove to its pure court?

What's their status?

I don't know the stats. I don't know what cases are before the commission, but a decision in this case consistent with my client's position and what we're arguing should be done is that those cases would need to be closed.

How does COVID impact the analysis?

It doesn't impact the analysis at all.

COVID came up in the facts section of the employee's brief that, by the way, there was what, 15 of 19 months between the initial charge and the second charge.

There was COVID. I put in a footnote in the reply brief, and this is really important.

The governor during COVID put out an invitation to every state agency, every commission, every board, saying if you need more time for any statutory deadline, you let the governor's office know and we'll do something about it.

And there are 26 appendices to that work, A through Z, and not a single one of them granted any extension requested by the Commission for Human Rights.

When I look at that, I say, hey, here's the governor telling you there's an emergency. If you've got a statutory deadline, a 24 month deadline, and you need more time, ask for it. We'll give it to you.

And they didn't ask, so it wasn't granted.

And by the way, on that score, if you look at the commission's decision denying the motion to close, it doesn't talk about COVID. It wasn't COVID. It was a lack of staff.

And when I read that, I say there's a political remedy that the commission knows about because it's already done it once, and to be fair, it wasn't necessarily the commission that asked for the staffing increase.

When you look at the legislative history, if you're so inclined to read it, you'll see that the then head of the commission testifies to the legislature that the commission didn't even ask for the bill.

It was just a representative. I can only speculate how it came to his attention, but one of the pieces in the legislative history is justice delayed as justice denied, so constituents were probably barking.

So with respect to the cases that would be closed, assuming that there are cases beyond the 24 months, are they closed with prejudice?

Yeah, I think that's a dismissal for the administrative portion. The other thing that's overlooked, respectfully, is that the administrative...

But I'm talking about, if we adopt your position, 24 months is jurisdictional. Assume that there are other cases pending before the commission.

You said those cases would be closed. What is their legal status for those claimants? Are they out of luck?

No, they're not out of luck, and that's where I was going. They're out of luck to use that expression with respect to the administrative remedy.

But remember, RSA 354A has two types of remedies. There's the administrative remedy and the judicial remedy.

And the judicial component is what's overlooked here. And so the way to conceptualize this is...

But there's a limitation there too.

There's a three-year limitation. Right, and so if you adopt my client's position, yes, with respect to one of this employee's claims, that's going to get...

There's no judicial remedy for that either. But she still has the retaliation claim. She can pursue that administratively or judicially.

That's up to her. And where I go with this is, if this court finds my client's favor and agrees with the position,

sure, there will be cases before the commission that are beyond 24 months that must be closed.

But those cases, those that still have another year or are not beyond three years, those people can still go to court.

And that is one of the big issues I think has been overlooked here.

Isn't that specifically contemplated by 354A21A?

It is, Your Honor.

Which is, after 180 days of inaction, the claimant can remove it to Superior Court within three years.

Or less.

Or less.

You don't even have to wait 180 days. You can ask for written...

You can ask for permission to go earlier, but at that 180 day, you're free to go.

That's correct. Now, to be fair, I think the tension is claimants want that problem to cause finding.

Because it could conceivably be lucrative.

Because that makes them eligible for potential enhanced compensatory damages.

So that's why they're waiting, I guess.

Because if the claimant chooses to go to Superior Court before the PC finding,

then they're not going to get their enhanced compensatory damages.

So that is something that's incumbent upon the claimant to do, to make that hard decision.

So if there are any cases pending that are between two years and three years, they can all go to court.

But again, that's something...

And so when I...

The issue came up in this case here on appeal with respect to constitutional violations.

I don't see any constitutional violation.

These claimants always have a right to have their claim heard by a court.

You know, it may be more cost efficient, but to have the administrative, to have the CHR do it.

But there's no constitutional violation at all.

In fact, if they elect not to go to court, that's sort of a dangerous thing to do, particularly after 24 months.

They should be... I mean, we can all read the statute and know what's happened.

The other thing I'd like to talk about is this idea of administrative gloss.

We're talking about what did the commission say was the reason it denied the motion to close.

And it said, hey, we just didn't have the resources.

Not enough staff.

It didn't say administrative gloss.

We've always interpreted this thing as being non-jurisdictional.

It relied on a 2013 superior court case, but it didn't say we've always interpreted the statute this way.

The first time we hear it is on appeal.

And what's important about the administrative gloss argument is that the commission doesn't offer another interpretation of the statute.

It doesn't say hard and fast that the statute is ambiguous.

It says it may be.

Not that it is.

And as I understand administrative gloss, you have to have two things.

You have to have an ambiguous statute and a reasonable alternative reading.

And neither of those exist in this case.

And not only do they not exist, there's no argument that they exist.

What you hear is this is just not fair.

But in 1994, the legislature in reaction to these delays came up with...

And we had the public policy arguments, heard the testimony and balanced all these interests and came up with a new rule.

And it's a rule unlike any other statute that you've addressed.

I even tried to find an analog statute that has this binary mandate.

And I can't find it.

And one of the problems is that when you search, when you're using search terms, shall and or come up in every statute.

But I don't find another statute that has this peculiar binary mandate that answers the question that this court has always explored in all the other...

I'll call it the rule line of cases.

What do you do when a statute says a court or an agency must do something in a certain amount of time and it doesn't do it?

This statute tells us what to do.

Close.

By the way, close means end.

Why should we be reviewing this on the basis of a writ of certiorari at this point?

Well, I'm glad you asked that question.

In fact, in one of the cases in the rule line, NRA Robin W, that case ends with a passage about why it was appropriate to bring a writ of cert.

Because of this court's supervisory role in overseeing not just courts, but administrative tribunals.

Particularly when there are statutes with mandates for either the tribunal or the agency to act within a certain amount of time,

and the agencies or courts just aren't doing it.

So writ of cert is always an appropriate remedy.

Original jurisdiction.

This court has invited.

The other thing I want to talk about is the fairness.

There are arguments that this result is unfair.

I see my lights on, so I'll be brief.

Two decisions from this court, in my mind, help clear up that issue.

It's the Steyer case and, in fact, Eldridge, the predecessor to this case.

Those cases, they dealt with the 180-day filing requirement.

But Steyer is really on point when I think about fairness.

That case involved a young woman who had physical disability.

She was a minor.

She was a minor, so she couldn't bring it.

And she tried to use the statute of limitations exemption for minors.

And this court said, no, no, no.

We understand what the public policy of Chapter 354A is,

but if the legislature wanted to grant more time to people,

it could have stuck that provision in 354A and it didn't.

So there's nothing unfair about applying these hard deadlines.

The legislature conducted the policy analysis and made that decision for us.

We don't have to guess.

We don't have to decide what's fair or not fair or what is not fair.

And if anybody thinks it's unfair, there's a building on the other side of the river

where we go correct those and get those political remedies.

Thank you.

Thank you, Attorney Michael.

Attorney Driscoll.

Mr. Chief Justice, may it please the court.

My name is Rich Driscoll, and I represent the respondent Jackie Varro.

Annalee argues that Jackie is barred from litigating her sex discrimination claim

solely because the HRC took too long in conducting its investigation.

In Annalee's view, whenever the HRC fails to commence adjudicative proceedings

within 24 months, the complainant, through no fault of her own,

automatically forfeits her cause of action without a hearing.

This cannot be the law.

Not exactly, though, because of 354A21-little-a, she can go to court.

Even if she could go to court, her position at the Human Rights Commission,

she has not been afforded notice that her right to stay in the Human Rights Commission has terminated.

So if the 24-months period is jurisdictional, in this case, Jackie was barred from...

Jackie did not get notice that she needed to remove to superior court

under that statutory provision.

And at a minimum, before Jackie's constitutional property rights are deprived,

she needs notice.

And that notice would be some information from the Human Rights Commission saying,

your case is closed, and now that would put Jackie on notice

that she needs to go remove this to superior court.

How is this a constitutional property, right?

Because it's a cause of action that's accrued.

The Supreme Court decision in Logan, which was cited in the state's amicus brief,

is clear that once a cause of action accrues,

it's a property right protected under the 14th Amendment Due Process Clause.

Is there a substantial history of administrative gloss whereby the commission hasn't deemed the statute to be jurisdictional?

I don't believe... I don't think there's a case where the commission has been applying the statute as a hard deadline.

So, is that a yes or a no?

I'm sorry, can you repeat the question?

What's the history in terms of the commission and its application of the statute?

Have they typically applied the statute jurisdictionally?

No, Your Honor.

And if the administrative closure is not the end of the case,

which I think you argue in your brief, it's an administrative closure, it can be reopened,

how does that work?

So, under the old, the expired Human Rights Commission rules,

Section 212.1 talks about the mechanism for closing a case.

In that language, it expressly uses the words administratively close.

From the use of that term, it seems that the Human Rights Commission understood this to be the same doctrine that the federal district courts use.

Why wouldn't in the rule where it references instances where cases can be administratively closed,

it referred to a case that's been pending for more than 24 months, it doesn't do so.

So, I don't know how the administrative rule reflects any understanding on the commission with respect to your interpretation.

By using the phrase administratively close, it's using, there's a background principle of procedural law that these closures are really docket management tools for the Human Rights Commission.

I understand that, but they're not using that tool in this instance in the administrative rule.

Right, because, yes.

And we wouldn't even get there unless there was an ambiguity in the statute.

How is shall close a case ambiguous?

Under the docket, well, with the background, the legislature's presumed to understand technical meanings, technical words.

And if close means administratively close, means to manage the docket, then the court can interpret that with this technical meaning.

If we disagree with you that close, which means end, is somehow a technical word, there's no ambiguity, correct?

Well, the legislature in other places and the Human Rights Commission in other places expressly use the word dismiss.

So, for instance, the statute that deals with after a final adjudicated hearing on the merits,

the statute says if the Human Rights Commission concludes that the employer wins, then it shall dismiss the case.

In this case it uses, it shall close the case.

The legislature uses two different concepts for different provisions of the statute, and this court can conclude that they're not synonymous.

So, how long does the Human Rights Commission have, if not two years? Five years? Ten years?

So, even if the language is mandatory, I mean the court has, in other cases, there's many of the cases cited in the petitioner's brief,

the courts concluded that those time limits were mandatory, but the court also concluded that it did not divest the tribunal or the lower court

of jurisdiction to resolve or settle the dispute that was before it.

So, maybe it could go to the three-year statute of limitations, but not beyond?

So, I think one of the problems with Annalee's argument is that they interpret this 24-month period as a protection for employers.

But the legislature already provides protection for employers by providing 180-day statute of limitations,

which is shorter than the ordinary three-year statute of limitations for civil causes of action,

and the 24-month period does not just benefit employers, it's designed to protect complainants as well,

because the delay from the Human Rights Commission is harmful to both parties in the same way.

It would be strange in this remedial statute where section one says the purpose of the statute is to prevent and discourage discrimination in the state.

It would be strange for, after 24 months, the burden falls on the complainant.

You should have, you lose because the Human Rights Commission took too long in conducting its investigation.

So, if it's there to protect the employer as well, isn't finality part of that protection?

So, it's not hanging over their head?

So, how does that get us to longer than 24 months?

I think another component with the time when it is the due process concerns and the canon of constitutional avoidance.

If the court were to interpret the statute to require, at least in this case, that the claim must be dismissed,

you know, Jackie doesn't have an opportunity to remove.

This case was brought after the three-year limitations period for removal.

If Jackie, if this court reverses the Human Rights Commission, Jackie has no date and court.

I guess I didn't hear an answer to Justice Hans-Marconi's question.

Is it three years? Is it five years? Is it indefinitely that the Human Rights Commission has?

Well, I don't think so.

What is the answer?

I think the answer is that this is the defense at issue here.

If there is a time limit, the burden is on the employer to sort of timely move to response, to move to close the case.

So, even if the requirement is two years, the defense is akin to a personal jurisdiction defense.

And this is similar to the waiver argument that we've raised.

All of the cases in which this court has construed a statute to be jurisdictional, the jurisdiction at issue is personal.

I'm not understanding that argument. This is about the authority of the tribunal to act that subject matter jurisdiction.

So, Annalee has not offered any authority to demonstrate that is subject matter jurisdiction.

Because the underlying cases demonstrate that it is...

It's a statute I'm relying on, the statute before us, which is, I would agree with opposing counsel, somewhat unique.

And it establishes this regime. And it's establishing a regime that's balancing the interests of the employer and the grievant.

And, you know, 180 days is an aggressive statute of limitations.

No question about that. And 24 months is an aggressive time period for an agency to act.

But that's what the legislature has decided. Isn't it?

The legislature can't enact a statute that deprives people of their constitutional property rights, of their causes of action.

But they agree that in this situation has multiple avenues to pursue her claim. Doesn't she?

Even if the 354A 21 Little A is really a forum selection.

You can bring it in the Human Rights Commission or you can bring it in the Superior Court.

And she has federal claims potentially.

And she can bring them in... Right, she may be able to bring them in federal court.

Here, she brought the claims in the Human Rights Commission.

The Human Rights Commission is conducting an investigation for more than two years.

And what it... I see my red light is on. May I briefly finish?

It's at the Human Rights Commission for more than four years.

She and the Human Rights Commission think it's still pending.

Without having noticed that the case is closed at the Human Rights Commission,

Jackie doesn't have the opportunity to remove, to the Superior Court.

And in this case, it results in the denial of due process.

And for these reasons, this court should dismiss the petition.

Attorney Locke.

Mr. Chief Justice, members of the court, good morning. May it please the court?

I am Senior Assistant Attorney General Sean Locke.

On behalf of the Commission for Human Rights, we are appearing as an amicus curiae in this case.

The Commission asked that this court construe the language at issue as non-jurisdictional

because applying traditional canons of statutory construction, the plain language cannot be jurisdictional,

as it risks creating conflict within RSA Chapter 354A and with the due process clauses

of both the United States and the New Hampshire constitutions.

And even if this court were to construe the language there as ambiguous,

looking to the legislative history, looking to the doctrine of administrative gloss,

it still must conclude that this is a non-jurisdictional statute.

Before I take questions, I do want to note that the Commission does not celebrate that there are delays.

This isn't something that anyone would be, they are proud of.

They strive to meet their deadlines, but at the same time they have to afford due process

to all parties appearing before them.

That may mean that as they consider cases, they deal with motions to dismiss,

motions to amend which start the case processing over at the very beginning

because now they have to get a response to those new allegations.

They may deal with bankruptcy stays imposed on them when businesses go into bankruptcy.

Those stays could take years to resolve.

It is not an issue of 24 months from beginning through investigation

to probable cause to adjudication.

There may be a lot of different paths a case takes.

Can't the Commission go to the legislature and say, you know,

this 24 month thing has some real problems for us in these cases

where our investigation, our proceedings, our delay due to bankruptcy,

or you name it, can't they do that?

They can do that.

So they can.

They have construed it since, at least as far back in the legislative record,

as 2000 because at 2000 when RSA 354A 21A was enacted,

there were references to a continued backlog of cases with the Commission

taking up three to five years before they would go to an adjudicatory hearing.

So even after the 24 month requirement was imposed,

there was still recognition in the legislature that cases were pending

longer than 24 months and that has continued through to the present day.

But they could go and ask for that statute to be changed.

They could go and ask for additional resources,

which they have finally been granted in fiscal year 2020 or 2021 and fiscal year 2023.

But for, you know, I know in the reply brief, there's a list of statistics

from about 2010 to 2019, 18 or so.

During that time, they were operating with almost the same staff in a time

because of shortages less staff than they had in 1994

when this requirement was imposed.

That's where we start running into the constitutional issues

that come up in Logan v. Zimmerman.

The legislature can't create a right and then under, you know,

and then create a process that says this agency has to act within 24 months

or 120 days as was the case in Logan and not provide, you know,

if there aren't the resources there to do it, well, too bad.

The claimant is out of luck.

Well, the claimant, I see I keep coming back to this.

The claimant's not out of luck because if things are hanging on too long,

they just go to superior.

So I disagree with that for two reasons.

First, in 1994, the choice of forum didn't exist.

So when this statue, this 24-month requirement was imposed,

there was no way to remove it.

The commission was the only show to bring your discrimination claim.

Unless you brought it in another federal court

or before a federal agency.

You could bring it before the EEOC.

Many places are dual filed with the EEOC.

So this is a very unique situation where there are multiple avenues

for a grievance to seek redress.

But many of those agents, many of those cases

that go before the EEOC due to the information,

kind of the agreements between the EEOC

and the Commission for Human Rights,

they get sent to the Commission of Human Rights

for it to go through its processes.

If they're filed under state and federal law,

they have to go through the Commission,

even through the EEOC's process.

But then the timelines are relaxed

because it's under the umbrella of the federal agency.

It is, but it's still, and I don't know,

I don't know the particulars of this particular case,

but, you know, that may be the case here

where it was dual filed.

It may have been just filed under state law claims.

But, you know, that is in that case.

And even in looking at the choice of form

where there's the ability to remove,

that statute wouldn't make sense.

I mean, that statute, if the case is closed

for the purposes of the Commission for Human Rights,

why is the statute requiring to give no,

you know, after that time?

So what are those words mean?

Shall close the case.

What does that mean?

Shall close the case.

It means that, you know,

it sets the parameter of a goal of 24 months.

The issue is, you know,

when you're construing that language,

you still have to constru it.

What does it mean?

Shall close the case.

In the context of this,

it has to mean that that is just,

that is a guidepost that the legislature has put forward

because otherwise, you risk creating constitution.

Wouldn't it have used different words

than shall close the case?

I mean, that is highly prescriptive.

It may be highly prescriptive,

but at the same time,

we have to be read in light of the Constitution,

which is the ultimate source of law.

They can't, you know, they can say shall,

but if it's conflicts with the Constitution,

it can't mean that.

Otherwise, it creates a problem.

What do we make of the argument

that opposing counsel made that this language substituted

the legislature's directive

that cases be dealt with expeditiously?

I mean, that's a material change.

Shall close the case versus expeditiously.

And I don't, I don't disagree

that it was meant to send a clear message

to the commission that it needs

to process cases more quickly.

The time it was adopted,

I think we were looking at a six to eight-year backlog

of cases before the commission.

So certainly that was an issue.

And even then, it was a question of, you know,

opposing counsel references kind of the idea

that the commission didn't ask for this bill.

The commission had been asking for staff for over a decade.

It didn't ask for this bill to change

kind of this kind of parameter

or to provide temporary staff in exchange

for these parameters.

It asked for additional staff

to be able to do its job.

I see my light.

I was going to say back when there was

a five to six-year backlog,

there was no, that wasn't tolling

the three-year statute of limitations or wasn't.

Or nobody raised that issue.

Nobody raised that issue.

The issue is that the way the commission works

is you have to file within 180 days of the commission.

You don't get to, you know,

and even if you're going to the EEOC,

a federal agency, you have 300 days

after the act of discrimination.

Boom.

And then there's no end date.

And the three years is just for removal to superior court.

It's for the petitioner to remove to superior court.

Got it.

The respondent has the ability to remove superior court

after a probable cost finding is issued.

So there still remains that avenue.

And it could be four years.

It could be after that three years.

So how long can the commission take?

It's, unfortunately, the answer,

there isn't a clear answer on how long

the commission can take.

And I share the concern,

and I know the commission shares the concern

that these cases take longer.

They have dedicated themselves

to revamping processes, to move and streamline things.

But there are points when they are considering everything

and making sure the process is fair to everyone,

they may confine them from being able to achieve that

in 24 months beyond their control.

And maybe there are questions that need to be addressed

by the legislature in doing that.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Attorney Block.

Thank you.

Thank you.

I'll be brief.

What's the right?

The right is this statutorily created cause of action.

The right isn't the right to have the commission adjudicate

that cause of action.

The right isn't to have the superior court adjudicate

the cause of action.

It's the cause of action itself,

and the claimant gets to choose which form to go to.

End of story.

That's it.

24 months does not infringe on that right.

All it does is eliminate one route of recovery,

the administrative route.

You can always go to court,

and you can go to court after one day

if the commission ascends.

And then to answer the other question,

how long does the commission have?

The answer is right there.

It's 24 months.

And if the commission needs more time,

there's a political remedy to address that.

Thank you.

And a defendant could wait for that probable cause

determination that could take who knows how long

and still be able to go to superior court.

I don't clearly understand your question.

Let me do my best to answer it.

Something that Attorney Block mentioned.

Here's the way it works.

Alleged act occurs on day zero.

Claimant has 180 days to file a complaint

or a charge in with the commission for human rights.

For the next 180 days after filing,

the claimant cannot go to superior court

unless it gets the commission's assent, okay?

But on day one of the filing,

the commission has 24 months.

So let's just play this out.

If a claimant filed a claim on day one,

the commission's got two years.

Then let's say there's no finding a probable cause.

The claimant still has one year,

actually it's another full year to go to superior court.

But the company, the defendant,

can go to superior court upon a probable cause finding.

Right.

But the claimant can always go to superior court.

Right, exactly.

The context of this hearing, in this case,

it's the claimant who's saying

her constitutional rights are violated or not.

It's up to the claimant to drive that.

Thank you.

Thank you very much, counsel.

Case submitted.
