This is case 2023-0109, Kathleen Sylvester v. Woodward's White Mountain Resort, LLC.

Good morning, Attorney Fisher. I understand you reserved two minutes for rebuttal.

That's correct, Your Honor.

Please proceed.

May it please the Court. My name is Christopher Fisher. I'm an attorney at Pointham-Wallard and Courtsman.

And I represent the appellant, Kathleen Sylvester.

This is a unique case.

The employee here sustained serious orthopedic injuries on the employer's property.

The employee sought workers' comp benefits, but the claim was not accepted.

The employee was denied workers' comp benefits by a decision of the Department of Labor.

And that decision was affirmed by the CAB.

And the basis of that decision was that the injuries were not compensable under the Workers' Compensation Act.

That was appealed to this Court.

While that appeal was pending, the parties settled their dispute.

That settlement resulted in $120,000 being paid to Mrs. Sylvester.

The settlement included a stipulation that this was not a compensable injury.

That the Workers' Comp Act did not apply.

The decision by the Department of Labor and the CAB was final and could not be revisited.

This case is unique in that, unlike other non-compensable settlements, there was a carve-out here for personal injury claims.

So why did the employer be bound by that? An employer wasn't a part of that contract.

We're not asserting that the employer is bound by it.

The employer is here arguing that that agreement is enforceable, but it's not what the appellant is suggesting it is.

And what we are saying is that it is a settlement agreement, a non-compensable settlement agreement,

that is not governed by the Workers' Comp Act and does not implicate the exclusivity provisions of RSA 281A8.

So how is the case different than Tothill?

The case is different from Tothill in several reasons.

I think there's three very critical distinctions.

Number one, in Tothill, the worker applied for Workers' Comp Benefits and the carrier accepted that claim for Workers' Comp Benefits.

Secondly, the Department of Labor was involved.

It was notified that this was an accepted claim, thereby triggering the procedural and substantive provisions of RSA 281A.

Third, Tothill accepted benefits under Workers' Comp and those benefits, the decision says, included medical benefits.

The court, the decision in Tothill does not specify exactly what the $70,000 payment to the worker there was for,

but I think all indications are that it was a lump sum settlement of sort,

which would have resulted in medical benefits under the Workers' Comp Act being preserved.

All other benefits under the Workers' Comp Act are subject to negotiation or alteration in the case of lump sum settlement.

Here, and unlike Tothill, the carrier never accepted Workers' Comp claim,

and instead fought alongside the employer Ms. Sylvester's claim that she was entitled to Workers' Comp benefits.

Are the carriers and the employer's independent agents or is the carrier serving as an agent for the employer?

I think that the carrier is serving as an agent for the employer.

The carrier could bind the employer, but below, in support of summary judgment,

Attorney Burt on behalf of the employer Woodward presented an affidavit that the employer had no idea about the settlement agreement.

And quite frankly, Ms. Sylvester, we didn't have any evidence or grounds to dispute that.

So I think the record does establish that...

Could that be, and I don't know, governed by some contract relationship between the carrier and the employer?

How is that relevant to the issue before us?

Whether the employer knew or not, maybe the carrier went rogue.

I agree, and I think that, to the extent it is relevant to the issues before this court,

it suggests that the employer may have a claim against the carrier

that's governed by the contract, the contractual relationship between those two parts.

The other distinction here from Tothill is that the Department of Labor entered a decision

adverse to the claimant, Ms. Sylvester.

That decision was deemed final in the agreement, the non-compensable settlement agreement,

entered by the parties while this appeal was pending.

And the payment to Ms. Sylvester here, the $120,000,

does not fit the mold of the workers comp benefits under RSA 281.

Ms. Sylvester was left responsible for past, present, and future medicals.

It's not a lump sum settlement agreement because it explicitly excluded medical benefits.

So it doesn't fall within the category of RSA.

What's the meaning of the release as reference to only claims rising under the workers' compensation law?

So what I think that means, the essence of that is the claims being dismissed,

the claims that can no longer be raised are Ms. Sylvester's entitlement to workers' comp benefits.

And that's it. I think that the totality of the agreement that was struck cannot be properly interpreted

without giving effect to that last, the third to last paragraph where it says,

claims or personal injuries are not excluded from the scope of this agreement.

Now, if Ms. Sylvester agreed and if the carrier had insisted that there include a provision

implicating the exclusivity component of the workers' comp act under RSA 281A8

and covered the negligence claim brought below, then we wouldn't be here.

But that agreement specifically excluded that.

It preserved the right to bring this claim against the employer here.

So I think the agreement, this non-compensable settlement agreement,

although it's not specifically allowed under the workers' comp act,

it's not addressed specifically that they are permissible,

but I think if the court looks at RSA 281, the lump sum settlement statute,

RSA 281A37, you just said this wasn't a lump sum settlement.

So why does that provision apply?

So that provision, the fourth section of that statute,

I believe it contemplates the practice of non-compensable settlement agreements

and that it says agreements not within the scope or consistent with this statute

are not to be included in data collected for workers' comp purposes.

Now, the reason I mentioned that is the New Hampshire Workers' Comp Manual

briefly talks about this, the significance of it.

And it's not a very comprehensive analysis,

but I think it's worth mentioning at this point.

And this is section 13.01.

And there it says that,

stimulating to a decision with waivers of protections under the workers' comp act,

with payment to the claimant,

that agreement is presumably, I think they use that word,

in the workers' comp manual,

binding on the partners and the terms to be given a fact.

So here, I think that the record before the court,

the agreement itself exempts and excludes the operation of RSA 281A

and the terms of that agreement should control.

Does it matter that the party to the agreement was New England Hospitality Trust

as opposed to the employer?

Should that matter in our analysis?

I don't think it should matter.

And I think to the extent it does,

the employer would have a claim.

I don't know exactly what form it would be

because it would be based on their actual relationship,

what the terms of the contract are.

If the employer would have objected to the settlement agreement,

then there could be grounds for the employer to bring an action against the carry.

But I don't think that affects the rights retained by Miss Sylvester

of virtue of this agreement.

And I gather that there's no dispute at this point

that the money came out of the workers' comp monies

and even though I gather your client didn't know the source at the time,

but we all know and it's accepted for the purposes of this case

that it was paid out of the workers' comp fund.

That's correct.

Below, we filed a motion to reconsider

and we were given the limited opportunity to present arguments

about where the source of the funds came from.

I was able to determine that it came from the workers' comp fund

for the carrier and that stipulated it.

Does that matter in our analysis?

I don't think that matters either

and that could have some legal consequences for the carrier.

I don't know exactly what consequences they would be.

But for Miss Sylvester, the rights that she obtained,

the consideration that she gave,

giving up her right to further pursue this appeal

and have the protections under the workers' comp act,

I think those are preserved and memorialized in the agreement

and it should be given effect.

But why would the trust pay any money

if it wasn't settling a workers' comp claim?

I don't think I can answer exactly why the trust would pay that money

or why the carrier used those funds.

But I think that the agreement is specific

but this is not payment under the workers' comp act.

It doesn't fit the mold.

It is a separate agreement entered into by two willingly contracting parties

that had the ability to dictate the terms of that agreement

and they settled on the terms that are unambiguously expressed.

If you argue that the benefit that Miss Sylvester received

did not compare to what she would have received

had she gone forward with the appeal,

is that a disputed fact and should that really matter?

I don't think that it's a disputed fact

that the workers' comp benefits would have exceeded $120,000.

I think that...

What were the specials?

I don't have that off the top of my head.

I want to say that with future medical costs,

I believe they were around half a million.

I could be wrong on that but I know it was significantly more

than the $120,000.

Why not just reserve a premises liability claim flat out in this agreement?

Noting that the employer's renting

and there's an owner missing from this equation,

but still why not say it if you're trying to preserve a premises liability claim?

Justice Hans-Marco, I see that my time's up.

If I could just answer the question.

I wish I could answer that.

Neither myself nor my firm is handling the workers' comp case.

So we got involved after the fact

and in connection with this case.

I don't know exactly why they settled on that language,

but I think that the language in and of itself controls

and should dictate the outcome of this.

Thank you.

Attorney Fisher, Attorney Burke.

Please support.

I and my colleague Olivia Wieck represent the appellee in this matter.

I waive my right to uninterrupted questioning.

One of the questions that was asked by Justice Bassett

was concerning the source of the payments,

paragraph 10 of the release says unequivocally,

this release pertains only to claims

under the New Hampshire Workers' Compensation Law,

RSA Chapter 281A.

It clearly was, unequivocally was,

a resolution of a workers' comp claim

providing certain benefits,

but perhaps not the whole family of benefits

that could have been obtained by the plaintiff, the appellant,

had she pursued the matter to conclusion.

The release says that she received as $120,000,

$44,000 for medical bills,

$15,000 for attorney's fees,

and $26,000, I'm sorry, $322 per month

for the balance of her life going forward.

If you read the decision in Tottenham,

I believe Tottenham,

it's pretty much the same type of benefits,

but more so in the case of Brooks v. Lagasse,

where the parents of the young man

entered into a settlement agreement

when there was a dispute over whether or not

he was an employee of the employer,

and the court said it is true that in the present case,

the question of whether the minor was in the employment

of the defendant was questioned by the latter,

but all of the parties with their counsel

entered into a lump sum agreement

which placed the case squarely within the domain

of the workers' comp law.

So what does the phrase,

you've read part of the paragraph,

what does the phrase and does not preclude

any personal injury actions mean?

I have no idea,

because my client wasn't a part of that provision,

but if it's to preserve against the employer,

it's invalid because of the exclusivity provision.

The quid pro quo that my client entered into was

to provide workers' compensation benefits

in exchange for having the community afforded

by the statute.

Here, the workers' comp carry using workers' comp funds

settles a claim, perhaps again,

not providing the full pamphly of benefits,

but nonetheless settles a claim

that was first prosecuted as a workers' comp claim

and continued to be so up until the point

that she withdrew her appeal here at the Supreme Court.

Were there any other possible personal injury claims

that she could have brought, for example,

against the company that was responsible

for plowing the company?

The company that was responsible for plowing

the parking lot where she slept?

Well, it's not the record I don't believe,

but clearly, the lease.

The lease is in the record.

The property was not owned by my client.

In query, whether a tenant,

a little more to a tenant has any,

I'm sorry, a tenant has any obligations

of people entering upon the property.

Fair amount.

Could be governed by the lease terms.

I'm sorry?

Could be governed by the lease terms

as responsibility.

Correct.

And there is language in the lease

if you were to read it,

I believe the tenant had the obligation to maintain.

However, preserving that right

falls in face of the fact

that there's an exclusivity provision that says,

once you apply for and accept benefits,

you are bound by the terms of the statute

and the employer has immunity from claims.

And this court made that clear multiple times

that once you apply for and receive benefits,

then you are bound by the exclusivity provision.

My client gets no quid pro quo,

no benefit from buying this insurance policy

and paying the premiums over time

and then getting sued when an employee

makes a claim, contest it,

and then settles it receiving substantial benefits.

I'm assuming the settlement influenced

or affected your client's premium.

Presumably, again, that's not in the record

and I can't say that we did or did not,

but it's the payment of the benefits up until,

the premiums up until that point in time

and the statute itself.

She procured the insurance,

the entity procured the insurance

it was supposed to procure,

it provided the protection it was supposed to provide,

it afforded in this instance

the talent with a substantial sum of money

resolving the claim.

Again, not maybe the panoply of money

that she might otherwise been entitled to

but that prevailed.

Right.

Exactly.

She and the workers' cop carrier

obviously assessed the risk involved

in proceeding forward

and made a determination that this case

could be settled with the payment

of some benefits under the workers' cop law

but perhaps not the full panoply of benefits

that might have otherwise been available.

And the fact that your client

wasn't aware of the settlement,

that's not unusual.

Once it's turned over to the carrier.

It's probably not unusual

but to say, for example,

if you go back and read the release

Audit says

Outcomes Kathleen Sylvester

Woodward's White Mountain Resort

and the Hampshire Motor Transport

in a grand stipulate as follows.

Well, there's another signature line on here

for Woodward.

So they're acting as

your client's agent?

Essentially maybe...

I don't think under the law

it's an agency relationship.

I really think it's

if you're going to make an analogy

with the independent contractor relationship.

Well, what do we do?

I mean, this clause is in the settlement.

Is Sylvester

may not have settled the case

for this amount

and she not had that clause in it

with the understanding that

doesn't preclude any personal injury action.

So maybe

there was never a meeting of minds

for this agreement to even exist.

And if that's true,

then she unwraps the agreement,

and prosecutes her workers' conflict.

She cannot use that, however,

to divest my client

of the protection it had.

I mean, the same exact thing

happened in Cockner

where they tried to put a provision

in the settlement agreement

to divest the employer there

of the benefits of the exclusivity provision

and this court said no,

it cannot do that.

And it's not rewriting the contract.

It's simply refusing to enforce

against a person

who was not applying for the contract

a term that would violate

the affirmative law of the state of New Hampshire,

which is there's this exclusivity provision

that protects the employer.

If this court were to allow this to be afford,

then the employer simply has no protection.

It really doesn't

because settlement agreements

like that could be entered into all the time

and the employer would have no right

to prevent those settlement agreements.

It would be paying premiums

to its workers' cop care

who doesn't want to pay out

more than it has to

and finds a way to avoid it.

And employees

who want to preserve a

take a competent benefit

and then pursue a personal reaction.

Reading the document as a whole

it quite frankly seems to be

an effort to avoid

what is otherwise clearly

an issue here,

which is the exclusivity provision.

And it's invalid for that reason.

So if Miss Sylvester were to sue the landlord

and then the landlord

goes after the employer

under an indemnity concept

because of the lease,

can that go forward?

Sure.

And unfortunately,

there's an indemnity provision in the lease,

but under that circumstance

the employer is not protected

by the exclusivity provision

because it entered into a separate agreement

with the landlord

to protect the landlord from claims.

So under that circumstance,

yes, it's not payment of work,

it's not payment to the employee,

it's payment for whatever the landlord

is obligated to pay out.

The landlord may not be obligated to pay anything.

He may have exercised reasonable care

in carrying out his duties.

But under that circumstance,

having agreed to an indemnity provision,

the employer expressly understood

it was picking up that liability,

not the liability

that would go toward the employee

for the acts of injury

or acts that happen during the course of employment.

So again,

I suggest that if you read

the entirety of the agreement,

it's clear that Ms. Sylvester

did receive benefits

from the work's compensation period

that our work has compensation benefits,

though again she didn't receive all the benefits

that she might otherwise have received

had she gone forward and pervaded.

But having received some of the benefits

to quote this court,

having applied for and received the benefits

of work's compensation benefits,

she is therefore precluded from pursuing her employer.

If there are any other questions?

Would it be the same

about this?

Would it be the same if she went forward,

did not prevail,

got nothing,

she still can't then bring suit

against the employer?

That's not entirely clear in my mind,

I think you're correct.

Because this court has said

if you apply for and receive the benefits,

it's the receipt of the benefits.

Now what was argued obviously

at the lower level

in the complaint was that

the injury didn't arise out of a hazard

related to the employment

relationship.

And so, of course, query,

if it didn't arise out of a hazard

of the employment relationship,

how could the employer be liable

to do so?

Thank you, Attorney Fisher.

Thank you, Chief Justice.

I will be brief.

There's several references to the quid pro quo,

that is the essence

of the workers comp scheme.

The quid pro quo

is a door that swings both ways.

So the benefit to the employee

is he or she

gets compensation

without having to prove

common law liability.

For the employer,

the employer is immune

from common law claims

if the workers comp statute

applies.

And when it does apply,

workers comp is the exclusive remedy.

All facets

of the quid pro quo

scheme, in this case,

are absent.

There was no quick compensation

to the worker here.

The worker had was denied

entitlement to workers comp benefits

at every stage

of the workers comp case,

the appeal to the CID,

and then the appeal here.

And also in the settlement,

the settlement agreement

says that these are not benefits

under the workers comp act.

And the exclusivity

provision is

inapplicable because the compensation

that went to the

Mr. Buster is not

consistent with the compensation

she otherwise would have been entitled to.

What do you mean not consistent

with?

Far short

than what she would have seen

if she had prevailed.

But that's why

people settle cases.

They do, and that's why they enter into

certain settlement agreements that includes

language covering

all the various issues

that are

at stake at present and could be at

stake in the future.

And here, the settlement agreement omitted

any reference

to application of the exclusivity

provision moving forward.

It preserved the right

for Mr. Buster to bring

common law claim of negligence

and it could have

included language that protected

the employer,

but it did not.

Unless there's any further questions.

For sure. Thank you council. Case

submitted.
