This is case 20230011, State of New Hampshire v. Damien Russo.

Good morning, Counselor, Attorney Woodcock.

Good morning, Your Honors.

Elizabeth Woodcock for the State of New Hampshire.

I would like to reserve two minutes for rebuttal.

The trial court committed an error in this case when it suppressed the evidence after the defendant committed a new crime.

Now, I think that while my opponent has made it, made the argument that essentially because the State had dismissed the charges after the motion to suppress was filed,

that somehow that means that the motion to suppress morphed into only seeking to suppress the evidence with relation to the break into the car, and I think that's not true.

I think that if you read the motion to suppress, it's really geared towards the unlawful seizure of the car and includes the charges that were pending at the time,

which were a group of drug charges as well as the charges that were related to the break in.

It really doesn't mention the break in to the car.

And so when the State responded, I think maybe if I had been the prosecutor, I would have filed a motion to dismiss the motion to suppress once the charges had been dismissed and charged federally.

But on the motion, the caption included all of the cases, right, all the charges?

It did include all the charges, but it didn't make any real argument as to why the break in to the car, the motive essentially, this is what it's essentially doing, it's suppressing the motive to break in to the car.

It doesn't talk about that.

It talks about how at least didn't get a warrant and how they should have gotten a warrant and they didn't do it.

Well, now they do.

And then you need to suppress all the evidence obtained after the seizure.

It did seek to suppress all the evidence, but with respect to the failure to get a warrant.

It didn't seek to suppress all the evidence after the defendant broke a law and broke into the police impact law and started to rummage around and steal all the stuff that he knew was going to implicate him in the underlying charges.

So when you look at what he did and how the defense teased up that motion to suppress, I think that the State is really on notice to the extent that it's on notice of anything, that the defendant is challenging the absence of a warrant and possibly the contents of the warrant,

but not raising anything that relates to the defendant's decision to break in to the impact law and start to steal the evidence that the police had seized.

And that unlawful activity is an intervening circumstance.

And in order for the State to be on notice that this is what the defendant was actually trying to raise, the defendant should have made some reference to this.

Now, what were the options that the defendant had after the drug-related charges were dismissed?

The defendant certainly could have amended the motion to suppress so that everybody was on notice.

But if you read the hearing transcript, there's very little discussion about what the defendant did in terms of after his car had been seized.

Well, now what I'll do is I'll break into the police impact law, get into my car.

Does it matter that it was deemed an unlawful seizure?

Well, the unlawful seizure doesn't make a difference.

If the defendant wanted his stuff back, he should have gone to the police counter and walked in and said,

I would like my drugs and my guns back, please. You've seized these unlawfully.

But instead, what he decided to do was he doomed that he had a lot of incriminating evidence in the car and he decided that he'd committed a new crime.

And that, the police, the exclusionary rule is supposed to deter bad police behavior.

It's not supposed to give somebody a car wash to commit new crimes.

And that's what happened here.

So when I think the defendant...

And breaking into your own car is a crime.

Breaking into the police impact law and the car that the police have seized is a crime.

Yes.

Even if they've seized it unlawfully.

Well, his remedy then is to file a motion for return of property.

I don't think that he would do that because then, Justice Hans Marconi, he would be saying,

I would like my drugs and my guns back.

Or my car back with everything in it.

Well, my car back with everything in it, but the police would almost certainly do some kind of inventory under that circumstance

to make sure that everything was being returned.

And some of that stuff was never going to be returned to him.

And he knew that.

He knew that he had illegal contraband in the car.

When he was taken out of the car, his response was that he did a dumb thing.

And I think that he said that he was looking for his cell phone.

But there were multiple cell phones in the car.

And if he had wanted his cell phone back, his appropriate response would have gotten him to go to the police department,

go out to the counter and say, I'd like to have my cell phone back.

Don't break into the police impamp lot to do that.

Why wasn't it incumbent upon the state when the motion to suppress was for all evidence obtained from the car

to make a layered argument about why the initial seizure of the car was okay?

And then to say, oh, but if that doesn't fly, then here's this argument and here's this argument.

As I understand it, the state did argue the inevitable discovery exception.

And so why wasn't it incumbent on the state to have raised the second crime exception?

I think that if you read the motion to suppress your honor, it does not talk about the break-in.

It mentions the crimes, but it doesn't say.

And here's why you should suppress the evidence after this new crime.

And I think a fair reading of it really truthfully is that I don't think that the defense was thinking about the subsequent break-in.

I think it was thinking about trying to suppress the evidence with respect to the drug charges that were pending against the defendant and the firearms charges.

I don't think that the defense was saying, oh yes, and also they have a line in there about the break-in,

but it doesn't talk about this being a new offense or anything of that sort.

So when the charges were dismissed and charged federally, the drug and gun charges,

when they were dismissed and charged federally, as I said, I think that if I had been the prosecutor,

I would have been sitting there saying, well, what is the point?

But they went forward with the hearing, I think, because the prosecutor was laboring under the misapprehension

of what they were trying to do, what the defense was trying to do, was to challenge the validity of the subsequent warrant that was issued and other things.

Not that the defense was saying, oh, this new crime doesn't somehow constitute an intervening circumstance.

And I think that it's clear from the hearing that people aren't thinking that.

And the initial order of the court is so oblique that the state really didn't understand what had been suppressed.

Now, when the state filed the motion to reconsider, the defense then says, oh, well, we're not asking you to suppress the fact that he broke into the police impound law

and started to get into the power.

But I guess what they're asking the court to suppress is the defendant's motive in breaking into the police impound law and breaking into the power.

But the motion talks about it asks to suppress all evidence obtained after the police had the white BMW tow bending a search warrant.

And the break-in happened before the search warrant.

Correct.

Correct.

But it doesn't ask the court to suppress, to make the argument to say, look, now because they did this illegally, this somehow prompted my client

to break the law.

And therefore none of the things that happened that he did by breaking into the impound law, by breaking into the power, none of that should remain out there.

And the reason is that there's no basis to do it.

There's no basis to suppress the fact that he broke into the impound law.

There's no basis to suppress the fact that he broke into his own car.

There is the only thing that the State is aware of is that there's somehow challenging police activity, not trying to defend the defendant's new criminal acts.

And the merits of the new crime claim, what's your response to the Beau Shane argument that the defendant makes?

Beau Shane is a very different case, Your Honor.

In Beau Shane, it's almost like Blaisdell Moore, another case where this court determined that the police really overstepped their bounds.

In Beau Shane, the police officer sees what he suspects is a hand-to-hand drug transaction, but he really has no evidence of it.

And he begins to approach the defendant and the defendant this court found was seized very early on in that interaction.

In this case, the defendant has left the custody of the police.

He's been released.

He's gone home.

He's thought about what he's going to do.

And then after hours and hours after he's released, he decides, well, I think I'll go and commit this new crime.

And that's very distinct from anything else the court's ever decided.

The temporal elapsed the intervening circumstance of the new crime.

And obviously this, if the court were to suppress all of this evidence, it wouldn't deter bad police behavior.

It would reward the bad behavior of the defendant.

So I think that if you look at this case and I have to say, if I were a prosecutor and I were reading this motion to suppress,

I would be thinking that the focus of the defendant is on the failure to get a warrant and the warrant

or the timeliness of the warrant or whatever.

I would not be thinking that the defendant is seeking to suppress the motive to break in to the police and the criminal.

I would not be thinking that.

And I don't think that the trial court was thinking it when it issued its initial order.

It was only after the state, being obviously very confused by the court, asked the court to reconsider and to clarify.

And then at that point, the court said, oh, yes, all of this is being suppressed for the purposes of both crimes.

Well, that would come as news in my own obscurity because I wouldn't see a basis for suppressing the evidence with respect to the new crime.

If somebody takes something unlawfully from you, that doesn't give you the license to just go and take it back,

whether it means you're breaking into their house or whatever.

If you do that, then you commit new crimes.

And what the court has essentially done is to suppress the reason that he would break into the impound plot,

not particularly the evidence, but his purpose in going in there.

Should it affect our analysis at all that there are charges, I guess, pending in the Federal Court?

They're no longer pending, Your Honor.

The defendant pleaded guilty to those charges and was sentenced last July.

So those charges are no longer lodged.

I think that I see my red light is on, but I think it might affect the court's analysis

if the motion to suppress it been clearer.

But since it is not clear, I think that it should not affect this court's analysis.

Thank you, Attorney Woodcock.

You reserved two minutes.

Attorney Barnard.

May it please the court.

Thomas Barnard, on behalf of Davey and the Rousseau.

I'm going to make three points.

First, the trial court sustainably found that the State waived its new crime argument.

Second, the State failed to preserve its argument that the new crime exception is offense-specific.

And third, the trial court sustainably found that the exclusionary rule applies.

Attorney is required to raise all possible objections at the earliest possible time.

The purpose of the motion that we consider is to bring a court's attention to points

of law or fact that the trial court misapprehended or overlooked.

I ask a more global question.

If we agree with the State, is there a case for which this evidence is going to apply?

What's the purpose of this appeal?

The defendant has already put out federal charges.

What's left to remain and remaining on the State side?

It charges an attempted falsification of physical evidence trespassing.

I suspect that the State wants to admit the evidence that was found to prove so

motive to trespass.

The purpose of a motion to reconsider is not to raise new arguments that were readily

apparent when the initial pleadings were filed.

Trial courts thus have discretion to refuse to consider a new argument that is raised

for the first time in a motion to reconsider.

And that's exactly what happened here.

The trial court sustainably found that the State could have raised its new crime

argument before its original ruling and thus that the State waived the issue.

Rousseau's motion to suppress was not just a challenge to the seizure of this car.

It was, like all motions, to suppress a request.

And it was a request that the trial court suppress, specifically, physical evidence

that was ultimately discovered in Rousseau's car.

The State was obligated to raise all objections to that request.

Does the order apply to the evidence that that was observed in plain view

that there appeared to be drug, some drugs in the car before they seized it?

The order applies to the physical evidence that was found in the car.

The order does not result in the suppression of the police officer's observations

before the car was seized.

Or even the drug alert, the dog alert, for that matter?

It does not apply to the dog alert.

So this is the...

Any ruling that we have here wouldn't be fiddled with the State's case.

It would not.

It would not.

No.

A motion to suppress never asks the court to never, never results directly in the dismissal

of the charge.

They never precludes the State from going forward with the charge.

There's no motion to suppress.

Motive, motive isn't evidence.

It's not.

I can't pick that up.

Could have been anything, could have been anything in the car that he was breaking

into retreat.

It could have been.

It could have been.

A motion to suppress asks the court to suppress physical evidence in the car with respect to

all the charges.

So if we read the transcript of the hearing and conclude that it really wasn't very clear

about what was going on and that the State could have reasonably thought that the focus

was just on the issue of whether there needed to be an initial warrant, can we use that

as the basis for reversing?

No.

It's a hard question to answer because it's hard to accept the premise that there was

something unclear about Rousseau's motion.

Rousseau, like in many motions, suppressed that the police violated the Constitution

as a result of that violation.

They obtained specific evidence and I'm asking the court to suppress that evidence that

the police obtained.

But the State, as soon as it got the order and it wasn't clear to the State as to exactly

what the trial court was ruling on, it asked really for reconsideration and clarification,

why is that not a sufficient way to proceed so that the State shouldn't lose its ability

to contest this motion?

I can't understand why the issue wasn't clear to the State before the Court's original

order of motion to suppress.

Rousseau asked the Court to suppress specific evidence as a result of a constitutional

violation.

In general, whenever a defendant files a motion to suppress, the State has a menu

of responses.

It can argue that the police did not violate the Constitution.

And it can also argue that even if the police violated the Constitution, some

exception to the exclusion of the rule applies.

And in fact, the State argued two exceptions here.

It argued inevitable discovery and independent source.

So the State, before the court ruled on the motion to suppress, before the hearing

even, the State appeared to understand what issue was before the Court.

It was only after the Court granted the motion to suppress that the State then

raised the new prime exemption.

I don't understand the basis for the State's claim that it couldn't have or that

it would not have been appropriate to raise the new prime exception before the

Court's ruling on the motion to suppress.

It's just like inevitable discovery or independent source.

It's an exception to the exclusion.

So my first argument is that the trial court sustainably found that the State

waived its new prime argument.

My second argument is distinct, but similar.

And that's that the State failed to preserve its argument that the new

prime exception is offense specific.

And this is pulling aside the timeliness issue.

Even in the State's motion to reconsider, the State argued that the new, that under

the new prime exception, the evidence should not be suppressed at all.

The State did not suggest that it depended on what prime Rousseau was charged

with.

So the trial court didn't pay particular attention to what crimes were pending

against Rousseau.

And because of that, the trial court, well, the trial court originally, as the order

granting the motion to suppress, had made a mistake.

The trial court said that Rousseau was then charged with possessing drugs and guns

and that the trespassing and attempted falsification charges had been all-pressed.

In fact, the opposite was true.

The drugs and gun charges had been all-pressed.

The attempted falsification and trespassing and resisting arrest charges

were still pending.

But under the argument that the State made in the trial court, that mistake didn't

matter.

The argument in the trial court was this evidence should not be suppressed at all,

regardless of what charges are pending.

Only on appeal does the State raise this possibility that under the exclusionary

rule, evidence might be suppressed with respect to one charge, but not with

respect to another charge.

And that's an argument that the trial court never had the opportunity to consider

because the State never raised before the trial court.

In fairness to the trial court, this court should consider that argument

unpreserved.

Turning to the merits of the State's new crime.

And just on that, the trial court noted in its order on the motion for

reconsideration that even if the State had timely raised blah, blah,

neither the plain view exception to the warrant requirement nor the new crime

exception to the exclusionary rule applies.

It did.

It did.

The trial court denied the State's motion to reconsider on two grounds, one,

timeliness, and second, on the merits.

On the merits.

Yeah.

So turning to the merits now, one point I want to make, the State claims

that we're so rummaged around in his car, there's no evidence of that.

There's no evidence at all that we're so touched, any item in his car.

The fundamentals of the new crime exception are well so.

If the defendant commits a new crime, the defendant's conduct is not suppressed,

even if it's in response to a constitutional violation.

That's panoramic.

If the defendant takes an item from the police, then that item is not suppressed.

Even if the police originally obtained the item by violating the Constitution,

that's McGurk.

But if those circumstances do not apply, then the exception does not apply,

even if the defendant commits a new crime, and that's motion.

Here, the trial court did not suppress any observations of his conduct.

If there's witnesses that saw Rousseau break into the impound lot, those witnesses

can testify at trial.

No dispute about that.

And there's no evidence that Rousseau took any item from the police.

Thus, the new crime exception does not apply.

The State's argument on appeal is essentially an argument that the new

crime exception is offense-specific, that even if it wouldn't apply to the

drug and gun charges, the new crime exception still applies to the attempted

falsification, trespassing, and resisting arrest charges.

This Court should reject them.

Evidence is either the fruit of the poisonous tree or it is the crime.

The analysis depends on the connection between the illegal police conduct

and the discovery and seizure of the evidence.

Subsequent charging decisions have no relevance to the connection

between constitutional violation and the discovery of the evidence.

Thus, the new crime exception is not offense-specific, and this Court should approve.

If the Court has any further questions.

Waiver, the trial court made a finding that there was a waiver of that argument.

What level of deference do we owe to that finding?

Conclusion.

That finding is afforded deference.

It's reviewed under an unsustainable exercise of discretion standard.

This Court on several cases has held that when a trial court refuses to consider

a new argument raised for the first time in a motion to reconsider, that refusal

is reviewed for an unsustainable exercise of discretion.

Here, there's nothing untenable or unreasonable about the trial court's

finding that the State could have raised this argument before its original

ruling on Rousseau's motion to suppress.

If there are no further questions.

Thank you, Attorney Court.

Thank you, Your Honor.

I would just like to point the Court to paragraphs 11 and 12 of the motion

to suppress.

And I say, on the afternoon of the next statement made about the police

found Mr. Rousseau had gotten into the impound plot and inside the white BMW.

The police ordered Mr. Rousseau out of the vehicle and he complied.

Mr. Rousseau advised that he had just snuck in.

I know it was stupid.

He was actually found in the back seat.

But then the next paragraph goes on.

It says, the police then applied for a search warrant.

The rest of this motion deals with the seizure of the car and the failure

to get a search warrant and the application of a search warrant.

It does not mention the new crimes again.

And I think that it is a little bit unfair to hold the state to answer

arguments that aren't being raised.

The issues here deal entirely, in this motion deal, entirely with the

question of what the police had done and when they actually sought the warrant.

They do not deal with the defendant's new criminal activities.

If they had, if they had discussed the new activities,

then I think that you could hold the state to responding to that.

But under these circumstances, I don't think you can.

I see my yellow light is on.

Thank you, Your Honor.
