All versus New Hampshire Department of Transportation.

Morning, counsel.

Mr. Marshall, I understand you have reserved two minutes

for re-battle.

That's correct.

Please proceed.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Good morning, Justices.

If it pleases the court, we're on appeal here

from Judge Tucker's reversal of Judge Schulman's denial

of summary judgment for the State of New Hampshire.

Judge Tucker found that it was undisputed

that, per the traffic control plan for traffic entering

the race track, that the track employees were

to place certain cones.

This whole track situation results from a driveway permit

when the track was first put in by statute, governed by,

and overseen by DOT.

The DOT, because there was so much traffic leaving,

put together a traffic control plan,

so three lanes could leave the track at once,

and head itself down 106, all the way down to 393.

And they had help from the city of Conkirk town

of Loudon, various police in the race track.

So they developed this plan, which was working pretty good,

until, between two races, the State widened an intersection

where this accident occurred.

When they did that, the State DOT

submitted new plans out to people.

And it's undisputed on the record

that, apparently, the people setting the cones

didn't get the new plans to show where the cone should be placed.

And you aren't challenging the adequacy or sufficiency

of the plan, right?

Not the plan itself, Your Honor, not at all.

But part of that plan required that once the cones

and everything were shifted over,

they called a lane shift.

Someone from the State Traffic Bureau

would drive down through the detour

before it was open to traffic

to make sure everything conformed to the traffic control

plan, which, again, because it's part of the driveway

permit, had to adhere to the MUTCD.

Where in the plan does it say that?

It's through specifically not in the plan.

It's part of the administration of the plan by DOT,

because they administer the plan.

Is that in the traffic control schedule?

It's not specifically in the schedule.

As we have in my summary judgment objection,

we had testimony from Bill Lambert,

even from former commissioner Gil Rogers

that that was a requirement that traffic would give the final

OK all clear to travel the road.

And that's not a fact in dispute.

That's not a fact in dispute at all.

And so the state goes down and says, whoops,

these cones are wrong.

Instead of three lanes, there's room for over four lanes.

They go back and report it to the racetrack

and says, those cones are wrong.

They then, the department then,

says it's free to open to traffic.

Nobody goes back to look.

No one goes to check.

And because it's a free-for-all on this stretch of road

by an intersection, Ms. McCray gets T-bone making

a left-hand turn.

So can you just clarify, do you

agree that the traffic plan, the TCP,

does not impose an obligation on the state

to do a second sweep?

They did a sweep as required by the plan.

And there's no further requirement for another sweep.

Is that right in the plan?

Well, the plan says that the state

is to do a sweep to confirm it's safe to open to traffic.

So how does the plan says that?

Where can we find in the record that the plan says that?

The record of that is cited in my objective summary

judgment, which I refer to in my brief,

is both through deposition and through meeting minutes

of the Traffic Control Committee.

Am I correct that the plan is the two-page document

that it's at one of the appendices at page 50

and it's sent as an email?

Is that right that that is the plan?

No.

There's much more to the plan than just that email.

And it's undisputed that the DOT

was supposed to look at the detour before it's opened up

to make sure it's safe for travel.

Now, how the DOT, because they're

in charge of the state roads, they're

in charge of driveling permits and they're

the final say on the traffic control plan,

whether they decide to go down and stop in the road

and wait for it to be fixed or whether they do a second sweep,

that would be up to them.

But the obligation on the department

was to make sure it was safe before traffic was sent down.

And they knew there was an obligation under the traffic

control plan or does that arise elsewhere?

That arises both under the traffic control plan

and it rises under the driveway permit

and under state statute with respect

to safe travel of roads.

Now, Judge Tucker would say he didn't look beyond that.

All he focused on was who was supposed to put the cones out

or who was supposed to check the cones.

The state was in charge of the safe travel of traffic

and exiting the traffic.

So you're saying basically that's a non-delegable duty

that it doesn't matter what this plan says.

Ultimately, the buck stops here and it's the state.

That's all we have to think about.

It would be no different than if a state turned over

management of a drawbridge to a separate entity like the track

and said before you send traffic

once the drawbridge is back down,

where do you send the state official out

to take a look to make sure the bridge is down?

And the state official goes out and says,

oh, the bridge isn't down, better put it down.

And goes home and the contractor

doesn't make sure the bridge is down

and everybody drives into the ocean.

There's no different than that.

This is a situation where the state had final say

on every aspect of traffic exiting the track,

went down there, noticed it was all wrong,

noticed there was too much lanes,

and then after the accident,

it was state DOT personnel that wouldn't fix the cones.

They didn't call the track

after this people sending off an ambulance.

They're there and the DOT fixed the cones.

So whether the state did a second sweep.

Is that in the record?

Yes, that's in the record.

Whether the state did a second sweep

or whether they stopped like they did after the accident,

Bill Lender in his testimony, they stayed right there,

had state department come up and fixed the cones

and no one else would suffer what Ms. McCrae suffered.

So when the state argues, well,

they do a little bit of argument about

whether or not this was a hazard.

The hazard was sending three lanes south on route 106

and they had a plan to do that safely.

We don't dispute that they're immune from soup

if the plan was a bad plan.

That isn't the issue.

The issue is they didn't follow the plan.

They knew they didn't follow the plan

and they did nothing to make sure the plan was corrected

before they sent everyone.

Well, they did do something.

They told the track to fix it.

Again, what does it do to tell the people

with the drawbridge put it down and then take it off

without making sure it's safe?

The department's obligation of the plan

to make sure it was safe.

It was that obligation as under the plan.

If we look at the four square corners of the plan,

that obligation is there

and can you identify it in the record?

Well, the trouble with the four square corners

of the plan, Your Honor, I can pull it out.

I mean, I haven't cited where they've all testified to this.

But the trouble with the four corners of the plan

is as the DOT says, it's an ever-evolving process

which the DOT has always been in charge of day one

because of the driveway permit.

So this isn't a traffic control plan

that is 10 sheets of paper.

This is a traffic control plan

that goes all the way back to when they first started

sending multiple lanes, traffic's down 106.

It's contains in thousands of patients,

beating minutes, dozens or thought hundreds

reiterations of a plan.

So it's reflected in minutes,

this obligation that you're identifying that the DOT

is in minutes somewhere?

No, it would say it's in the,

their obligation is based both in statute

because it's a state highway.

It's based in statute off the driveway permit.

It's in the driveway permit.

And then as part of the plan for this particular race,

the DOT was to give the final approval

after they do their suite.

This was testified to by all personnel involved

with the Department of Transportation

to make sure this lane of road was safe

and that it was set up the way the paper layout

of the signs and the lane configurations

were supposed to be.

So your argument would be the same

even if DOT never noticed

that their cones were in the wrong place?

Yes, if they never noticed it,

they didn't do their job to make sure

that this lane configuration matched the plan

that the department approved was required

in order to have safe travel

for three lanes of traffic leaving the track.

If Judge Tucker's orders to stand

in the state arguments are allowed to remain in place,

the department would never be allowed for anything.

They had a plan, they didn't follow it,

they didn't make sure the road was safe

before they left and I see my lights on.

No, that's the yellow light, so you get more time.

All right, so, and then I argue that in my brief,

you're essentially telling the state,

oh, you're never gonna be liable for anything.

So do you agree that, I think the state's saying

that we should affirm Judge Tucker,

but if we don't affirm Judge Tucker,

then we need to send it back

because there's a whole insufficiency statute

regimen that the trial court did not address

and that that needs to be addressed by the trial court.

Do you agree with that?

Absolutely, I agree with that 100%.

Because again, I'm appealing Judge Tucker's order,

which just says the track was putting out the cones

so case closed, state's immune.

And there's too many facts in dispute

and then there's so many facts that are not in dispute

about the state being responsible

for doing a final they call, that's a quote sweep,

where they go down to make sure the plan

was the traffic control plan as far as cones and signs

were put out where they were supposed to be.

We're on the marks they put in the road for the cones.

Can you just clarify for me the timeline here

when how compressed was this situation

in terms of identifying the problem

and then the road being opened.

Are we talking about hours or?

That was a matter of, I believe,

if memory serves, it was less than a half hour.

The state did the final sweep,

drove back up to the track from 106

and I think they also radioed

and said that intersection's wrong

because of the recent winding the state did,

those cones need to be fixed.

And then 30 minutes later, the road is open.

And then the state said, through I believe it was Bill Lambert,

go ahead and send traffic.

And no one ever radioed back saying,

okay, we fixed the cones,

there's none of that in the record.

All it is, is the state saying,

yep, okay, now send traffic.

It was just pure negligence on the part of the state,

not to go down or stay there

to make sure these cones were fixed

and were according to plan.

If the state had stopped or had their own person

or anyone else fixed the cones,

this accident would have never happened.

What happened was we went from three controlled lanes

headed south to over four lanes wide

at an intersection where someone

is following the signs above.

Mr. McCray was right underneath the sign

to left hand turn.

Trouble was there was about 15 feet to her left

because the cones were in the wrong place.

Now she turned left, she gets smashed

by somebody flying, you know,

better than 55 miles an hour down the road.

So she's following the signs.

The cones are way off because the road was widened

and the state knew it.

And then it's just, I don't understand why,

but they didn't make sure it was safe according to plan.

They're noting, hey, we didn't follow the plan,

but we're not going to make sure we follow

before we send all these cars barreling down the highway.

Regardless, you still have claims against the speedway,

don't you?

The claims against the speedway and the ton of louden

and the driver have all been finalized.

This is the last remaining nugget.

Okay.

So that's why we're here.

So unless there's any other questions, I'll defer.

Thank you.

Thank you very much, Mr. Marshall, Ms. Wilson.

Good morning, may it please the court.

My name is Christina Wilson,

representing the New Hampshire Department of Transportation.

This case arises from appellant's desire

to hold the DOT responsible for New Hampshire motor speedway's

failure to implement a traffic control plan

that was designed to mitigate traffic

coming to and from the speedway's premises

for a NASCAR event.

As counsel said, there's no dispute in this case

that that plan itself, the TCP is protected

by the state's discretionary function immunity

and that claims are rising from the creation

of that plan are barred.

The state acknowledges that if there is a failure

to implement that plan properly,

a negligent implementation of that plan,

there's possibility for a claim against the state.

But as I'll explain today,

those circumstances are not present here.

Today I plan to address the lack of evidence

showing negligent implementation by DOT.

Second, why the sweep, I'll explain why the sweep

performed by DOT does not expose the state's agency

to liability for the negligence of the speedway.

And finally, if there's time, I'll address briefly

some of the appellant's arguments

regarding the insufficiency law.

I welcome the court's questions at any time.

Turning first to the implementation of the TCP,

we know, I don't think that there's a lot of facts

at all in dispute about what happened

with regard to the placement of the cones.

The traffic control plan was very clear

about who the responsible party was for placing the cones.

And we know that to be the speedway.

We know that the speedway acknowledges

that that's their responsibility.

What happened here is DOT disseminated

with the traffic control plan two cone layout plans

that dictated where the cones were to be placed

on the day of the accident.

So in terms of the responsibility of NHMS,

where specifically in the plan is that?

Is it in that schedule and if so where?

Yes, so there's a 20 page schedule

that details all of the responsibilities.

It spans two or three days.

On page, one moment.

On page 41 of the state's appendix,

it explains that at the third entry down,

different cone placements that are to be done.

I believe it's under that category,

but it's definitely on this page that dictates

that New Hampshire Motor Speedway is responsible

for placing the cones in the area

of the intersection of 106 and Staniels Road.

So we know that that's not in dispute.

What we do know happened is that when DOT sent the plans out

to the speedway's representatives,

the speedway did not communicate those plans

to its employees that were actually on the ground

that day placing the traffic cones.

And so we know the speedway has acknowledged

that this is not in dispute,

that the employees for the speedway

placed the cones where they had in all the prior years

prior to an intersection redesign

that occurred in that area.

And they inadvertently created a fourth lane.

We know that that was all of the speedway.

It's not in dispute at all.

And so despite having a clear cone layout plan

that was designed by and disseminated by the DOT,

simply put the speedway did not follow it.

And so appellants are trying to turn around

and hold DOT responsible for the negligent implementation

of that plan.

Well, but they're trying to hold DOT responsible

for identifying the problem, saying,

hey, you ought to fix it.

And then not going back and checking that it was fixed

and then opening it to traffic.

Why should DOT get a pass on that?

So I think that they're using this idea of the sweep

to try to turn around and impose liability on DOT

because they know that there's no way

they can get DOT for the cone placement.

Because it's simply-

Is the sweep required?

The sweep is required under the plan.

I think that appellants council has overstated

a bit what that sweep is.

There was testimony from Bill Lambert,

that sweep is just what it is, a sweep, a drive-by.

And the primary purpose of that sweep

is to ensure that the lanes, the side roads

are closed feeding into 106.

So you don't have competing traffic

coming into the roadway from different directions.

During that sweep to ensure that those lanes,

those side roads were closed,

DOT employees discovered the misplaced cones.

What was omitted from the argument earlier this morning

is that there was a plan in place

for what happens if there is a problem discovered day of.

If DOT discovers a problem

with some portion of the traffic control plan,

it was agreed upon by everybody and the plan was

DOT would communicate that issue

to the responsible party under the traffic control plan

so that that party can go back and fix it.

The reason it's-

But they not follow through to make sure that it was safe?

So DOT, they perform one sweep

and then they notify if there's a problem,

the responsible party to fix it.

They did not go back to make sure that it was fixed.

Why not?

I think just there's so many moving parts on that day

that if DOT stops, goes back, fixes it themselves

or goes, it just delays the whole plan.

And so I guess maybe there was a degree of trust there

that the Speedway would go and do what it agreed to do,

which is if a problem is communicated to the Speedway,

the Speedway agrees to go back and fix it.

They simply did not follow through

on their responsibilities under the traffic control plan.

And what I think is notable is not only does the Speedway

acknowledge they had to go back and fix it

and they didn't, DOT says that's what our understanding

was under the plan.

We notify the responsible party, they go back and fix it.

Plaintiff's own expert testified in his deposition

that DOT did everything that it was supposed to do

under a traffic control plan.

This idea that there's multiple responsible parties

and you communicate out problems under the plan

to be fixed, that's exactly what was required

under the plan, that's an industry standard

and DOT did everything.

So what troubles me is somewhat what Mr. Marshall

was saying that DOT can never be held liable

for anything here because it seems the endpoint

of your argument is that DOT can outsource

the responsibility, they can have a one paragraph deal

with the track and say, hey, you're responsible

for figuring this out, we under statute

and the law, we're supposed to do it,

but we're saying you do it and then they're absolved

from any responsibility, that doesn't seem any different

than what you're saying now.

So I think there's a couple of pieces to it

and so if you look at it just under discretionary function

I could see how the appellants are concerned

that there's never going to be liability for DOT

but that's certainly not what we understand

to be the case and I think this is what kicks over

to those insufficiency arguments.

There's two pieces to this, there's the plan itself,

if you're challenging why didn't you do a second sweep,

the decisions that you made under that plan,

why did you do it the way that you did it

and you're challenging the judgment and engineering

decisions and all of that that goes into the plan,

that's the discretionary function piece of it.

If you're challenging what did DOT do

after it received notice of a hazard on a highway,

that's a separate question and so they've argued

and we haven't disputed it for purposes of summary judgment

that there was a hazard or an insufficiency on the road

will concede that for purposes of argument

but what did DOT do after it learned of that hazard,

that's precisely what the insufficiency laws

are designed to govern and that's-

But if we were to affirm the trial court

then at least under the trial court's analysis

we never get to the insufficiency analysis.

So I think-

But that's what you're saying is the backstop

and the protection for the public.

Right, so I think, yes, I think that

what the trial court did and what it realized

is that when you look at the core of appellants' arguments

it's challenging why didn't you do more?

Why didn't you do a second sweep?

You should have done this.

This should have been the way that the plan was designed

after you noticed the misplaced cones

and so when at its core when you're challenging

the why of the plan, that's covered by discretionary function,

I don't think the trial court saw any other claims

left to be addressed by that.

If there is this question of there is something else

lingering there, what should DOT have done

after it received notice of those misplaced cones?

I think it kicks over to the insufficiency laws

which is RSA 23078 through 80

and that statute is designed to do two things.

One creates immunity but it also creates

a heightened standard of care to govern

when there can be liability.

And then that involves notice and all.

Right, and so you look at the type of notice DOT received.

So why isn't that the right way to think about this case

that okay, so maybe there's not this immunity

that the trial court found but there is,

we've got to analyze it under insufficiency

and how long did they have notice

and what did they do, did they act reasonably

once they got the notice?

Isn't that the right analysis?

So the way that I interpret appellants arguments with

and it's really comes down to

why didn't you do a second sweep?

Why didn't you do more?

Why did you have the plan set up

the way that you did that you delegated it

to the speedway under this plan?

Why is it set up that way?

I really think that is fully encompassed

within the discretionary function immunity.

In plaintiff's complaint, they set forth this notice framework

and this idea of an insufficiency

within the framework of that law,

essentially putting the state on notice

that it made an insufficiency claim

so we responded to that.

I don't think that it needs to be reached

but if the court finds there is some lingering claim

not fully encompassed within that discretionary function

I think it's fully disposed of under the insufficiency laws

because the notice framework,

there's somebody writes into DOT,

we didn't have that occur.

The next is an intentional act by DOT

is how they received notice.

There's no allegation of that.

There's this third category of when DOT

has actual notice of a hazard on the road.

I think that's arguably the bucket we would put it in.

But the facts in relation to this issue

and the law really haven't been fully developed

and it would be unusual for us

to deal with it in the first instance.

Correct, I think, and we asserted this in the brief

that one, we don't think it was fully briefed.

It was referenced in appellants' pleadings

but I think that it hasn't been adequately kind of brief

for purposes of judicial review now

but also I think it's up to the trial court

to determine that in the first instance.

But I only get to that point to flag for the court

that what we're dealing with

if we are working under the insufficiency statute

is a heightened standard of care

that requires gross negligence or bad faith.

And so one, I don't think we have any allegations

of either of those but any lingering claims

are gonna be judged under that standard.

And again, it's the state's position

that there are no claims that are outside

of the discretionary function

that would survive that immunity.

Why doesn't Defrucia apply

in that this is more of an implementation of the plan?

So with Defrucia, it was a guardrail case.

The design of the guardrail itself

was decided to be under discretionary function

but they just, I believe they didn't put it

in the right spot or they didn't put it in.

They didn't put it in and they didn't drain the ditch.

Right, and so we don't have that here.

We have, as far as the record shows,

DOT did everything that that plan was designed to do.

I think that it is a collaborative effort

but it is not evolving document

in the sense that it's changing in the moment.

It's evolving over decades of learning experiences.

Each time, each year a race happens, they change it

but this day up is a concrete plan.

Everybody knows what they're supposed to do.

It starts at 4 a.m., it goes till 9 p.m.,

there's multiple stakeholders involved.

Everybody knows what their responsibilities are that day.

But it seems like Defrucia,

this case is like Defrucia except that

instead of the highway department not doing it,

they have contracted with somebody to do it

and then it hasn't been done

and it doesn't seem like that's a difference

that should matter.

So I'm hesitant to say with regard to traffic control plans

these are not specific to DOT.

These are happening all across the state.

Traffic engineers do this.

Landowners sign themselves up to do this.

It's not as if DOT signed up the Speedway.

The Speedway volunteers to do this

because it benefits them.

It's of such great magnitude

that that's why we have multiple stakeholders involved.

But generally speaking an ordinary traffic control plan

is implemented only by the landowner,

their contractors, their engineers.

It just so happens we have multiple parties

involved in this one.

And as far as DOT's involvement goes,

they did everything according to plan.

It's not like Defrucia where the plan

was not implemented properly.

This we know DOT, the Speedway was assigned

to place the cones, they failed to do that.

DOT was assigned to do a sweep, DOT did that.

During the sweep, DOT discovered a problem.

The plan calls for them to report that problem

to the Speedway, DOT did that.

And can you identify precisely in the record

where that set of responsibilities is identified

and there are no further responsibilities?

That seems to be the nub of the question.

Sure.

So page 41 of the state's appendix

is the portion that governs

the Speedway's placement of the traffic cones.

Page 40, I'm sorry, 112 and page 113

of the state's appendix are the diagrams

including the cone layout plan

that is part of that traffic control plan.

And then page 43 of the state's appendix

with regard to DOT's sweep

is the entry at 2.45 p.m.

on page 43 of the state's appendix.

So that's the only sweep that's called for

for DOT to do at this time.

There was testimony that they-

Well, DOT's responsible for opening the road, right?

Don't they give the OK to open the road?

Correct, DOT does do that.

How much time passed between that decision

and the notification that the cones are in the wrong spot?

We don't have an exact timeline.

I think memories fade and the record just wasn't there

with regard to the exact timeline of all of the events.

But from what we can gather from the times in this plan

and just when the accident happened,

it's our understanding the cones were called to be placed

roughly around 12.30 p.m.

The sweep was called for it to be around roughly 2.45 p.m.

We don't have a record of exactly

when the road was ordered to be open,

but we know that the plaintiffs

alleged the accident occurred around 4.30 p.m.

So it's the span of a few hours

that are different things are occurring,

but we just don't unfortunately have the exact times.

Councilor, your red lights on.

Do you wish to close quickly?

Yes, I just want to reiterate that I think that this case

is designed to hold DOT responsible

for the speedways actions and inactions.

I don't think that that's what discretionary function

immunity is designed for.

I think this would open the door

to an absurd degree of claims

for everything that happens on the state's highway

if the appellant is successful.

Talk about opening the door here.

You quoted Bergeron versus the city of Manchester

in your brief and Gardner versus the city of Concord.

And in fact, when you look at Bergeron,

does it not say that immunity is the exception

rather than the rule in tort cases?

I think that it is.

I think that this has been carved out

as to be protected to precisely stop

the second guessing of the plan.

Again, we're not saying that this is immune

for everything that occurs under this umbrella of the plan.

There could very well be a claim,

and I think that that's right.

There has been exceptions carved out

and DOT could be held liable if they can point to something

that DOT did incorrectly.

And then it kicks over to that standard,

but I don't think that they've done that here today.

Thank you very much, counsel.

Thank you.

Mr. Marshall, do you wish to use your two minutes?

Yes, thank you, Your Honor.

I want to just first say that coming on the Bergeron case,

that was the failure to install a beacon, which

was made a decision based on design criteria.

So that doesn't apply to anything here.

Here we have, and I'll just want to correct,

there was a comment that Speedway volunteers to help out.

That's not the case at all.

As cited in my brief, they have a driveway permit

that requires that they have to handle traffic coming

out of there in a safe manner.

And DOT decides what that safe manner is,

hence the traffic control plan.

So to the extent the track volunteers,

if they don't volunteer, nobody will leave in the racetrack

except in a single lane of traffic.

So this was the racetrack trying

to work with the state to meet the state DOT driveway

requirements to keep their permit,

to have races up there and leave the track.

We can talk about a lot of stuff,

but, again, in my appeal, I'm bound

by the fore corners of Judge Tucker's order.

He only looked at it and said, oh,

the track was supposed to put the cones out?

States immune.

Never even acknowledged arguments

about the state's requirement to go back, sweep the lanes.

The definition I refer to, I refer to the driveway permit

because Madam Justice asked me about where

it's cited in the record.

And in the record, we have Mr. Lambert,

who was head of the Transportation Bureau at the time,

say that they went down, they found an error,

and they let traffic go before the error

was confirmed to be corrected.

So numerous facts remain in dispute on this issue.

And yet, Judge Tucker and I were

addressed it in granted summary judgment.

Now, summary judgment, as this court has told us

numerous times, it needs to be undisputed facts

when you look at it most reasonably in favor

of the non-moving park.

And our facts that we've asserted

are that the state required a traffic control plan,

that they required final approval

of the layout of it prior to traffic going down the road,

and they let the State Department of Transportation

let traffic go, and it did not meet the traffic control

plan.

So thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you, Counsel.

Case submitted.

Court is now adjourned.

Right.
