This is case 2023-0356, state of New Hampshire versus Christopher Vivny.

Good morning, Attorney Johnson. Good morning.

I understand you reserve one minute. Yes, Your Honor. Thank you. Please proceed.

May I please record Christopher Johnson on behalf of Christopher Vivny.

There's three issues in this appeal. My plan this morning is to focus on the first principally,

but I have a point to make about the second. And within the issues,

I want to talk first about the merits and then get to harmless error.

Before we do that, with regard to the third issue, the confidential records,

they're seeking review of confidential records held by a third party, not by the state.

Problem is we don't have any records. So nobody's asked the trial court to send us those records.

I will check on that. My understanding was that they are being held in the trial court

and that we had asked them to be transferred, but I will double check that.

Thank you. Yeah. So turning to these issues, the first issue is the exclusion of the text message

or the denial of the mistrial regarding the texted after party invitation.

With respect to the merits, there was no discovery violation.

There's no obligation to disclose an item before the lawyer knows it exists.

And there's no discovery rule that imposes a duty to investigate early.

Indeed, courts lack the power to compel a party to do an investigation.

I mentioned to Mr. Gagne that I was going to alert the court to another case that's not cited in the brief,

and that's Petition of State Lewandowski. It's 169 New Hampshire, 340,

and just in support of that point that the courts don't have the power to compel a party to do an investigation.

So the error here, I think principally, was in the interpretation of the discovery rules

to create an obligation that didn't exist or to state an obligation belatedly that had not...

So this is a text message that was allegedly sent to a witness for the defense.

That witness was allowed to testify that he was invited to?

Yes.

Was he allowed to testify that he was invited by way of a text message or...?

I think... I don't recall that. It was very clear that he testified that he was invited.

It was very clear that Preston testified that he didn't invite anybody.

So the sort of issue was joined.

And as the state points out, the defendant was acquitted of the burglary charge.

And so doesn't that suggest that there's no prejudice?

No, I don't think so because the burglary acquittal could be accounted for by other sort of lines of reasoning within the deliberation room.

And so, for example, the jury could...

So the way the burglary was charged here is that he had to have the intent to commit the AFSA when he entered the house.

It wasn't an enter or remain. It was entered.

And the jury could have find that they wouldn't have known what they were going to find in the house.

His intentions would have been more sort of less defined until he actually got there and entered.

And so the jury could have said it wasn't... he didn't have the mental... the criminal mental state when he entered.

And that could account for it.

So what is the standard overview on the text issue?

So I think it depends on how one characterizes the error.

And I think there's a couple of ways to do it.

So in the first instance, as I suggested, I think the court misinterpreted the discovery rules to postulate an obligation that doesn't exist.

So if you frame it that way, it's de novo review.

If you frame it as the court misapplied the rules, then it would be deferential.

I think we would...

What are you advocating for?

Because the burglary freely addresses that.

Right. I mean, I think you could look at it either way.

I think we'd prevail either way.

So I'd sort of present the court sort of in the brief both options because I think it is justified.

The way the court articulated its ruling was that there was a discovery violation.

You can look at the discovery rules to know that there wasn't.

And so that strikes me as an erroneous interpretation or understanding of the rules.

Was the state apprised of the fact that this witness was going to testify that he had been invited by way of a text message?

Yes.

And so it was just that they were aware that a text message was allegedly sent.

They just didn't see the message itself.

Well, the state knew that he was going to testify that he was invited.

And so they, in their case in chief, elicited a testimony that nobody was invited.

And so again, whether I did keep some notes about exactly what was said.

So Preston, Sijapati said at pages 380 and 81 that we were invited to this after party.

I didn't put in my notes that it was by text.

And so I don't think he voiced the mechanism.

And Preston in the state's case had testified that we didn't invite anybody back.

It was at pages 137.

So then you get to prejudice.

So if, you know, I'm right in asserting that this was an error.

The court had this discretion to do one of two things.

It could have granted the mistrial or it could have admitted the evidence.

And to that extent that either one of those forms of relief were requested and either would have been fined if it defends.

And again, the fundamental goal here that all of these rules serve is that there be a fair trial

at which each side can present the best evidence that it has so that the jury can make the best decision.

And so, you know, which gets to prejudice, this was hotly disputed.

Preston said we didn't invite anybody back.

Sijapati was allowed to say we were invited.

That dispute matters for a couple of reasons.

One is that, substantively, Vivny's appearance at the house at this hour in these circumstances,

if they weren't invited, looks a lot more predatory than if they had been invited.

And so this sort of dispute about the invitation...

But knowing the importance of that dispute, why did it take the defense so long to discover that text message?

It could have been discovered earlier.

I mean, it sort of existed, no doubt.

But the defense got from Sijapati, and maybe there's even a generational thing here,

that the defense lawyer, and I'm speculating, may have just assumed when Sijapati said to him,

and they turned over to the state, we were invited.

You might have thought, well, they were orally invited at the bar because they were all there together.

But young people today text each other even when they're sort of in the same room.

So it turned out, late in the prep process, that Sijapati revealed to the defense lawyer,

by the way, actually have a text showing it.

And so I don't think it was so obviously something the defense lawyer should have known.

I would say, I mean, the other thing I would say, that why it mattered is credibility.

So in addition to the sort of the substantively that it looks more predatory, Vivni's arrival,

it mattered to credibility because if Vivni is believed about the invitation,

it's more likely the jury would believe him about what happened in the bedroom.

And so this dispute, whereas if they don't believe him about the invitation,

it's less likely they believe him about what happened in the bedroom.

And I'd agree, maybe one further point on this first issue is that this isn't a case of deliberate ignorance.

There's no fact finding to that effect. There's no real suggestion to that effect.

Like if the facts showed that a lawyer for a party sort of purposely with, you know,

failed to learn a fact and then tried to sneak it in at the end,

I think that would be different than what the court could say about such a circumstance,

is to be deliberately ignorant of something is in fact to know it.

And so if you know it earlier, you're going to be held to, you can't sort of maneuver around.

But that's just not what the situation here is.

There's no assertion that the defense lawyer, you know, managed this discovery in this way.

Can you address a second issue? I'm a little confused by the Hill only fans,

whether that website existed, whether she had an accountant.

Yes, so the second issue is the exclusion of Vivni's testimony on hearsay grounds

that Arielle invited him to join her with only fans.

I guess what I would say first about that is I agree with sort of in a broad sense

with the proposition in the state's brief that a question can be hearsay.

And I think when one thinks about a question, questions have two components.

They are sort of the framing component.

It's an inquiry or an invitation, which in and of itself doesn't assert anything to be true.

But as has been pointed out, sometimes questions have facts embedded in them.

And so the hearsay issue, you know, depends, you know, whether a question or an invitation is hearsay

depends on the salience of the embedded fact.

And if that's the point, then the state would be right.

So, you know, the examples in the state's brief, a question, why did you stab Jimmy

offered at a trial to prove that the defendant stabbed Jimmy?

It's the embedded question that matters. That's hearsay.

But here the embedded fact is that she has an only fan site.

And that's not really what the defense was getting at.

What they were getting at was the invitation.

That she was, what was important is that invitation framing.

That she was seeking to encourage Vivny's sort of future sexualized interest in her.

And what was he allowed to testify?

He was allowed to testify that she showed him some pictures.

And I think he was allowed to say it was on an only fan site.

But what's crucially, what was not covered by that testimony, what he was not allowed to say

was that she invited him to subscribe to the only fan site.

And the state contends that there was subsequent evidence that she never had an only fan's account?

So I think that's not pertinent to this appeal for a couple of reasons.

So the state cites something that happened at sentencing hearing.

Her statements made at the sentencing hearing so long after the court had made this ruling.

Vivny has in fact been indicted for perjury.

But the case is still pending. He's presumed innocent.

There has not yet gone to trial.

So I don't think this court can take that sort of later established circumstance into account to justify the trial courts in trial ruling.

It's just an allegation of this.

It's just an allegation.

I think my understanding is they are awaiting further processing of that pending charge pending the outcome of this appeal.

What about the application of the rape shield law?

So the rape shield law doesn't justify this because the rape shield law is about preventing defendants from eliciting witnesses or a complainant's sexual conduct with other people.

And what Vivny was trying to get at is that she invited him to join the only fan site.

And so it doesn't raise that concern or that, you know, the false logic that because a complainant was sexually interested in somebody else,

she would be sexually interested in the defendant also.

Do you share that risk with only fans?

And I don't even know exactly what that implies, but it seems that it would imply other people are involved in a sexual manner.

So I don't either.

And the records, you know, I think insufficiently developed for that to be the justification for the ruling.

And indeed it wasn't.

The court's stated justification was hearsay.

It wasn't that this is, you know, 403 unduly prejudicial.

So that isn't the way the state argued it in the trial court, as I recall, and it certainly wasn't the way that trial court ruled.

But anyways, it had come out, I think anyways, through this other mechanism that Vivny asserted that she had an only fan site.

And so this further fact about being allowed to testify that she invited him to subscribe to it is not, wouldn't add any prejudice to whatever might be associated with that.

And it's a lawful business, I think, so it's not as dangerous as other kinds of sexual behavior might be.

But again, the rape shield doesn't apply.

And the prejudice again from that is that that invitation framing conveys her encouragement of his future sexualized interest.

And again, it matters because Vivny's account of what happened in the bedroom was fundamentally, ultimately the issue here against RL's account of what happened in the bedroom.

And his account of what happened in the bedroom would be much more credible if he was fully allowed to state his account of what happened in the bar.

And in particular this piece that we're challenging in the second issue, which is the invitation for this.

Not just sort of having a flirtatious interaction and showing pictures in the bar, but an invitation for a future connection via the only fans site.

So unless the court has questions, we'd ask the court to reverse on those and I will follow up.

Thank you.

Accomplish what can be done about those records.

Thank you very much.

Attorney Johnson.

Attorney Ghanye.

Good morning, Honors.

May it please the court.

Sam Ghanye for the State of New Hampshire.

I am going to structure my presentation to kind of track what the court just did with Attorney Johnson.

I'd like to begin with the standard of review in this case asked by Justice McDonald.

The standard of review here is on sustainable exercise of discretion.

The court was managing, excuse me, had broad discretion to do what it was doing.

Manage discovery and rule on the admissibility of evidence.

If this court looks to the trial transcripts at page 350 to I believe it's about 354, it will see the discussion in which this ruling is made.

And it's not going to see the court apply a hard, fast interpretation of 12B2 and say, this wasn't turned over by the deadline.

I don't want to hear anything else.

This is out.

The court is going to see the trial court weighing up factors.

One of those being that this 12B2 deadline does exist.

And this is sort of the evidence, the sort of evidence that 12B2 involves.

But then the court considers other factors.

Well, this is your witness.

You had spoken with him.

He did produce a report to the state.

He didn't mention anything about a text message.

And then what the court calls most problematic is that Billy had been released from his subpoena and he was on a plane to Florida.

He could not be recalled and rebuttal.

That most problematic factor has nothing to do with 12B2 specifically.

So the defense produced the text message in the second or third day of trial when it began to put its case on?

Are you asking when they produced it?

Yes.

After the first day, I believe it was about five o'clock in the evening after the first day of trial going into the second day.

Okay.

Justice Donovan, you had asked if Hamanshu was able to specifically testify that he was invited by text.

I saw nothing in the ruling that Hamanshu would have been precluded from testifying that way.

But as Attorney Johnson stated in the record, he did not say that.

He just said that he was invited to an after party by Billy.

Justice Donovan also asked, was the state aware that there were text messages inviting them to an after party?

The state was not aware of that until after day one of trial.

What the state was aware that Hamanshu would testify is that Tyler invited him back to an after party.

That changed to Billy in the new disclosure but he was still allowed to testify that he was able to come back.

To the prejudice point on the text messages, I'm not sure that is really able to be completely assessed here

because we don't have the text messages.

We don't know exactly what they say and unfortunately, and I believe it's page 354 of the record,

the court asks the attorneys, okay, what do these text messages say?

The attorney starts to talk over each other a little bit, seemingly about to get into what they say

and then there's just this point that says pause and then the conversation picks up and it has to do with something else.

I don't know what the text messages say.

But the court says, again, the most problematic piece is Billy isn't here to be called in a rebuttal

and I think that allows for the inference that the text might be a little bit ambiguous.

So if the text said from Billy to Hamanshu, hey, come back here,

that could mean they were at the bar and Hamanshu walked away from the table

and he just wanted to come back to the table or it could mean, hey, come back to the house for an after party.

We can't know without Billy being called.

So without the text, without any of us knowing what the text say,

I'm not sure how we can assess how prejudicial it was for them to have been kept out,

especially in light of Hamanshu still being able to testify that he was invited to an after party by Billy.

To the extent that credibility could have been lent to Hamanshu or the defendant by these text messages

and this is dovetailing into harmless error a little bit, it really wouldn't have mattered.

Hamanshu's credibility started to go off the rails at the very beginning of his testimony

when he testified that he was good friends with Billy, who Billy had testified he was only acquainted with Hamanshu

and then Hamanshu testified that he was invited to whiskey to celebrate Billy's birthday.

It wasn't Billy's birthday, it was Dylan's brother's birthday as every state witness testified to

that they really didn't seem to be that good of friends.

And then Hamanshu went on to testify that he overheard this three-some conversation,

five feet away from the conversation in a packed bar with loud music, but he was pretty sure of it.

And then the credibility went way off the rails when the defendant's story diverged from Hamanshu's back at the house.

Hamanshu says when they got back to the house, Billy and Josh were up in the kitchen drinking.

They mixed a couple of drinks, handed them to Hamanshu and I believe Josh is actually who Hamanshu arrived with.

And then Hamanshu said he and Billy were going to go into Billy's bedroom to wake Gigi up to continue drinking.

Gigi was Billy's girlfriend.

The defendant's story is that when he arrived Billy mixed them a couple of drinks but Billy was just going to go to bed.

What Hamanshu was doing was following Billy into his bedroom to convince Billy to stay up drinking

and the defendant was going to go convince Tyler to get up and drink.

So under Hamanshu's account Billy was already ready to drink.

Under the defendant's account Billy was actually going to go to bed and if we just listened to Billy himself he was heavily intoxicated.

He went immediately to bed and recalled nothing until he woke up and spoke to Tyler.

These text messages would not have lent credibility to the defendant or Hamanshu that would not have gone away in other ways.

And finally to the deliberate ignorance piece.

I don't disagree with Attorney Johnson that there's nothing in this record to suggest that Defense Council was deliberately ignorant

and just didn't go after these text messages knowing that they were there but I'm not sure that that matters so much.

I think the court's point continues to hold.

This was your witness.

You spoke to them.

Deliberate ignorance maybe not but lack of diligence maybe so.

Nobody asked Hamanshu are there any text messages, any documents to document any sort of these things while he was being interviewed

by either Defense Council or the investigator.

Hamanshu offered all of the information that was in the text messages but not the text messages themselves

and it seems pretty easy to simply inquire is there anything that might substantiate this.

To turn briefly to the hearsay issue.

The hearsay, the question certainly asserted a fact that's susceptible of being true or false that you maintain in OnlyFans page.

To the extent that Attorney Johnson argues that the join was the important part, I fail to understand that.

OnlyFans is a subscription service.

Everybody who is willing to pay a subscription is free to join and if a person who maintains an OnlyFans site

which is a subscription service then goes out and tells people hey you should join my site

that is more like an advertisement to join a subscription service than it is an expression of sexual interest.

This is not a private site where you have to be exclusively invited to view these provocative photos.

This is a subscription service.

So the fact that she was asking anybody to join does not speak to any sexual interest in that person.

It speaks to trying to expand her OnlyFans account which it appears did not even exist.

I recognize that it's alleged at this point that the defendant committed perjury.

I don't know exactly what the state presented to the trial court at sentencing for the court to call it provable perjury.

But I do imagine that it is relatively easy to determine whether or not a certain individual maintained an OnlyFans account

was registered with OnlyFans on a certain date.

So you agree with the construct that we look at the salience of the embedded fact within the question?

It's just that there's no salience here because the invitation was to join a subscription only website

versus a potential sexually laden invitation.

I think you do look to the factual assertion that's embedded in the question.

As we explained in our brief, I don't think these saliences the join part.

I think the defendant wanted to get it out that this person maintains an OnlyFans account.

So yes, I think you look at the embeddedness in the question whether it's susceptible of being true or false.

If it is susceptible of being true or false, I think then it is hearsay.

And then you can evaluate the argument that but I'm not offering it for the truth of the matter asserted.

That's the join piece versus the you just wanted to get in front of the jury that she has an OnlyFans account.

And I would suggest to the court for the reasons I just explained the join piece doesn't make a whole lot of sense.

And even if this court were to decide that it was error to not let the defendant testify that she invited her.

There was a question whether it's admissible under Rule 403 too.

Yes, I'm getting a little jumbled on myself.

So thank you for taking me somewhere else.

I agree under Rule 403, even if Rape Shields did not apply.

This is very prejudicial to the victim.

OnlyFans, while it can be used for a variety of purposes is widely understood to be something of just a pornographic site at this point.

It does start to sound like Rape Shield.

It definitely gets to the area of state versus Miss Aglia where an invitation to join an OnlyFans site,

just like sex on a prior occasion is not an invitation to have sex on a subsequent occasion.

So it may not have been irrelevant for a 1402.

It was more prejudicial than it was probative of anything because it really wasn't probative of anything.

403, it would have stayed out under that.

And for those reasons, we think the trial court correctly ruled that this is hearsay.

This is very similar in the state's view to the question in State versus Bennett,

who killed the victim really offered to show that I don't know who killed the victim.

I think this is you asked me to join your OnlyFans page.

I want the jury to know that you have an OnlyFans page,

which the defendant was ultimately able to put before the jury as a justice done of an observed.

Similar with the text message issue, although the text messages themselves didn't come in,

it certainly got before the jury you were invited to an after party on remand.

If this case were to be reversed and remanded, that just would be a non-factor

because whether or not you were invited to an after party does not speak to what happened in that bedroom.

I can envision a war where you can start making that argument

if maybe we got invited back to an after party and a little more of the relationship

between the victim and the defendant sort of developed at that after party.

But that's not the testimony here. The testimony is they went to an after party.

It was completely dead. So instead of leaving like a monster did,

the defendant poked his head in a closed dark bedroom and then laid down with the victim in bed.

The after party is really neither here nor there with what happened inside the bedroom,

although it did speak directly to the burglary charge because it kind of,

the after party tends to make it more likely than not that the defendant went back

to the mental state to intend an after party not to commit aggravated felonious sexual assault.

On the issue of the counseling records, was the victim notified of the records relevance to the case?

I don't believe so, Justice Countway, but I don't know the answer to that for sure.

As I stand here, I do recall the final paragraph of the state's brief asking this court

to appoint her an attorney so that her interest can be represented.

And that leads me to believe that I don't think she did have notice or an opportunity to represent,

excuse me, her interest vis-à-vis those requests.

And if the court has no further questions, the state would rest on its papers.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you. Attorney Gagné, Attorney Johnson.

Thank you. Just three quick points.

First, with respect to the text messages between Sijapati,

the context of the discussion makes clear that they conveyed an invitation to an after party.

In the trial court, the state did not assert that there was any ambiguity about that,

and they could have if there had been one.

So there's no reason to think there was a relevant ambiguity.

The second point.

You know, Sijapati did give testimony that was different from Preston about whose birthday it was.

But bear in mind, by the time of the trial, which is in 2023, it was three years after these events,

and that shows just all the more why it was important to have the document, the text,

rather than his memory of having been invited.

And finally, I would not be here with this issue if the defense lawyer had objected to the mistrial.

I think the state makes them in the court, made some points,

it's inconvenient that Preston was not available to respond, and we get that.

But the mistrial is the mechanism that allows both sides to have a full presentation of their evidence.

And because the defense asked for that also, that makes the ruling unsustainable.

Thank you very much, counsel.

Case submitted.
