This is an important and historic day for our court.

As we welcome our newest justice, Melissa Kahn, Countway, who is joining us, having been sworn

in yesterday, so getting right to work.

So we are thrilled to have Justice Countway with us.

Thank you.

And with that, I'll ask the court monitor, please call the first case.

This is case 2023-0278, appeal of Port City Air Leasing, Inc.

Attorney Marvelli, I understand you've reserved two minutes for a rebuttal.

Yes, please, Your Honor.

Please proceed.

Thank you.

Good morning.

My name is Jake Marvelli.

I represent Port City Air, who asks this court to rule that it qualifies as an abutting

landowner for purposes of standing before the Wetlands Council.

Alternatively, we ask the court to rule that RSA 482A9 and A10 are unconstitutional

as applied to Port City Air, because Port City Air was injured by a Wetlands permit that

issued but was denied the right to appeal to the Wetlands Council.

I've reserved up to two minutes.

I'm happy to take questions at any point.

Okay, so what was your injury then?

If we're going to follow the due process argument, what's your injury?

The injury, Your Honor, was a couple of fold.

First of all, Port City Air's least premises, which at least is for a 30-year term,

is downgradient of the millionaire facility site.

What that means is that contamination occurring at the millionaire site, which includes Wetlands,

would naturally, scientifically hydrogeologically flow to Port City Air's site there by.

But your site is also contaminated.

Did you dispute that?

No.

Pee's, in general, is contaminated.

In this area in particular, there is P-FOS contamination that's been detected by the United

States Air Force as part of a larger cleanup project, the haven well to which this Wetland

is connected has been the subject of a multi-million dollar effort to clean up the P-FOS contamination.

Aren't there other remedies to Port City Air in the event that such a contamination

occurs?

There are remedies after the fact, but the Fuente's decision and others we've cited demonstrate

that we're entitled to seek relief before the injurious work occurs.

As recently as last week, this court issued an opinion and it involved the Wetlands,

the Waste Management Council, excuse me, and the court affirmed that future harm

is sufficient, is sufficient harm to have standing.

And what we have here is a detection of future harm that will occur.

Are you talking about standing a due process?

Justice Donovan asked about due process.

What's the injury for purposes of due process?

The injury is that the permit is issued from the Wetlands Bureau.

Port City Air has been unable to challenge it, so an injury-causing permit, work is

being permitted to occur.

And Port City Air has been unable to challenge the issuance of that permit.

So there's been a deprivation of Port City's right to challenge the injury-causing permit.

In practical terms, were there to be contamination?

How does that affect the operations of your client?

I see it a couple of ways, Your Honor.

One of all, the Haven Well to which this wetland is connected provides water to the Pee's water

system.

So buildings that are at Pee's are on that system, that's where their water comes from.

And Pee's maintains the quality of that water?

It's the city of Portsmouth that maintains it.

They have two separate loops, one for their municipal and one for Pee's.

So this water system services all of Pee's trade port and part of the town of Newington.

So Port City's facility, again, would draw water from that public water system.

The other issue is that- But that's a generalized harm.

I mean, that would be a harm to the public.

It would be a harm to those who are on the water system, Your Honor.

And so that there are for sure more than just Port City Air who would be concerned

about it.

Isn't that a concern of the landowner or ultimately, I mean, the landowner being

the Pee's development authority, or ultimately, the state of New

England?

We would advocate that it should be a concern for all.

And Port City Air, though in many respects, acts as- it has most of the sticks of a landowner.

So it does also suffer some of the same harms that we would advocate that the Pee's

development authority should be concerned about.

With a long-term lease, with an indemnity to do environmental clean-up, should there

be a spill or a contamination, excuse me, at Port City Air's site, Port City Air has a

generalized drinking water harm, but it also has a specific concern about its site being

contaminated, particularly in the context of owning an environmental indemnity.

And what makes that even more of an aggravating or concerning point is that because this

wetland is connected to surface and drinking water resources, it's not just a- that environmental

indemnity could become a very significant issue.

If million- you've got two aviation-related companies.

If millionaire were to commit an act that contaminates and that indemnity is triggered,

there is a potentially very grave harm.

There's a drinking water issue, there's a surface water contamination issue, and

then from there it becomes a who-done-it as to who caused the environmental contamination.

So whereas millionaire argues, if it's their cause, it's their harm, it's their liability,

the who-done-it is enough to prompt a significant expense and concern for Port City Air.

The cost of defense is enough, we submit our sufficient specialized injury to warrant

standing to present these concerns.

If we were to accept your standing argument, would- and this were a multi-tenant facility-

would every tenant with a lease-

It's a good question and one that could be addressed by the court in an opinion- in

its opinion in confined.

So Port City Air is- there's a large gradient of tenants from those who rent a barber's

chair to someone like Port City Air who's got a 30-year commercial lease.

To answer your question, Your Honor, the court could issue an opinion that those who have long-term

leases with a notice of lease recorded in the registry have sufficient rights or are sufficiently

ascertainable to have standing and the right to be noticed by mail, which is what RSA 482-810

speaks to.

So are you saying that under those circumstances your client isn't a butter?

Yes, Your Honor.

We claim that under the statutory scheme RSA 482-810 provides that a grieve person may appeal

to the Wetlands Council and it says a person aggrieved shall be anybody entitled to be

noticed by mail in accordance with RSA 482-810.

I realize I've flipped my statute so it's 810 that references a 9's discussion of

a budding landowner.

Can you tell me why a long-term lease holder is the same or similar to someone who holds

an easement?

It's the rights and responsibilities that are conferred and we would submit that whether

it's an easement or a lease, it's the bundle of sticks, it's what Port City Air is able

to do.

As with an easement holder with an exclusive right such as the applicant in Michelle, Port

City Air has exclusive use of its premises.

It's a regulated place, it's an airport so the Peace Development Authority has security

rights to ensure that the badged personnel are allowed to use the premises, but that's

different than a shared ability to use the buildings.

Port City Air has the exclusive right to make use of its buildings.

You concede under the Plain and Ordinary meaning of landowner, Port City is not a landowner.

I wouldn't concede it, Your Honor, I concede it colloquially.

It's a landowner we think of as the White House and the picket fence.

I would argue though that on a Plain and Ordinary meaning the Michelle Court then turned

to the dictionary to assist in interpreting a similar word.

You cite the Black's Dictionary which says a landowner is one who owns land and here the

land is owned by the Peace Development Authority.

It is owned and then I went on to cite owner and that was the holder of rights.

So for the dictionary definition that you're right, Your Honor, you would have to look

to owner as well.

And I did that because the definition of landowner mentioned owning, one who owns

land.

So under that thought I would look to kind of the town of Lincoln's bundle of sticks analysis

of what qualifies as a landowner depends on how many rights that person holds, how many

of the sticks are held.

The dictionary offers that broad definition of the court were to look to the word own.

The Michelle Court or commented that when the legislature does not define a term it should

be a given broad meaning.

When the legislature intends a narrow meaning it defines the term.

What about the notion that the legislature could easily have referred to tenants or

long-term tenants but it did not.

Wouldn't we be adding something to the statute that's not there?

I don't think it's so they could have done that.

It would have been great if they did do that.

I don't think they needed to do that and I don't think the court would be adding to

the statute because of, again under the precedent of Michelle, the RSA 42A, the concept of

ownership and landowner is broad and because the dictionary does take two steps but

it gets the court to a point where it's really the bundle of sticks analysis, it's

a holistic view.

The statute is in effect defining a grieved party in a relatively narrow sense.

Wouldn't you agree with that?

Yes, it does define it.

Some of the other councils with DES don't have a similar restriction.

On the term a grieved party?

Correct.

They do not.

Where I think the legislature did leave it open again was in deciding not to

define the term landowner and the statutes otherwise aren't a complete match so there

are just differences between the wetlands council statutes and the others but here

where they had the opportunity to add landowner or easement holder or other

terms and chose not to, it's not necessary as the Michelle court has

pointed out because the term landowner and ownership is not hard and

fast, it's not a narrow definition unless it's been narrowly defined specifically by

the legislature.

That gets to the point here, honor, that if the court were to define landowners excluding

port city air, it would be unconstitutional as applied to port city air.

The reason being that port city air has suffered the harms that we've discussed.

It's on the water system.

It has an environmental indemnity that could be triggered by this work.

They know recourse to the landlord to peace development.

I'm sorry, I didn't hear you.

Have they no recourse to their landlord?

They potentially have after the fact recourse.

And the problem with that is that the harm will already have been done.

Or prior to the, I mean, was there any recourse to ask peace development

authority to weigh in on this permit?

So the peace development authority, they have their own site plan review

process, which is also underway.

And they look at factors that are different.

There are some additional factors they look at that the wetlands council

does not.

And we would advocate that they should be concerned about this and where to

put this facility that may be something that they, that is something they

should address and they should be concerned about.

But it's different because that's, there are two different permits that are

needed and they have their concerns.

But the wetlands council has its and they are supposed to be the

exclusive forum, the wetlands council for an appeal challenging a permit

based on it being unlawfully issued or unreasonably issued.

And so I see my time is up.

Thank you very much.

You reserved two minutes.

Thank you.

During fantasy.

Good morning.

May it please the court.

My name is Nathan Fennessey from pretty Flaherty.

I'm representing P's aviation partners doing business as millionaire Portsmouth.

What Portsmouth is asking you to do today is something that this

court has never done, which is to find that a tenant is the equivalent of a

landowner under RSA chapter 42A.

We don't believe that the plain and ordinary meaning of the text supports

that finding.

And we also don't believe that your prior decisions in both Michelle and

town of Lincoln support that conclusion.

What about case B St. Mary's bank where we discussed the status of a

mortgagee in possession?

How does that factor in?

I think it's a totally different statutory scheme.

So I think it's important to focus on the precedence that you have in

this realm.

The interest of a mortgagee are very different than a tenant.

A mortgagee has arguably additional rights that a tenant would not

have under release.

So I think the concerns at play in that administrative scheme are far

different than the administrative scheme here.

I would argue that essentially what poor city is asking you to do is

to upend the statutory administrative scheme that's been

enacted by the legislature.

This is not the form for you to make wholesale changes as to who

has an opportunity to appeal DES decisions.

The proper form for that is to go to the legislature and the

legislature has been aware of your prior decisions in town of

Lincoln and appeal of Michelle.

If they wanted to make a change, if they wanted to broaden the

universe of individuals who could bring appeals, they could have

done so.

They haven't done so at this point.

So I think it's appropriate based on the plain and ordinary

meaning of the language and your prior precedence to affirm

the decision of the hearing officer.

Is it correct that two other tenants got notice including

spyglass?

And if so, why and what's the import of that?

Sure.

I'm not certain exactly who was provided notice that was handled

through the consulting engineer.

I suspect that they want to be over inclusive with some of the

notices that they sent out.

I don't think that impacts your analysis or frankly the

analysis as to whether or not those individuals or entities

that received the notice qualified as landowners or not.

I mean here it's a pretty unique situation because P's

development authority owns everything.

So it's like the statues doesn't really contemplate that

scenario.

I don't know that it necessarily doesn't contemplate that

scenario.

There are certainly different people under the statute who

are entitled to notice beyond simply the landowner.

So the conservation commission, the planning board,

the municipality, any of those could have been parties and

brought an appeal.

The fact that the legislators chose not to include tenants

or perhaps hasn't contemplated all of the potential

impacts of an entity like P's in setting forth that

statutory scheme.

I don't think should impact your analysis here.

Again, if this is an issue that the legislature feels

strongly about, they could certainly change it.

They could amend the statute such that in a circumstance

like P's, tenants get rights.

I think the issue you have with reaching a conclusion

that tenants at P's should be treated differently is a

scenario where you could have P's as the landlord going to

get a wetlands permit for a particular project and now

you have, if you were to find that any of these tenants could

be the equivalent of a landowner and appeal, now the

tenant has the power to somehow impact the feasible

interest of the landowner.

I think that creates...

Unless it's addressed in the lease, right?

Unless it's addressed in the lease, correct.

And I think it's really important here to the extent,

I think the plain and ordinary meaning of the language

clearly supports the conclusion that a tenant does not

qualify.

Well, what about the fact that under the lease,

Port City owns the buildings?

So the lease has a lot of restrictions.

So the ownership of the building is very limited.

And I know Council point said it was a 30-year lease.

It's actually a five-year lease with the option for renewable

terms.

So during the term of the lease, they have title to the

building and the improvements, but at the termination or

conclusion of the lease, those revert back to the P's

development authority.

Who holds the option?

I believe the option is held by Port City.

However, there's a variety of provisions and I couldn't

identify all of them where P's development authority has

the option to also terminate the lease if certain obligations

are not performed by Port City.

So I wouldn't say it's an automatic extension.

There are certainly obligations that Port City,

including one of the key obligations at the commencement

of the lease was that they had certain obligations to

improve the building.

That was actually part of the consideration for entering

into the lease.

And if they didn't perform, then there are going to be

modifications to the lease.

Would it be different if it was a 99-year lease?

I would say it might be a closer question if it were a

99-year lease.

I don't think you need to get into the,

into drawing lines between leases because I think based

on the play and the ordinary meaning of the text and

your prior precedence, I think the line has already

been drawn and the line is drawn in the context of

easements.

And so some easements, I guess let me step back.

I think of the property rights as sort of on a,

on a spectrum.

We've got fee simple and easements which are permanent

in nature.

And then we'd have leases and licenses which are more

temporary in nature.

When you were confronted with the question about line

drawing in the context of an easement,

it was something that looked a little different than

fee simple, but we were still looking at permanent

ownership rights.

And there was some disagreement among the court,

but the majority held that there's a difference between

certain types of easements and other types of easements.

I think categorically you could make a determination

that no tenant, no lease holder qualifies as a

landowner.

And I think that would be appropriate based on your

prior conclusions that the line,

wherever the line may be is somewhere in that permanent

easement realm and not in the lease hold tenant realm.

But the closer you get to Justice Countway's 99-year

lease, the more permanent it becomes.

With respect to perhaps that bundle,

but there's still various restrictions in the lease

that we're looking at.

There's restrictions on the purpose for which the

building can be used.

So, you know, in Michelle you looked at,

well, it could be used for any purpose.

Here, there's certain specified purposes that the

building may be used for in the lease.

If poor city is looking to do anything beyond that,

they have to get the consent of peace development

authority to do it.

Before they make any alterations to the building,

they have to go through a whole process and get consent

from the peace development authority.

They don't have the opportunity to delegate any of

their responsibilities.

They can only get a mortgage under certain specified

circumstances and that requires written consent from

peace.

They can't do a sub-lease unless they get it.

In comparison, a lease goes with the land.

So, it would run in some circumstances,

the lease would run with the land.

The easement would run with the land.

Correct.

Yeah, I think generally we think of the easement

runs with the land and you can transfer,

you can convey that interest.

There's not that same opportunity here with this

lease hold.

You could anticipate a scenario where someone could

convey a lease hold interest.

Here, there's no opportunity to do so.

So, is it your position that because it's a lease

hold interest, it doesn't satisfy the landowner

requirement or we need to look to the terms of

every lease to figure that out?

I think you can decide that no lease hold

interest satisfies landowner based on the

planning, ordering, and needing.

If you're not satisfied with that,

if you want to do an analysis based on Michelle

and Town of Lincoln and get into the specifics of

it, even under that scenario, I don't believe

that this lease would satisfy that.

I don't think the level of control is anywhere

near and the exclusivity and ability to use

and dispose of the interest in the property

is anywhere close to what you found was

a constitute ownership in the appeal of Michelle.

Can you address the injury argument here?

In your brief, you seem to argue that

Port City complained about their financial harm

before the permit was issued and then reverted

to the environmental concerns.

Is that a preservation issue or is that just

something that you wanted to place in context for us?

So, there's a lot of things in the due process.

So, I think it's important to unpack what

the due process claim is not.

So, originally the procedural due process claim

involved a facial challenge, at least we believed

it was in our brief.

In the reply brief, Port City said,

no, we're not doing a facial challenge,

we're just doing as applied.

In the reply brief, they also seem to raise

for the first time, which I don't think

was ever preserved, this idea of a substantive

due process claim, which, again,

I'm happy to address it if you would like,

but I don't think that was ever preserved below.

So, my understanding is that now,

their due process argument is based upon

some sort of procedural due process as applied.

So, they think that they should have had

an opportunity as a result of some...

How would they raise that to the wetlands council?

I'm sorry?

How would that be raised below?

It's not exactly in the council's domain.

I would agree with that, although

I think that they raised their procedural

due process issues before the wetlands council

and basically said to the hearing officer,

if you reach this conclusion,

you're interpreting the statute

in an unconstitutional manner.

Going back to Justice Donovan's question

about the injury, it seems to be

a contingent future potential

injury that they're concerned about.

I think as council conceded,

this is a contaminated site.

Most of PEs is considered to be contaminated.

And the concern is really that

there might be more contamination

and that the PEs Development Authority

will turn to poor city and say,

we think you're responsible under your indemnity agreement

for some future contamination that results.

I think that can be handled as part of,

whether it's injunctive relief

or suit for damages down the road

if this injury ever comes to pass.

At this point though,

there's no present injury.

This is different than some of the environmental cases

that they cited in their brief

where you have individuals who are pointing to

some sort of impact on their use

and enjoyment of a wetland

or something to that effect.

There's no allegation that's been made

that poor cities using this wetland

that it's enjoyment of the wetland

is somehow being impacted by

the granting of this permit.

So I just don't think they come close

to meeting the injury requirement.

And any contamination that were to result

other than the litigation threat

would not disrupt their operations?

I don't know because I don't know

what the future's going to hold.

I can tell you that they operate

a fuel farm, you know,

not too far from this property,

so I don't know what contamination

there might already be from that.

So it's hard for me to sort of guess

at what impact, if any,

some future contamination may or may not have

on their operations.

Thank you.

Thank you, Attorney Phanis.

I can take questions at any time

if your honors have them.

There were a few items I had hoped to address though

quickly.

Justice Donovan, you had asked about the lease term.

The lease, I had said 30 years

because the lease is set up as

a five-year initial term with

automatic renewing, no further action

needed, five-year renewals

that stack to a term of 30 years.

The Port City Air holds

the right to cancel

so long as it gives adequate notice,

which is something like a year's notice.

The notice to tenants

issue,

the millionaire did give notice

to two other tenants

and one of whom

is quite like Port City Air

and the other one is very, very much

like Port City Air.

There was one tenant who had

a notice of lease recorded

with the Registry of Deeds

that puts them on the City of Portsmouth

tax cards, that's how they would have been

detected.

They also had a deed to their

building recorded in the registry

and that's where it's different.

Should it matter to our analysis

that they got notice

while this one did not?

It goes to your honest question earlier about

does it open the floodgates to all tenants

and here, I think with a narrow

order saying that if

in the ordinary course of ascertaining

of butters, which is typically looking

at tax maps and cards, if

Port City Air shows up, which it did

just like the other two

tenants who did receive notice

in this case, then it should be treated

as in a butter, just as if that

last tenant had received notice, it could

have appeared, it could have had similar objections

to Port City Air, it would have had

standing and only

because they would have received notice

under the statute and so I think

that that's grounds that the court could issue

a narrower ruling rather than saying

all tenants always,

tenants that are like

Port City Air that are ascertainable,

that have long term leaseholds,

exclusive use of their buildings and the series

of rights and obligations, they should

be treated.

Can you just clarify one factual matter, is it correct

that the Conservation Commission

oppose this?

Yes, Your Honor, they serve

in an advisory capacity to DES

so whenever there's a permit,

the Municipal Conservation Commission

is alerted and they issue a

recommendation.

Under the statute, do they have a

right of appeal?

They do have a right of appeal, it's a

different statute, I don't know the

outcome challenge.

Thank you very much, Council.

The case is submitted.

Court invites Council

and Paul versus Paul.
