This is case 2023-0211, TAM, Development Corporation et al. v. George's Mills Boat Club.

Good afternoon. Attorney Cronin, I understand you've reserved two minutes.

That's correct, Chief Justice. Please report to John Cronin, the appellant in this case. Mr. Miller is with us this afternoon.

TAM, the acronym, stands for Tom, Andrew, and Mary.

The Millers, the family that purchased the boat slip at Lake Sonopi, Andrew is an adult son with a pretty severe case of autism that enjoys the lake

and sent him to the lake to enjoy some quiet time with him.

The Millers acquired a boat slip back in, approximately, 2011 at this boat club, which sits on Lake Bonaposaki.

At that time, they had a 23-foot pontoon boat, and the deed to their slip acknowledges a 25-foot slip.

They used that slip and enjoyed it immensely with their family.

At one point, they were swamped by some of these newer wave-type boats, where there was fear of some of them being thrown overboard.

It caused the Miller family to do some shopping, went to the boat show in Boston, looked at some boats,

and they settled on a Grand Mariner 250, which was represented to be a 25-foot pontoon or tri-toon boat.

They purchased it, went forward, submitted documents to the club, put it in the water, and used it for the first season.

Thereafter, there were some issues that surfaced relative to the size of the boat, some give-and-take.

There was a meeting at one point after a notice of violation was circulated,

and which questions were raised about the length of the boat and its ability to use the slip.

There was a meeting.

There were some discussions about what applied.

And you probably see in the record that there was an effort to amend some of the rules and regulations and by-laws in 220.

I think it's clear that those don't apply here, and the pre-existing regulations would be in force.

At that particular time, there's some generic language without definition describing the length requirement,

saying the Board of Directors has the duty and the charge to set the length and size of the boat,

a beam and length, I think they refer to.

When this first serviced, there was some communications between the Board and the millers saying,

look, we've got this boat, used it for a year without incident.

We launched it.

The by-laws and the documents and the regulations, they really don't define length,

and anyone with a boat knows that that can be applied in many different ways.

Is it the length at the waterline?

Is it the length overall?

Is it the length from the bow to the rear appendage, including motors and ladders?

And in fact, the trial court in this case made a specific finding that that was ambiguous.

The court then went on to grant summary judgment on both counts,

and all we're asking here for is a day in court, as we believe that there are material facts

that would arrive at a different outcome in this case if the millers had an opportunity to go to trial.

The allegations in the complaint and throughout are saying,

regardless of what regulation you had at any specific point in time,

it was not enforced evenly.

The enforcement was arbitrary to the extent that a board member was allowed for a number of years

to have a boat that exceeded its boat length to dock at one of the slips without any enforcement whatsoever.

Mr. Cronin, can you just clarify for me,

the trial court makes a finding or sets forth that the boat has an overall length of 27 feet 2 inches?

Do you agree with that?

If you take it from the forward most point to the rear of the motor, I would agree with that.

And I think it's pretty clear that that's not how the boat club ever determined length.

We believe if we had a trial that it would be determined by boat registration.

That's a requirement that you must submit.

It's in the files, and this boat registered with the state of New Hampshire based on its certificate of origin

indicates that it's a 25-foot boat.

Why should that matter?

Well, I'll say.

What the boat registration says.

Because if we don't have any specific definition,

I think the state of New Hampshire who regulates the waterways of the state of New Hampshire

has a methodology to determine boat length to the extent that they put it on a registration.

That should matter.

It should have some bearing.

If it was specifically defined at that particular time and said, you know, boat registrations don't matter,

we look at X, Y, and Z, but that's not the case here.

There is no such definition or no guidance regarding the measurement.

In fact, that's one of the things that the Millers raised that shows up in the 220 amendments.

They do employ a specific standard on how to measure boats.

We believe that's also arbitrary because of the fact that it makes certain exclusions, we say, to benefit preferred members relative to swim platforms

and other things that are potentially detachable if you were coming into a port with your impact wrench and a crew to lift some heavy swim platforms.

But in this particular instance, we believe that if we were allowed to show evidence that there are a number of boats,

and it's in the record as a spreadsheet that's in there that identifies a number of boats that exceed the deeded or slip length

that are allowed to dock at the boat at the marina without incident.

Is that relevant to how the boat club determines overall length?

Is that why it's in here?

It would be directly relevant, and it goes, I think, to the court's finding that it was arbitrary.

So if you're saying that we have a standard, I think we can all agree that it should be applied fairly

and it shouldn't be an identity issue that we decided for one person one way and another person another way,

depending on whether we like them or not or whether they complain or they file notices.

So if you show evidence of a number of different boats that exceed the regulation as the club defines it,

I think that's directly relevant and goes to the issue that they had no standard

and they had no enforceable standard other than boat registrations.

And the basis for the complaint from the neighboring boat slip was what?

Was there any specific?

I think initially it was that it exceeded the slip.

So if you look at it, I want to be clear, the long thing that extends out, what's called the dock,

and then the slips are off to the side, the boat exceeded the step.

And what if it were 25 feet as well?

There was some expert testimony early on, and I think one of the motions, that there's no navigation hazard here.

It's close to the water.

And also with respect to the weight issue, which seems to be raised,

there was a decision made by the club on a dock or a slip next to this one, to the Millers,

in which a very big boat, and I say big in terms of weight, much heavier than the Millers, is approved.

So if there's questions about impacts to the dock and safety, that's inconsistent to approve that dock.

And there's actually a reference in some of the e-mails that are attached saying our rules

and regulations don't have any bearing on weight, which is the most important factor on slippage.

Conclusions, yeah, okay, safety, is it a navigation hazard?

Does it impact the docks?

There's no evidence in the record to support that finding on summary judgment.

There's nothing before the court where, yes, she can look at the goals for everyone as for safety,

and if there was some evidence before the court that the Millers' boat was responsible for causing damage to the docks,

that would be one thing, but that's not there.

I think the court looked at it and said, okay, it's 27-2 overall.

That's longer than 25.

We can issue summary judgment.

And it disregarded the element that's the thrust of the whole case.

One, there's no standard, and there's others with longer boats that have the opportunity to dock without enforcement.

And I think the two claims are intertwined.

When you look at the contractual piece,

there's mentioned that some of the things that the Millers suggested when this first surfaced,

that they were asked to remove their boat, which has been out of the water for a couple of seasons without any use of this slip.

Why don't we have a pre-purchase inspection requirement just to make sure this doesn't happen?

So if you want to buy a boat, you know, send your paperwork of what it is, the board can approve it,

which they've since adopted, which we agree is a good idea.

That wasn't in place at the time the Millers acquired their boat, and it was a much more loose standard.

Are the other outsized boats grandfathered at this point?

Has there been any attempt to enforce against other outsized boats?

There is a grandfathering issue, but I don't believe it relates to these boats.

There was a situation going back prior to the Millers' involvement with the club where there were a number of oversized boats,

and I think it was based on their beam rather than their length,

and the club elected to grandfather those boats and allow them to remain, regardless of what their weight or size was.

But the boats that we're referencing, in fact, Mr. Fiore's boat, who you'll see his name,

he self-admitted that it's too long, that he's allowed to use them.

Our contract analysis requires us, where there's an ambiguity, to look at the circumstances.

To the extent we consider extrinsic evidence, look at the circumstances under which the contract was negotiated.

What in the record, with respect to the negotiation of the contract, supports the plaintiff's position?

Well, if you're thinking about the contract back at the time that the deed was entered and the bylaws were adopted,

as far as the intent of the parties then was to provide a boat club for boats,

there's nothing particular about that contract, about this particular situation.

And if you look at a contract as being vibrant and having a life, as this one does,

it wasn't something that had a closing date and terminated.

That's not our analysis.

Well, if you look at any extrinsic evidence to show what was done, and you had a trial,

you could bring in why it was done, why it was grandfathered, and why the length requirement.

But the question is, why was summary judgment incorrectly entered from your perspective?

And you need to point to evidence in the record, which establishes that when the contract was negotiated,

the terms meant something different than what the court has determined.

If we take that standard, I think all you have to look at is the evidence in the record

that shows whatever the intent was and whatever was found was applied differently to different people

in an arbitrary manner, period.

And I think that covers that particular question.

You said before that the court found that it was arbitrary?

Ambiguous.

Ambiguous or arbitrary?

Ambiguous.

Okay, not arbitrary.

I thought you said arbitrary before.

But I may have, if I did, I meant to say that it was a specific finding in the summary judgment order

that says it finds the term of length and how to measure it ambiguous.

And you don't take issue with that.

That's the starting point from your perspective, right?

Yeah, I think where it's ambiguous, that opens the window up to extrinsic evidence.

If it wasn't ambiguous, it would be a different story.

Thank you.

Thank you, Attorney Johnston.

Good afternoon, Your Honor.

It's David Johnston for the appellee, George's Mills Book Club.

I would like to first address the good faith argument that the plaintiffs have raised in their brief.

The plaintiffs contend that they were treated differently from other members of the club,

that the standards changed, and that the club showed flexibility to others that they did not show to the millers.

The record, as I will address, does not support these contentions.

What is clear from the record, abundantly clear, is that there is no other member whose vote is anything like the plaintiffs,

extending over two feet beyond the slip limit, and that's...

With or without...

That's even...

With or without pieces that can be removed.

That's even before accounting for pieces that can be removed.

That's the distance from the bow point to the stern of the fixed structure of the boat.

Including an outboard engine?

No, not including the outboard engine.

Is the engine included in the 27- and 2-inch length attributed to the plaintiff?

Yes.

The deck.

The deck.

Yes.

Not the engine.

Bow to stern.

Correct.

Not the engine.

Not the engine.

Right.

Got it.

Right.

Plans start out in their brief...

Is he a agreement?

Ambiguous?

We do not read the agreement.

The contractual...

The governing contractual documents are ambiguous with respect to length, Your Honor.

The reason for this is a simple meaning of the word or understanding of the word length.

In the bowing context, it would be from bow to stern.

At waterline or above?

From bow to stern, Your Honor, would mean that it would be from the tip of the bow to the very back of the boat.

Whatever length that is.

And when you look at the common definition of length, it is simply from the front to the back.

So, our position is, Your Honor, it's not ambiguous.

It's a simple understanding of what length means for a post-structure, bow to stern.

Now, going back to the issue of whether there was a breach of the good faith in fair dealing.

The plaintiff started out by complaining that the trial court shifted the burden of proof

and otherwise failed to acknowledge portions of the record that showed a genuine issue of fact.

But the burden was, in fact, on the plaintiff to present specific facts

of competent evidence that would affect the outcome of the litigation

once the club presented facts that supported its motion.

And I would also note, because it was a criticism within the brief,

that the court, this court, recognizes that the trial court is not obligated to address

every allegation in the plaintiff's complaint or that the plaintiff's allegation is an issue of fact,

particularly when the court's narrative order explains its rulings

and articulates the essential facts of its rulings.

Now, addressing the plaintiff's assertion that the record support the showing of the existence

of a genuine issue of fact.

First, I address what is raised at page 21 of the brief,

and elsewhere within the plaintiff's brief,

that plaintiffs contend that the club acknowledged

that the boat configurations changed over the years.

It became, quote, commonplace for boats to extend beyond their slip.

They then cite to some pages from a deposition taken by a board member

in support of that proposition.

However, the actual testimony of the witness was that

boats commonly extend beyond the finger of the dock,

which is completely different than saying that boats commonly extend beyond the slip.

Non-boaters may not know this, but a dock's finger is a walkway

that extends perpendicular from the main dock,

and boats tie up to it.

And boats often do extend beyond the finger when they are tied up,

and that is not to say, however, that they extend beyond the slip limit,

because slip limits can go beyond the end of the finger.

Basically, the plaintiffs confuse the term slip and finger within their brief

to make an invalid point.

At page 25 of the plaintiff's brief,

they present a compare and contrast of emails between board members

who were exchanging information about the size of other members' boats,

and then other times exchanging information about the size of the plaintiff's boat.

And this was raised during oral argument.

There were emails that plaintiffs' beliefs chose unfair bias.

They contended that the trial court should have inferred that the emails

involving the Millers suggest abides against the plaintiffs

because some board members expressed frustration

and perhaps even some dislike of the plaintiffs

for their lack of candor with that.

However, being frustrated or even not liking someone

does not create an inference of unfair treatment

in the application of the governing documents by the board,

particularly when, as here,

plaintiffs' boat exceeded the slip-length limit

not by just a few inches, but by over two feet,

even without the outboard motor.

Plaintiffs could not identify any member

whose boat so blatantly exceeded its assigned slip limit

yet received more favorable treatment.

At another point, plaintiffs complained

that there was evidence of unfair treatment

in that the club expected them to submit documentation

that pertained to the length of the boat

that plaintiffs, upon review of the club's records,

did not find in some other member's files.

However, incomplete documentation or record-keeping

does not demand an inference

of inconsistent measuring standards by the club,

let alone unfair application of the ballot

to stern standard applied to plaintiffs' boat.

There might be any number of reasons

that are required of the plaintiffs

that are not included in other member's files

as explained by the board member who was deposed.

They could be missing or they could be misfiled.

And common sense dictates

that if a boat is well within its slip limit,

say 15 feet within a 22-foot slip,

there is no need to have full documentation

including manufacturer's specifications.

And beyond that, the plaintiff failed to prove

to the trial court any specific evidence

or provide any specific evidence

of inconsistent documentation or record-keeping

by the club

that raised an issue of material fact,

which would be that other members

with like violations were treated differently.

And finally, with regard to the record-keeping issue,

there was nothing in the club's governing document

to suggest that the board overstepped its authority

when it relayed to the millers

the board's expectation of the submission

of a manufacturer's specifications

with respect to their boat,

which would have stated the length overall.

The applicable club rule,

cited at page 16 of our brief,

requires members to submit, quote,

satisfactory documentation evidencing

the make, model, beam, and length of the boat.

And clearly, what constitutes satisfactory documentation

is not for the individual members to determine,

but is what...

Well, but if the official documentation

for the boat uses one measurement,

what other documentation would there be

but for the member to go out

with a camera and a tape measure?

Well...

If the manufacturer's specs say it's 25 feet,

how do you document...

But that's the point, Ron.

The manufacturer's specs did not say it was 25 feet.

The manufacturer's specifications

say it's 27.2 feet length overall.

That manufacturer's specification

was not submitted to the board

when the plaintiffs first bought the boat.

They submitted the registration

as was addressed during the oral argument.

But the registration,

as we pointed out in our brief,

does not give the full measurements of the boat.

It does not give the beam of the boat.

It gives...

It requires the applicant for the registration

to submit the length of the boat.

And what's very interesting about that

is that under a separate explanation

of what they mean by length of the boat,

what the state means by length of the boat,

it is from the furthest point forward on the bow

to the furthest point back on the stern.

So even the registration

for the inaccurate submission to the state.

Is there documentation in the record

for the 27.2 feet per the manufacturer?

Yes.

There's a manufacturer's specifications

including and included in the record, Your Honor.

And that's not disputed.

Let me ask you this.

Your position, I guess, as the trial court,

erred, but it was harmless error

when it found that it was...

The term was ambiguous.

That's correct.

Even under the court's analysis,

they did turn out with the correct analysis.

So if we were to go with the trial court's characterization

that the term is ambiguous,

what is it that we should look at in the record

that would support your position?

What I'm going through right now, Your Honor,

is what I'm saying supports our position.

Because it was for the plaintiffs to offer evidence

that either they were unfairly treated

or that the record supports their position

that hull length, for instance,

could be the proper measure of the boat.

But with respect to that,

the problem is hull length might be a reasonable measure

in some context, such as in navigation

or in narrow channels,

but here it makes no sense.

It would be objectively unreasonable

to use as a standard of measurement

for purposes of a marina slip limitation

where there's only so much dock space

for 50-plus boats.

By that measure, hull length,

which is what the plaintiffs push,

the club would be powerless to prevent members

like the millers from burping pontoon boats

that had fixed decks extending over their pontoon length

not just by 2 feet,

but 5 feet, 10 feet, 15 feet,

and thus encroaching on other people's slip

or violating their own slip limitations

without recourse for the club.

As for the recording of the length

reflected in the manufacturer's certification,

which was also submitted as part of the documentation,

I'll simply repeat what Judge Shulman said

in his order on the preliminary injunction,

which was made part of the record for summary judgment.

Quote,

From the boat club's perspective,

the manufacturer's representative

is just some guy who happened to be wrong.

Under the law,

the boat club is not as stopped

from enforcing its bylaws

by virtue of anything uttered

by the manufacturer's representative.

As for the remaining,

well, actually there is one more other thing.

The plaintiffs made much in the trial court

in their objection

and with their motion for reconsideration

of an Exhibit D

to the plaintiffs' objection

that purportedly documented

other oversized boats at the marina.

The plaintiffs complained at page 25

that the trial court determined

that the submission lacked

sufficient detail to be considered,

suggesting that the court's ruling was unfair

because the club,

in plaintiff's view,

did not present detailed evidence

showing enforcement was consistent.

But again,

it wasn't for the club

to present detailed evidence

to prove the negative,

namely that there were no other boats

that exceeded the assigned slip limit.

The trial court correctly held

that the plaintiffs' Exhibit D,

as presented,

amounted to conclusory allegations

unsupported by sworn testimony

that was insufficient

to satisfy plaintiffs' burden

to show that a material issue

of fact existed.

You said Exhibit D?

Correct.

Exhibit D to the plaintiffs' objection

to the motion for summary judgment.

George Mills respectfully submit,

Your Honor,

I'm not sure I understood

your answer to Justice Bassett's question.

What in the record

supports

your position

assuming there's an ambiguity?

Assuming there was an ambiguity?

Yes.

The position that the boat length

should be from bow to stern

without the...

Supports the trial court's conclusion.

What in the record

supports the trial court's conclusion?

That the...

I guess I'm misunderstanding...

The trial court concluded

that the agreement was ambiguous.

Right.

Therefore,

the trial court looked

to extrinsic evidence.

What is the extrinsic evidence

that supports

the ultimate court's conclusion

with respect to the length of the boat?

The length of the boat,

the extrinsic evidence

was simply 27 feet 2 inches

as manufacturers...

No,

what the contract...

What the bylaws require

and the registration requires.

Well,

the bylaws set a limit

of 25 feet

for the Miller slip.

There's no question about that.

But how it's measured,

I mean,

that's the point.

But how it's measured is

the court decided

that a boat's structure

is the most reasonable measure

of the boat

under the club's bylaws.

In other words,

the structure itself

is not removable.

The structure itself

is fixed.

And that is the most reasonable

understanding

of what length means.

Okay.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Attorney Cronin.

In a bottle,

I just want to take exception

to any comment

about the Miller's candor.

It's not a matter of record

and we don't agree with it.

Secondly,

the exhibit D,

you'll find it at the record.

It's page 172

of the appendix.

It's...

I'll hold it up

so you can probably check it.

It's kind of easy to find

when you flip through it.

It goes from 172

to 177

with a summary on 178.

Of interest is slip number one.

The specificity

that this exhibit provides

is the slip number,

the deeded length,

and the measure

of the actual boat

showing that there are

a number of boats

that were permitted

that were oversized.

We believe

that's specific enough

evidence

to show that

there was a dispute

to meritorial fact

that would allow us

to have a trial.

And Chief Justice,

you've asked

a number of questions

about looking at the record

as far as the

extrinsic evidence.

It's pretty hard to do

without a trial.

Certainly you can

on summer judgment,

but without having

that opportunity,

it's difficult to do.

The last point I make,

initially,

the question was,

well, we don't go by origin,

we don't go by registration,

we go by manufacturer's specs.

Yes, and Council conceded

that when discovery

was undertaken

and when requested

the files for the other boats,

many of them

had no manufacturer's specs

in them.

And what I hear today is,

well, it doesn't matter

about manufacturer's specs,

it's whatever the Board

thinks is the right measurement.

So in the Miller's case,

we're going to look

at the manufacturer's specs,

but not others,

we don't,

we just look at

the certificate of origin

and the registration.

You agree

that the manufacturer's specs

here say 27.2?

That's correct.

Thank you very much,

Council.

Casey Smith.
