This is case 2023-0097, Daniel Richard v. Governor, State of New Hampshire, et al.

Good morning.

Good morning.

Good morning, Mr. Richard. I understand you reserved two minutes for rebuttal.

Yes, sir.

And for the record on the appellee side, I understand, Attorney Conley, you'll be going first for ten minutes

in two minutes for attorney tyranny. Is that correct?

All right, Mr. Richard, please proceed.

Thank you. May it please the court. My name is Daniel Richard. I'm representing myself in this matter.

I'm not an attorney. I'm a prosa litigant and who's not trained in the practice of law.

I'd also like to extend my apologies in advance for any procedural errors I may have made or that I may make before you here today.

I requested this court to reserve approximately two minutes for rebuttal.

I believe I was wrongly denied by the trial court a hearing on the merits of my case,

including but not limited to the benefit of discovery and opportunity to present expert witnesses.

Respectfully, I'm seeking from the court the following relief.

However, in the alternative, I would ask for the court to reverse the lower court's ruling

and remand my case back to the lower court for a trial by jury so a jury can decide

whether the defendants either misunderstood or simply violated new hands.

Can you tell us if you were granted a trial, what kind of evidence you would present to the jury?

I would present my rights, the body of my rights enumerated in my briefs

and under the new standard of review, I believe that we'd have a different outcome.

And so, under the recent cases that I cited in the late authorities,

what we have is a shifter of the burden. The burden of proof is no longer upon me.

It's now upon the state to prove that its statutory scheme would have been applicable

at the time my rights were enumerated in the lower court.

None of that was an opportunity.

So we had an emergency hearing based on the safety concerns that I had raised

and that was the extent of it where my expert witness was in fact denied the right to testify

and we had no proceeding on the merits of the arguments.

But that's my answer to what I would say.

Along the same lines as Justice Donovan's question,

what discovery would you have sought and how would it have related to your claims?

Well, specifically, the state, the Secretary of State's office,

there's conflict in the law, so there was no ability for me to question them.

We have a conflict with the affidavit issue, which is the evidence

that the state isn't following the process, right?

The absentee voting requires Section 659, B requires that the moderator

of every town examine the absentee envelope

and make sure that the affidavit was properly executed.

That's not happening.

We have a big problem that hasn't happened since 1979.

And the reason it hasn't happened is that in 79,

the state legislature decided they would give us religious liberty.

And what they did is they created by statute,

they created a statutory right that authorized an exemption for a religious exemption.

At the same time, that same legislature omitted the notary certificate

that had been in effect since the law, since 1941,

when absentee voting became a constitutional right.

And the big difference is the Constitution provides in Part 2 Article 32

that the moderator is supposed to sort and count the votes, not a machine.

I don't know if I answered that question, ma'am.

You did?

Mr. Richard, the state spends the first part of its brief raising the issue

that the issues that you actually brief were not in your notice of appeal.

And you don't respond to that in your reply brief.

Can you respond now, please?

Yes, absolutely.

And I'll do respect, yes.

I failed as a prosa litigant to understand the process

and I thought that I would be given that opportunity

during the legal process itself of actually having a hearing

and preparing all my evidence for that hearing, but that didn't happen.

And what is it that, why is it inappropriate for the trial court

to have analyzed and made a decision in regard to Question 8 of the 1976 amendments?

It seems to me that it had all the information that it needed to make the decision it made.

With all due respect to the lower court, they were absolutely wrong

on every fact and every position they took in that brief.

Let's go over to 1976.

There are five yes or no questions put to the voters in 1976.

The court has already struck down Question B, the domicile question,

and Question D, which is the change in the time of who notifies the winner of the election

and the month in which it happens.

So these things have already been struck down by this court.

The Fisher v. Governor struck down the domicile question.

So why it still remains, I don't know.

But Question A, the voting age, was moved.

It was already law.

It had been passed in an affirmative manner two years earlier in 1974.

Why is it the lead question when it's moved?

If you look at the bottom of the voting guide, it tells the voters that Question A is already law.

Well, how can the voters say yes or no when you have five substantive questions

relating from age, domicile, voting in unincorporated places,

changing who and how elections are notified, and E, absentee voting.

Absentee voting had been lost since 1942 and then in 56

when they amended the Constitution a second time.

So how that is not in, and here's the killer.

Gerber v. King was already settled law in 1967.

Article 100 of the State Constitution is clear.

You cannot change the definition.

I'm sorry.

I lost my train of thought.

Please help me.

Well, let me just ask.

So is your argument in regard to Question 8

that it was premature and the trial court should have had a trial on that,

or that the trial court was wrong?

Thank you, sir.

My point was going to be that the Article 100 is clear.

You have to ask a single yes or no question.

You can't put five yes or no questions, give the voters one choice,

and call it good.

So that's exactly where that's at.

And that's what Gerber v. King struck down.

So when the state cites Gerber v. King,

they cherry-picked one section of it that fit the narrative,

but it doesn't address the underlying legal issue

that five or yes or no questions is inappropriate under Gerber v. King.

Background.

I'd like to get into the recent,

the recent late authorities that I brought into the case

that I was unaware of when I filed my brief.

Under that new standard, I don't call it a new standard.

We have called it the corrected standard of review.

In the Second Amendment cases at the federal level,

we had a corrective decision in Bruin last year.

And that was that Heller, the lower courts didn't get

what the Supreme Court was trying to say in Heller.

What they did in that case is in Bruin,

they brought up the fact that all the courts now

must follow this process.

And that is that when you look at the Bill of Rights,

you must look at the plain text

and analyze the plain text.

And even New Hampshire's case law,

I think I cited the most recent version

of the same standard of review for this court.

And that was that when you look at the plain text,

under this new precedent, on this corrective precedent,

you're now left with the burden shifting to the state.

So it's no longer my burden to prove that the statutory scheme,

and that's radical.

We aren't bound by Bruin, are we?

We are now because of Heller, excuse me,

because of the Moore v. Harper case,

because under Article I, Section 4 of the U.S. Constitution,

Moore v. Harper was the redistricting case,

in that case, outlined these issues.

It outlined that now, because it's a federally protected right,

it has the federal standard of review applies.

So on that premise, Chief Justice Roberts wrote,

federal constitution contains no provision

allowing state legislatures to enact laws in any manner

other than that prescribed by the state constitution.

That was referenced in the election law,

which is central to my case here.

These contentions are supported by, again, the recent case,

and the cases I just cited,

and the defendants didn't object.

So they didn't object to the corrected standard of review.

And that's what these cases have put in place

when you look at Heller leads to Bruin.

Bruin puts in place the corrective action,

and it applies.

They take the Second Amendment case

and apply it to all of the Bill of Rights.

And so with voting...

Who is they?

I'm sorry, the Supreme Court in Moore,

excuse me, in the Heller-Bruin decisions

put in place that now the courts

must look at the Bill of Rights.

All of them must be treated equally,

and the same standard of review now applies.

So when the Moore v. Harper case comes down this year

over election law,

the two are now tied together,

because the state and the federal constitution

have concurrent jurisdiction over...

You still have two minutes. You have time.

Over the...

They have concurrent jurisdiction over the election process

that the federal standard of review now applies.

And had it not been for the recent decisions

that that wouldn't apply.

And so that's, I think, a major shift in the debate.

So the standard wouldn't apply

in a solely state election?

Correct, correct.

And so what's happened now under this corrective measure

or this corrective standard of review

is that they've said very clearly

that because both constitutions apply,

that they must be held to the standard.

And I'll reserve the rest of my time.

Thank you very much, Mr. Richard.

Tony Connolly.

Good morning, your honours.

Thank you very much for having me today.

My name is Matthew Connolly,

and I'll be speaking to the state.

I'm happy to take questions at any time,

but I would like to make just three points before we get to that.

And I believe the points that the state would like to make at first

can doubly serve as a signpost

for the categories of complaints

that the plaintiff has brought before this court.

So first, there was no legislative overreach.

Counts two, three, four, and five of the plaintiff's complaint

can be treated as improper legislative uses of power

in terms of defining words,

in terms of improper delegation of power.

There is nothing that's been pled before this court

to indicate an improper use of the legislature's power.

Point number one.

Point number two.

There was no constitutional repugnant,

so relating to the plaintiff's count number six,

amending the constitution without the consent of the govern

or otherwise placing in language that was repugnant

to the remainder of the constitution.

I believe that the Superior Court's opinion lays out very well

how the questions that were presented to voters in 1976

are reflected in the language

that is currently in the constitution of this state.

So there is no repugnance or failure

to obtain the consent of a govern.

And finally, an underpinning of all the complaints

that are before this court is that there is no injury

that has been presented before this court.

The defendant was, or I'm, excuse me,

I used to be a prosecutor, so I apologize for that.

The plaintiff has presented no evidence

that he has a cognizable injury in facts or in the law

that is connected to anything that happened in 2002.

Who would have standing to raise such a claim?

So it must be legally cognizable.

Somebody must be able to do it, and why not, Mr. Richard?

So, Your Honor, the only...

I think the only thing we see that approaches

a cognizable claim in what has been presented to this court

is there are brief references to voter dilution.

There are a couple problems with that.

The first being that that argument was not developed

for this court at all.

There are no facts to rely on.

There's no development of the legal argument there.

Further...

There was a pretty short process for development of argument.

So, yes, but there was, there were pleadings,

there were briefs before we got to the point

of having a hearing in this process, Your Honor,

that these things could have easily been more researched

and more fleshed out more so that the trial court

could have an opportunity to speak on them more.

I'm returning to your question, Justice Bassett.

This is...

There is some speculation on my part here,

because, again, the state was put in the position

of responding to a number of complaints

and perhaps not going into as much depth

as we would have liked on each,

but typically from what we've seen,

where a dilution claim arises,

you're looking at more traditional gerrymandering cases

at redistricting cases.

That's where a claim that a group of people

have been disadvantaged,

and there's real evidence to show that

is where vote dilution enters the equation.

I don't know that there's been any showing of that here, Your Honor.

But you haven't really brief-standing.

You haven't brief-standing.

So, not before this court, Your Honor, the...

So, that really is waved.

I mean, it seems like why would we reach the standing issue?

So, because that is an issue

that can be raised at any time, Your Honor.

So, you're raising it now.

So, Your Honor, we did raise that in the lower court.

Why didn't you brief it?

It was not brief, because what we were doing was

we were answering what...

I'm sorry, we were addressing what the superior court

put into its...

The superior court deferred standing,

assumed without deciding that there was standing.

In any event, I would like to address

some of the substantive arguments,

and what is the state's position on

beginning with Part 2 Article 100?

I mean, the plain text of that amendment

refers to each constitutional amendment,

and there were, in 1976,

five.

How do we reconcile that?

So, Your Honor,

what I would point out in that case is there have been

a number of rounds of constitutional amendments

that have been passed in that way.

There's the 1960s.

I apologize, I don't recall the exact year

amendments for the Gerber case.

There were the amendments to Part 1 Article 11

and other provisions contained in the 1976 amendments.

There were also amendments passed in the 1980s,

where this has been a method through which...

Has anybody challenged that method

before Mr. Richard?

Your Honor, I don't believe that was something

that we very well developed.

What has been challenged is when there is dissonance

between the implemented language in the state constitution

and the language that was voted on.

But that's a different question.

Correct.

No, you're absolutely right, Your Honor.

What I was expressing is that I'm not sure

that there has been a lot of case law exploring

the question that has been specifically raised here.

I was just offering a contrast there.

Then on the Part 2 Article 32 issue,

the absentee ballot issue.

I'm not understanding your argument, frankly.

I mean, the text of the Constitution refers to...

I'm sorry, I said Part 2 Article 32.

I meant Part 1 Article 11 refers to a voter being absent

or unable to vote by reason of physical disability.

And your brief talks about the various legislative amendments

since the National Weather Service Amendment,

the Religious Amendment, among others,

as being a permissible legislative judgment.

I don't understand what that term means.

How is a permissible legislative judgment permissible

if it exceeds the authority of the Constitution?

I think that's a great question, Your Honor.

So to be clear, the state's position is that

the grants of authority that are seen in statute

do not exceed the directives that are contained

in Part 1 Article 11.

So we submit there are some specific delineations

of instances where absentee voting is permitted.

Absence from the City Town Award.

But not exclusive is your position.

Those aren't exclusive.

That is where I was going, Your Honor.

I apologize, I didn't speak over you.

Reading with the remainder of Part 1 Article 11,

where there is a directive granted to the state legislature,

I'm sorry, directive of the state legislature,

that voting places are to be accessible to all,

including elderly and disabled.

We do not read those pieces of the Constitution

as contradictory.

One of them does not, they do not clash.

One does not swallow the other.

Those are two provisions in Part 1 Article 11

that are meant to be read.

So why would there be specific reference

to physical disability and absence?

I'm sorry, Your Honor.

Why would, under that reading of Part 1 Article 11,

why would there be specific reference to absence

and physical disability?

Wouldn't that be superfluous?

I'm speculating, Your Honor,

but I would imagine that those are probably

two of the most ready examples of instances

where a person would be unable to gain access

to the polling place.

But when read with the remainder of Part 1 Article 11,

in that directive for access to the polling place for all,

there is a directive to maybe contemplate

a little bit more what that means.

So in looking specifically at the National Weather Service

exception or prison, rather,

if somebody is fully intending to vote on Election Day,

we've all lived in New Hampshire for some time,

I think it's a fair statement that everyone here understands

how bad our winters can get,

does a person still have access to the poll

if suddenly there is a severe storm

that has made roads unsafe,

that for many people who don't have

access to snow clearing services,

they don't have the ability to even get on the road?

Do those people in that scenario

have access to the polling place?

And the legislature saw fit to answer that question

and they said no, those people don't have access

to the polling place as the Constitution...

So the solution is voting absentee?

In that circumstance, yes.

So the legislature's created the Ballot Law Commission,

so there's an issue about whether that's a proper delegation

to an administrative authority,

and we've said that that's okay

if there are prescribed standards

for administrative action.

What are the constitutionally sufficient

guidance, a guidepost for the Ballot Commission?

Why is that constitutional?

So one moment, Your Honor.

Excuse me, I apologize.

I have a lot in front of me.

So Your Honor, looking at the guidepost

for what constitutes permissible authority

from the Ballot Law Commission,

it can be seen in looking at the rules

outlining when and where the legislature

can delegate its authority.

So in looking at...

This isn't new, this is all contained in the briefs.

Opinion of the Justices, 143 and H-429,

in 1999, that there are two broad rules of law

that apply for determining when such authority

can be delegated.

The first is that the legislature is prohibited

from abdicating its legislative power.

That is not what has happened

with the creation of the Ballot Law Commission.

There is a specific directive

that there is a body that has been created

to oversee certain aspects of election law

with the primary directive

being overseeing how ballot counting devices

are implemented within the state.

And we are granting this specific body

a power to help us in achieving that goal.

That's not an abdication.

And where can we look for the prescribed standards

for administrative action

in regard to the Ballot Law Commission?

I understand the creation of it,

but where are the guide rails, as it were?

I apologize, Your Honor.

I do not have those statutes directly in front of me.

But what I can go off of memory, Your Honor,

is that that is contained in the election law code.

So that would be somewhere between RSA 652 and 71

if memory serves.

And I apologize, I'm out of time.

I'll just end it by saying that the election law code

does provide clear outlines

for what exactly it is that the Ballot Law Commission

is empowered to do.

Thank you, Attorney Connelly. Attorney Tierney.

Good morning, Your Honors.

Michael Tierney for the town of Auburn.

The town of Auburn is but a small town.

And the town joins in the arguments of the state

as far as their constitutional issues.

The town has not violated any of the statutes

that the state had adopted,

and it is the responsibility of the state

to defend the constitutionality of those statutes.

We join in their arguments that they're constitutional,

but we don't provide any, you know,

separate argument from what the state offered

in their brief just like below.

In the trial court, we simply joined

in the state's argument.

I do just want to make 100% clear, though,

that the town has never denied Mr. Richard

the right to vote in any town election,

any state election,

and Mr. Richard has acknowledged,

both in his complaint and in the argument

that he has been provided about

and an opportunity to vote in every election.

Is there any confidentiality

concerned with any of his votes,

or have there been,

in terms of setting aside a separate box

and therefore general knowledge

of whose votes in the box?

So there were 30-some-odd people

who put their votes in the Hand Count box

in that last election,

and I'm not aware of how anybody voted,

and nobody in the town is aware of, you know,

how people voted.

Is the Hand Count option a standard procedure?

It is a standard procedure

in the town of Auburn, at least.

I'm not sure that every town provides that

as an option, but the town of Auburn

has a Hand Count option.

And how long has it had that option?

So it has had a separate box

in the September and November elections.

I believe in the March election

there was basically a pile on the side of the machine

where you could put your ballot

instead of sticking it in.

It was basically on the side of the machine.

Thank you.

Mr. Richard, your butthole.

All right, let me start with ballot box.

The ballot box was provided after I was denied the first time.

So the first time I was denied the right to vote

because if I did not use the machine,

that was my only option,

and that's where the fight began.

Injury.

And was your vote counted in that one?

No, I was denied the right to vote the first time,

and this was after I gave the town

and the Secretary of State notice

a problem and a conflict with the law.

And rather than sit down and work and solve the problem,

they said no.

So the box was provided the second time.

As it pertains to injury,

this is detailed in my pleadings.

40, excuse me, the average absentee turnout

prior to the recent amendment

or alterations by statute, 4%,

the 2020 election, 32%.

Those are the state's figures.

So when we look at, was the vote diluted?

Absolutely.

Look, here's another one.

Every single absentee ballot is defective

and it has been defective since 1979.

Why?

Because there's no affidavit.

We have an affidavit statute in place, right?

And no one's complying with it.

So that's obviously a huge problem.

The ballot, excuse me, the ballot law commission.

The ballot law commission is an appropriate institution

under Article 4, Part 2, Article 4 as a tribunal.

But under the election machines

or the voting machines and the statutes,

what did they do?

They expanded that power.

And so now the ballot law commission

has the ability to make law, suspend law,

police their own rules and regulations,

and sit in judgment of their own rules and regulations.

So that's the underlying issue.

And again, Morvey Harper struck it down.

The Arizona case, the Supreme Court

dealt with four different states

pertaining to how this power has been abused

at the state level and the corrective actions

were given by them.

I want to get to my closing points here.

The defendants argue that they have the authority

to define words, be so kind as to allow me to finish.

Please finish your sentence.

Sure.

I'll summarize it this way.

I have no argument against any of the things

that they want to do.

But we have a beautiful system.

And the beautiful system is the amendment process.

And it hasn't been followed.

And that's my argument in total,

is that if they want voting machines,

follow Massachusetts lead, right?

Their constitution is almost identical to ours.

Why is voting machines constitutional in Massachusetts?

Because they gave permission to do so.

And they didn't in this case,

so when you apply the federal standard of review

to every one of my grievances,

the state has failed to meet its burden.

Thank you very much, Mr. Richard.

All council cases submitted.

Courts in recess.
