This is case 2023-0545, Mayor Mack Premium Outlets, LLC, at Arnold v. Town of Merrimack.

Good morning. Good morning. May it please the Court.

Anthony Ambariano on behalf of Mayor Mack Premium Outlets.

With me are my co-counsel, Olga Goldberg and Jonathan Block.

I have reserved two minutes with respect to today's argument.

The reason that we are here today is that the trial court and the town

have obstinately refused to recognize the decision of this court in Merrimack 1

three or four years ago now.

And I think it is necessary to talk a little bit about Merrimack 1

not only in terms of what the issue that the court decided

but looking also at the issues that this court said were not necessary to address.

In the case before, in the case then, this court reversed the trial court's decision

that RSA 758 allowed the town to reassess one property in the absence of any physical change.

That was not the only issue that was then pending before this court.

In addition to that, the taxpayer appealed the trial court's dismissal

of its equal protection claim as a discovery sanction.

The taxpayer also appealed the trial court's denial of its motion and limiting

which sought to exclude the so-called Morningstar document

which was at the heart of the case, not from evidence,

but from having any substantive weight as to the value of the property.

The taxpayer also appealed the trial court's

granting a motion to compel brought by the town

with the expected discovery items that sought information

as to the value of the property.

So this court ruled that the trial court

burned in finding, ruling, that 758 allowed what the town did in this case.

And this court said, and if I may quote,

given this disposition, this court need not address any other issues on appeal.

So did the town raise the argument regarding the private cause of action

in the proceeding before Merrimack 1 became the escort?

No, not before Merrimack 1 was decided,

but the town also brought a cross appeal in that case

arguing that the trial court should have dismissed

all of taxpayers' claims on the grounds that the abatement process

was the only remedy and that there was no New Hampshire law

that allowed equal protection claims in tax cases.

In Merrimack 1 was the claim involving RSA 758

part of account-seeking injunctive relief.

No, and in that case, Chief Justice,

by the time that case progressed,

the injunctive relief part was pretty much moved because

what was the cause of action in that,

getting to Justice Donovan's point, I think,

in that count?

Well, there were essentially two causes of action

that were the one relating to 758,

and the second was the equal protection claim.

I understand that. Just focus on 758.

What was the count there?

What was the theory, the cause of action?

The theory was that the town did not have the legal ability.

No, I understand that, but what relief were you seeking?

What was the causing reversal of the trial court's dismissal?

But the underlying complaint asked for money damages, did it not?

I respectfully disagree with the characterization of money damages.

All the taxpayer has ever asked for in this case

is a refind of the illegally assessed taxes.

I guess that gets to my point.

You do not dispute that the legal remedy of an abatement

has always been available to the plaintiffs, do you?

I do dispute that.

Well, the remedy is available, but that's not what the taxpayer has sought.

That's not my question.

Has the legal remedy always been available?

You agree that it has.

Yes, I agree that there is an abatement procedure.

And for whatever reason, the plaintiff chose not to pursue the abatement procedure.

That's correct. Following the precedents that have said, including Pheasant Lane 1,

I guess now in Nashua, that where there is no legal authority

to impose or in Pheasant Lane, or in this case, to adjust an assessment,

a taxpayer need not resort to an abatement proceeding.

But it just is a matter of basic procedure.

If you don't pursue the available legal remedy,

that means there has to be either a cause of action

supporting your theory under 75-8, or an equitable remedy.

And we know equity can't lie because there is an available legal remedy.

So it comes down to what Justice Donovan raised, which is where is the cause of action here?

Where has that been established?

Well, the cause of action was in Pheasant Lane 1.

That was not an abatement proceeding.

The Verizon case, Verizon Rochester, was not an abatement proceeding.

And in fact, the trial court in this case, way back when,

when the town I think made three attempts to dismiss this case at the trial court level.

And the trial court itself said at the time, this is not an abatement case.

This is a case that falls under that exception or alternative theory

where the tax is illegal, improperly assessed.

But again, that can be raised in the context of a request for abatement.

Well, we did in this case prior to this court's decision in Merrimack 1.

We also filed abatement proceedings in the Superior Court,

separately from...

But not for all tax years.

We stopped when the trial court ruled, and I think this is somewhat ironic.

But you didn't appeal that order.

The trial court dismissed your abatement proceeding.

That's correct.

And you didn't appeal that.

We did not appeal that because the trial court at that point had ruled

that we had, even though the trial court ruled against us on the so-called statutory claim,

the trial court had ruled that there was still an equal protection claim.

And quite honestly, the trial court dismissed the abatement cases

and said this is not an abatement case.

And until the court's final order, the trial court's final order here,

where the trial court said, you should have brought an abatement case.

Those two statements by the trial court can help you reconcile.

Would you be barred from bringing an abatement case at this time?

Oh, yes, under the tying strictures of a typical abatement case, shall we say.

In case involving overvalue and disproportionate assessment, the time is long past.

So can you just clarify were abatement cases filed for each of the tax years?

I'm going to suggest there were files for tax years 17, 18, and possibly 19.

And those were the ones that were dismissed.

Correct.

And you could have appealed those dismissals in Merrimack 1, but you chose not to.

There was just simply no reason because we, and I think it's all tied in also with the discovery motions

and other proceedings that were, which this court said in Merrimack 1,

we don't need to decide that.

But nonetheless, the trial court, essentially, we opened the proceedings.

We subsequent to the decision of this court in Merrimack 1,

there was a perhaps a status conference held with the trial court.

Where did we go from here?

And the taxpayer's position has always been both the cases over.

The Supreme Court would not have left hanging four issues that was likely to be, that would reoccur

if there were any further proceedings in this case.

Evidentiary rulings, the important constitutional argument.

This court said we don't have to go there.

The only result of that is that let's get this over.

And that's why the taxpayer filed the motion with respect to tax year 2017 first

because that was the very year that had been before this court.

And there are simply no undisputed facts in this case.

They honestly never have been.

The town reassessed the property for one reason, the Morningstar report.

And this court's decision made clear that could not be done.

So if we reverse on this issue, do you then move for summary judgment

or what's your request at this point?

At this point, there was pending before the trial court

a motion for partial summary judgment with respect to later years.

Which was deemed moot, correct?

We ask this court now to issue a very specific order

including the bouts of judgments to be entered

so that there is no further ignoring of this court's decision.

This case has been over for a long time, yet we are back here.

The trial court referred to this court's decision in various ways

as a quote ambiguous.

The trial court has said,

I'm not sure what ground the prior decision was reversed on.

I think it's pretty clear to anyone reading that decision exactly what was intended.

The town also filed a motion for reconsideration

which the town to this day which uses to recognize

was considered by the court and the court did not grant the relief requested.

Was there a refund for the overpayments in 2017?

There has not been any refund but for when the case first started

and this is what the injunctive relief in the very first year

the town on the preliminary first half tax bill

used the new assessment which is again not permitted under the statute.

In that case, and I don't quite recall the sequence

but the town said yeah we have to give that money back

based on the new assessment and the trial court said the same thing.

Yes, you've deprived the taxpayer of its money.

You have to give it back and the town didn't in fact give back

that relatively small amount.

But now withstanding that earlier action by the court

now the court says there's no private right of action

you can't recover money from a town.

The trial court goes on to say this is a 1983 claim.

That's never been the case.

Time is up. Thank you. You reserve two minutes.

Attorney Serge.

Thank you Mr. Chief Justice, members of the court.

Matthew Serge from German Woodson on behalf of the town of Merrimack.

I want to begin where the chief was going with the thread here

and what led to Merrimack won.

I have here the original 2017 complaint which was the catalyst

brought us to M1.

There were two claims, declaratory judgment and injunctive relief.

That was it.

The judgment your honors dealt with the issue of the second half

tax bill issue which was cleared up.

That's different than of course what we're dealing with today

with an assessment.

But that did ask for an immediate refund, did it not?

I can't remember Justice Cowley what the wording was

but probably just the refund of the from that bill

because it simply wasn't that evaluation issue

was simply you can't use that mechanically to charge that bill.

It's a different issue.

Second question, the second count was the injunctive relief question

and buried within that was a number of things.

Frankly 75-8 was never mentioned.

It was brought up later in the course of the proceedings

from the perspective of the town made a change

under that statute.

But that was the relief sought.

There was no other kind of cause of action.

And if I have a moment I'll refer to some of your prior cases

that have talked about these issues with taxation

and private causes of action.

But I don't want to lose sight of,

once we get to the Merrimack 1 case or M1, I'll call it,

you had a very limited issue before you

which was the trial court dismissing a portion

of that injunctive relief claim on the basis

that the town had the right under 75-8 to make that change

based on the Morningstar report.

I might remember that from the record.

And you had held that was not a proper basis under 75-8.

So the motion dismissed was reversed

and the case was remanded.

And of course we see that as remanded for further proceedings.

You did not order the judgment be entered

and quite frankly the court couldn't do that.

75-8 doesn't provide that relief

and that's where I'm going to go next.

Once we go beyond this,

you then know there was the motion for final judgment

following M1 and then a summary judgment that was mooted.

Judge Colburn quite surprisingly had reset the case.

Hopefully you had a chance to read that order.

She took great pains to explain what she's tried to work through

out of four rounds of pleadings and frankly...

So in resetting the case,

why did that move the motion for summary judgment?

What was at that point, Justice Countway,

Judge Colburn was asking for,

to put all your claims start over,

get all your claims before us,

she already denied the final judgment under M1.

So she said to the taxpayer, clean slate.

In fact, I think she uses words like,

this will supersede any prior claims

and any act as if, I'm paraphrasing,

act as if I didn't dismiss any of the other claims or anything.

So at that point, the taxpayer could have brought

an abatement claim?

Well, not for prior years, Justice Donovan.

And of course, as we know with abatements,

you first have to ask for it locally

by a date specific.

If you don't get it,

then you have to appeal by a date specific.

So I haven't done the numbers in terms of what year,

a lot of years here.

But the judge gave, we thought,

kind of a big windfall to the taxpayer

by allowing them to refile.

And frankly, we, the town,

had thought about, should we challenge this?

We didn't, because frankly, we needed,

it was getting out of control too.

But importantly, before I lose this,

there was no request for reconsideration

of that November order resetting the case.

That's very important because from our perspective,

those claims that are there now

count one statutory claim,

which is about 75-8,

and count two equal protection.

Those are what the judge ruled

and then dismissed, and that's why we're here.

So we're there at some point,

abatement cases filed?

And if so, for what years?

And they were dismissed, is that right?

That's correct, Justice Bassett.

There was abatements filed with the court

for tax years 2017 and 18.

And presumably they had been filed

with the town and denied, and then they went to court.

I believe so. I didn't go back on the record,

but I believe so.

And we'll assume for the sake of the argument they were.

Beyond that, I don't believe there were others filed.

And did Judge Coburn at that point

in time tell the taxpayer

this is not an abatement case?

Well, this is where it gets interesting.

But first, I want to go back to the

why the abatements were dismissed.

The abatements were dismissed because the taxpayer

has never wanted to argue disproportionality

or that the value is wrong in that, for that reason.

They simply wanted to say, you couldn't change it.

Therefore, give us all our money back.

Automatic refund.

So what Judge Coburn said.

Could they raise that issue in the context of an abatement?

Could they raise the issue? I'm sorry.

The issue that they want to pursue,

which is the assessment was wrong.

Well, let me, yeah, if I may.

Well, I don't want to lose your question.

I'm sorry, Justice Brown.

No, Justice Chief Justice.

This takes us into another area now.

The idea of the abatement

and then what you can raise.

They could certainly raise

that they had no right to make this assessment

under 75-8.

It didn't sanction that change.

The change was still made and the value was still given.

Now, in that case,

it's very important here

order versus town of Sanborn.

That was a case that held that

even if an assessment is done fraudulently,

in bad faith,

arbitrarily,

you still have an abatement process.

You still have to go through.

And when you do, however, there's a burden shift.

Because I know the question. I get it.

Well, 75-8, if you can just make the change anyway,

what's the consequence?

The consequence is the burden's on the town at that point

to show that the value is correct.

That's a heavy burden.

Taxor doesn't have to prove anything at that point.

So, is that the exclusive remedy

for a taxpayer in this situation?

In this situation? Absolutely. That's it.

That's what the case has said.

In the case of Duval versus City of Manchester,

which the plaintiffs have cited.

And it's very interesting in that case.

Number one, because 75-8 was around.

75-8's been on the books

since, I think, the turn of the 20th century.

But in Duval,

the City of Manchester had a very bizarre method

of assessing properties

where they would basically

assess them as they were sold.

So you'd have some properties that were

20 to 30% of market value

hadn't been sold in 30 years

and the taxpayer sues.

This is 1,000 abatements. This is crazy.

And it's resulting in disproportionality.

I should get my refund.

And the court agreed

and actually took sort of a raise,

it's a local approach to disproportionality

saying taxpayer, you don't have to prove market value

in this case. It's clear based on what's going on here

that there's a problem.

However, what's important in that case

is that the trial court had agreed

with that taxpayer's request

to reset the value back to where it was

i.e. automatic refund,

Supreme Court said no.

You still have a burden to share

of your tax burden to provide.

Therefore, there has to be some trial

on value.

And that's where I was going to begin this

to remind the court that since 1879,

at least,

the court's been very clear

that if you challenge an assessment

no matter how erroneous that assessment was

by law or by fact,

you still have to go

through that abatement process.

There's a burden you share as a taxpayer.

You can't just get a free pass.

So fast forward to

the trial court's reset.

And the taxpayer made a choice

to file the statutory claim.

That's what it's carried.

Did the taxpayer

have the option of

filing an abatement at that point

pursuing the abatement remedy?

I guess I'll say it this way.

Mr. Chief Justice, they could always ask for it.

Whether or not they could ask for it for prior years.

They could certainly do that.

And Justice Colburn, I mean, the statute,

it's a statute about when you can file these things.

And frankly, that's really a subject matter,

a jurisdiction issue.

But the court and its equity powers

maybe could have allowed an abatement

from prior years.

I mean, this was a consolidated case eventually

because we were dealing with all these multiple years.

But this is where

language pleadings matter.

What you plead matters. What you claim.

That's why from the beginning when you asked

what was the original cause of action.

Injunctive relief. This is not

Pheasant Lane, by the way.

There's a lot of talk about the Pheasant Lane case.

Why isn't it Pheasant Lane?

That's what they're relying on.

Yeah, I'm going to tell you.

While there was a change,

Pheasant Lane involved really

what became a taxing issue.

They looked at the city was relying upon

7416

to say

taxation therefore you get another tax,

a supplemental tax.

We see that really as a separate mechanical

again, another mechanical type issue

like a tax bill issue.

Not a yearly assessment issue

for the year. It's very different.

But Pheasant Lane didn't actually pay.

So what would

the taxpayers remedy

be in this situation?

I mean, you had a footnote that seems

to dispute the

concept that

there was any remedy.

In footnote 4, page 25,

you said

Merrimack 1

merely held

75 didn't authorize the change

but that's not a violation of the statute.

Can you explain that

and tie it in with what would their remedy ever be?

Happy to.

The 758 in and of itself does not provide a remedy.

That's not a punitive or remedial statute.

It's simply a directive to a town

or city that you must

make sure of proportionality every year

and here are some reasons when you must look at it.

This court found that the reason we were citing

was not appropriate under the statute.

That could be, in fact,

just Judge Coburn said,

be treated as an unlawful assessment,

an illegal assessment, and that would likely

create that burden shift approach under poor

in an abatement case. So Justice, can't wait

to answer your question. I hope

the abatement should be pled.

It could have been pled along with everything else.

And simply 758,

that's the basis to claim illegality

and therefore shift that burden to the town

and make them prove it.

But they did. I mean, my review of the record

shows that in August of 18

and August of 19,

they filed petitions for abatement.

Those were filed, but

that argument I just

provided was not made

for abatement.

And, in fact, disproportionate,

and again, no was it appealed.

The decision wasn't appealed

but Justice Coburn said

they're specifically not arguing

that they were disproportionately taxed.

They want the court to follow.

Isn't that implicit

if your property is

overvalued because of an improper

methodology

that proportionality

is therefore also established?

Justice Bassett, we

contend, yes. That's always what's

happening when you're challenging

assessments. What do you have to do?

Here, however, there was kind of a conscious decision

that they weren't doing that.

Didn't want to do that. Just wanted to say

it's void, which frankly is not even

in the statute of avoiding an assessment,

but void it and revert back to the beginning

and give us now

$6 million, but give us all our money back.

So that was denied in Newval.

That type of remedy.

And it's a remedy issue. That's what we're talking about here.

So, if I may briefly,

there are also some other cases cited

outside of Pheasant Lane

where taxpayers were able

to go around that abatement process.

This is not that case.

Things like pour versus sandwich

and aviation, excuse me,

single aviation services,

those involved, for example,

breach of contract, which were developed

under RSA 79D, which you may know

is sort of an exemption statute for historical buildings.

That's an agreement.

They're saying you breach our agreement.

You're not supposed to charge us this much money.

It's supposed to be this much.

Isn't the practical consequence of your position

that the taxpayer will pay a disproportionate share

because the value

isn't tied

to the actual value established

in the townwide reval?

I'm sorry, can you repeat that one more time?

I'm sure.

Isn't the reality here

is that the taxpayer is going to be

preparing, be paying

a disproportionate share of the taxes

because of what happened here.

And you seem to be saying,

well, that's too bad. There's no remedy.

Well, but there were remedies.

There have been remedies. That's what we're saying.

Abatement. You're saying that was the...

Abatement has always been...

And then you say, well, they could have argued

to the trial court that

the trial court could use its equitable powers

to allow that to go forward.

You said that, didn't you?

Maybe. Maybe.

Could we do that?

I guess I'd say you have the Supreme Court,

Mr. Bassett, and you can kind of do what

you feel you want to do.

I don't...

Wouldn't that be equitable here?

Oh, yeah. I think that could be

an equitable relief.

That hasn't been requested of you,

of course, and that would be, again,

kind of runs into the subject

manageristic issue with timing of filings.

That being said,

you are the court.

But...

But to answer the...

To go on about the cases, I'm sorry,

I don't want to lose it before my time goes out,

about Puerto V. Sandwich,

those were breach of contract cases,

breach of lease agreements, things like that.

If this case involved, for example,

maybe a tax deferral or a tax exemption

for an elderly person, for example,

well, you get a certain deduction

and you don't get it. You get billed for everything.

You don't have to bring an abatement for that.

You bring, most likely in that case,

an injunctive relief kind of claim, whatever,

because that's what you call us for,

a certain kind of payment, a certain level.

Finally, there's this issue of

Rochester III, the Verizon case,

an equal protection, real quick.

We've always said, equal protection

in this context talks about taxability,

not assessing. Verizon wasn't about

assessing. Verizon was complaining,

rightfully so, that they were

picked out of all the other utilities

on this poll, and being charged

a tax. And if no one else

is being charged a tax, we shouldn't

say it's taxability. That's the question there.

It wasn't about challenging the value.

What was the relief there, refund?

No, because they filed

believe just adjunctive relief

and had not paid the tax, I believe.

So here,

their mistake was they paid the tax.

Well, I mean,

they made whatever choices they felt were

proper.

But that doesn't mean that

those remedies were always there. In fact,

like I said, in 17 they asked for an abatement.

But as Justice Donovan pointed out,

it was not appealed when it was dismissed.

So that's where we're left.

Did I just want to clarify, you indicated

that if somebody had been overtaxed

with

somebody that would otherwise qualify

for an elderly reduction

or exemption,

that they could file an injunction and get a refund?

Maybe.

I'm just spitballing that idea,

Justice Countway. I'm just saying that

first the abatement wouldn't be necessary.

We wouldn't be arguing to you, you have to ask for an abatement.

Because that's not what you're challenging. You're challenging

literally, you weren't getting what's due to you under the statute

based upon a framework for exemption.

Thank you, Attorney Surge. Thank you very much.

Thank you very much.

A couple of points.

First, I think it's important

to note that the trial court

in response to

one of the town's first or second

motions to dismiss

specifically said

that the trial court would

consider ordering a refund

in this case.

That topic has been

part of this case for

six or seven years now.

Under way to authority.

Oh, I'm sorry, this was not an abatement case

and if the tax were found to be illegal

under Pheasant Lane,

that that's what happens.

Because substantively

there is no difference between

Pheasant Lane and this case.

The fact that

the Pheasant Lane they knew it was coming

and they sought an injunction

as opposed to here

where the bills went out

and the town and the

taxpayers said, you've got our money.

We would like our money back.

The Supreme Court has

said you didn't have the legal authority

to do what you did.

This tax is illegal

and

there was no reason to file

an abatement claim because

the question here is the legality of the

tax, not whether it is

disproportionate.

And that is a

difference that has been recognized by this court

in other

cases as well.

And just to clarify

an additional point

I

would be surprised if

a trial court

or this court ever ruled

that the statutory abatement deadlines

can somehow

be extended equitably

or be adjusted

equitably.

Finally

with respect to the issue of the remedy

I think it's

important to note that we are

in a notice-pleading jurisdiction.

Regardless of what the headings of the counts

were and the trial court seemed very

concerned

that we were seeking a remedy

only under 75-8.

The fact of the matter is we have asked for a refund

and this court has recognized it can

craft remedies when need be.

Thank you very much.

Thank you counsel.

For the record

I will note just as Hans Marconi

is disqualified in cases submitted.

Thank you.
