B-0614 in the matter of Donald Nixon and Roxanne Nixon.

Thank you, Tony Strasburger.

I'm understanding you reserve two minutes.

I did, Your Honor.

Good morning, Your Honors. May it please the court?

My name is John Strasburger, and I represent the petitioner appellant in this matter, Donald Nixon.

Your Honors, the trial court in this case committed an abuse of discretion in order for Mr. Nixon to pay a reduced amount of alimony

of $1,000 per month while he is attending nursing school full-time during a period when his income has been limited

to $1,440 per month in VA disability benefits.

The record will reflect that at the time of the party's divorce in this matter, Mr. Nixon was employed as an IT director

for Corning in Corning, New York. He was earning a very healthy salary based salary of $16,838 plus opportunity for bonus

at the time of the party's divorce in 2016.

Mrs. Nixon was employed earning approximately $5,605 per month at the time of the divorce.

The case law is clear in New Hampshire that when the court is entertaining a request to modify alimony,

that the court must reexamine the financial circumstances of both parties.

By the time of the hearing on the request to modify, the respondents' earnings had increased to $11,608 monthly.

So she was earning nearly double what she was earning at the time of the party's divorce in 2016.

That equates to approximately $140,000 annually.

The financial affidavits filed at the time of the hearing on the underlying request to modify alimony

reflected that at that time the respond was able to contribute $1,600 per month towards her 401k.

She had resolved debt she was showing at the time of the 2016 divorce

as compared to her financial affidavit that was filed at the time of the divorce.

It shows significant discretionary expenditures that she was spending approximately $350 on meals eaten out,

$600 on vacation expenses, and $300 on entertainment and recreation expenses.

The record revealed that conversely, the petitioner having been laid off from Corning

and after having done exhaustive search for similar work

took advantage of job retraining benefits as a result of his service in the Marines.

It was determined that he would be eligible for additional schooling

and he undertook the benefit of going to nursing school full-time in order to achieve a nursing degree

and to hopefully start him in a new field.

I think it's important for the court to note in this case

that unlike many people that rise to the ranks of a direct level in a large corporation,

Mr. Nixon worked his way up from an entry-level position.

He worked for Corning for more than 20 years.

He found himself in a position where he was in his 50s

and he had really only experience within Corning that he essentially was aged out.

New management came in, they wanted to bring in younger talent

and he found himself in a position where it was very difficult to find commensurate employment

in his field of work at the level that he had achieved with Corning.

What are Mr. Nixon's present circumstances? Is he still in nursing school?

He is. He is, Your Honor. He's projected to graduate in 2025, which is what the trial court found.

And the interesting thing that the trial court did in this case, Your Honors,

which I have not seen previously and I have not seen another case in New Hampshire

or at least a published opinion address this,

what the court did is essentially gave Mr. Nixon a break during the time

that he would be attending nursing school.

So the court found that he had met his burden to show that he was in a unforeseeable,

significant change of circumstance as a result of the job loss.

The court made a specific finding that he did not have the present ability to pay

the $5,000 per month that the final decree requires.

And it reduced his alimony to $1,000 per month for the approximately two years

that remained for him to complete his nursing degree.

What I believe the court's perhaps most significant error was

is that it said at the end of that two-year period for alimony obligation

is automatically going to revert to the $5,000 per month

that was originally ordered by this court.

That doesn't take into account a number of things that the case law

and the statute clearly require.

Number one, no one knows what Mr. Nixon will be earning upon graduation

assuming he gets a job in his chosen field of nursing

and passes the nursing boards.

Was there not testimony that he was going to earn a six-figure salary?

So there was testimony that it was hoped if he worked for a larger hospital

he would have the ability to earn a six-figure income.

He testified to that, or there was an offer of proof

because there was a combination of both during this particular hearing.

So there was an offer of proof that it was anticipated

that he may be able to earn six figures.

Notably, Roxanne Nixon earns six figures.

She earns well into six figures at this juncture.

And Mr. Nixon was earning well into six figures

when he was a director of IT at Corning.

And that's the problem.

So he had a base salary of approximately $200,000 plus bonus.

There was no evidence for the trial court

that his earnings would be commensurate

with what he was able to earn at Corning.

And what's significant about this case, your honors,

is that this case is dissimilar to a lot of the other cases

such as Canoway where the court has said,

okay, well, we have some ability to comply

because there are some assets here.

But this is the case where the court made a specific finding

that he did not have the present ability

to comply with the court's final decree.

It also made a specific finding denying the respondent's request

for contempt finding, noting that he filed not one,

but two motions to modify alimony.

This case sort of has an odd procedural aspect to it

as the court probably saw.

He filed a motion to modify alimony in May of 2020

when he learned that his compensation was going to be reduced

as a result of a COVID response that Corning was doing.

And it removed him from the long-term

executive compensation program.

And he'd been getting severance, is that right, until that time?

He did.

So what happened, your honor, is he received a severance package.

It was a pretty good severance package.

He hired employment counsel when he learned he was going to be laid off.

There was a significant amount of effort

negotiating the terms of his exit from Corning.

So when the trial court ordered a rearage of $70,000,

what was the effective date of that?

In other words, what was the window of calculating the $70,000

rearage?

So what it did was it took the last date that my client made,

the $5,000 payment, which was commensurate with when he

received his last severance.

So he continued to pay the $5,000 per month

during the entirety of the period that he was receiving

severance pay.

Even though he had a motion to modify the had been pending

and he was receiving less income, he still made his

required court order payment throughout that entire duration.

Ultimately, and I believe it was at some point in April of

2021 or 2022 when his severance was exhausted.

It was April of 2022.

That's right.

He stopped making those payments.

And so by the time we got before the court, there was no

dispute that he had stopped making the payments when he

stopped receiving severance.

So by the time we were before the court on the motion to

modify alimony, there was $70,000 in payments that

were in arrears.

Our fundamental argument is it is inconsistent for the court

to make a finding that Mr. Nixon did not have the

present ability to pay the $5,000 per month, but yet

still order to pay in arrearage based on $5,000 per month.

And what is more problematic, Your Honor, is that the

$70,000 that the court ordered, the order says that

it was to come from an investment account.

It noted that he had an investment account with

$110,000 in it.

He testified that that was funded through the same stock

options that were exercised.

Those were split in the underlying divorce.

If you look at the decree, it's in page 4 of our appendix.

Mrs. Nixon was awarded her 50% of those stock options.

So those were divided.

And the court expects Mr. Nixon to give up a substantial

portion of his share of that property division because

the court has found that he has assets that he could pay.

And what I understand in reading my opponent's brief,

as well as the argument that was made at the trial

court, was the Canaway case allows the court to make

a finding that there's an ability to pay from assets.

This case is entirely different from Canaway.

In Canaway, you had an obligor who filed, I believe,

motions to modify alimony, all of which were denied.

There was a specific finding that the obligor in that case

was underemployed, that it was providing consulting services

to his fiance's business for no consideration.

And he was, in fact, in contempt.

And there was a contempt finding.

And the court said he had sufficient assets to satisfy

his alimony obligations, which would make sense

because the court made a determination in that case

that he was voluntarily underemployed.

In this case, the court made no such findings.

In fact, the court said, you're not in contempt.

You filed not one but two motions to modify alimony.

And you have insufficient income to meet the current

obligations requiring $5,000 per month in alimony.

Can I just ask you, before your time runs out,

to respond to Mr. Gordon's argument

that job loss is an inherently foreseeable circumstance

and therefore...

Absolutely.

So the cases that are discussed in my opponent's brief

are employment law cases.

They say they stand for the proposition that generally

employment is employment at will unless you have a contract

that states otherwise, which I don't dispute

and I agree with, okay?

There are lots of cases when you're dealing with

modification of alimony in child support in New Hampshire

that say a substantial change in circumstance

is a job loss.

There are many, many litigants in the state

that don't have the benefit of an employment contract.

Okay?

You're dealing with an individual who worked

for the same corporation for an excess of 20 years.

He had a great career there.

He anticipated that he would continue to earn the income

that he did for years to come,

which is why he agreed to pay alimony

at a significant rate for 10 years.

An employment case that talks about whether or not

you have a continued expectation of employment

at a particular employer is inapposite to whether or not

a job loss constitutes a substantial change

in financial circumstances under our alimony cases.

So I would agree with the proposition

that if you don't have a contract,

you're an employee at will,

I would disagree that that means that it is foreseeable

that you would have a job loss.

And I think there's many cases that discuss that.

Thank you, Attorney Strasburger.

You reserve two minutes.

Thank you.

Attorney Gordon.

May it please the court?

I'm Joshua Gordon,

representing Roxanne Nixon here this morning.

My brother's basic argument is that this court

should begin because Donald is on a downward trajectory

and Roxanne is on an upward one,

and so paying alimony isn't fair.

The argument should be rejected for four reasons.

First, the asserted trajectories aren't necessarily true.

Currently, Donald can meet his own needs

because he has nearly a million dollars in the bank

and because his current wealth covers some of his costs.

He's graduating from nursing school this coming May,

upon which he said he is confident

that he will then earn a six-figure income.

And he said he's confident he'll be able to get a job in that field

and if he gets hired in the hospital

he will again earn a six-figure income.

On the other hand, Roxanne explained

that her company is undergoing structural changes

and she is not confident about her job.

Unlike Donald, she can foresee that at will employee.

She could lose her job at any time.

So then why isn't the best remedy determination at the time

or at the moment that he graduates gets a job

and then the trial court can assess her need and his ability?

Well, the trial court can do that again

when he gets a job determines what his salary is,

but there's many equitable ways to modify in this situation

and it would have been entirely within the family court's discretion

to reject modification entirely.

He got more than fair treatment.

The family court modified just as he requested,

although not as in extreme a way as he would wish,

but the role of fairness is very, very broad

and this case is straightforward deference

to the discretion of the family court

and that's why this court should affirm.

But the second reason that this court should reject

my brother's argument is that alimony law

is traditionally largely based on assets

while child support is income-based by statute.

Alimony is not.

Income is not irrelevant and certainly not in the new statute,

but going back nearly 200 years,

alimony is historically mostly an asset-based analysis

and this makes sense because alimony is the least in part

is the oblige's financial contribution to the marriage

to get extracted after the marriage

and of course she has no claim,

Roxanne has no claim to Donald's current income

that ended when the marriage did

and not in which is far more on point than Conaway.

The husband lost his job for different reasons.

Wife sought to attach assets to recoup her alimony

and this court said regarding both alimony and rearches

any of husband's property may be applied

to meet alimony obligations.

What about the seeming tension or inconsistency

between the trial courts finding that

Mr. Nixon didn't have the ability to pay

5,000 a month after he lost his severance

but also saying that there's a rearage

of a year times 5,000 a month?

There's no inconsistency.

The court said he is unable to pay alimony

because of his current income

but it didn't say he's not unable to pay alimony.

There's no inconsistency I don't think.

So it's only if it's appropriate to resort

to liquidating assets that there's no inconsistency?

No inconsistency and there's a case

I think Walker where

I think it's Walker but maybe it's not

where the family court required

the obligor to liquidate assets.

Let me ask you just it seemed that

Mr. Strasberg made a good point in response

to your argument that job loss is inherently foreseeable.

We have a lot of cases that talk about job loss

satisfying the criteria for modification of alimony.

So it has often qualified as an unforeseen substantial

change in financial circumstances

and would seem to be so here.

I think Mr. Nixon during the hearing

he said he hoped to stay with Corbyn through his retirement

and while it might be a nice dream

I think it's not a reasonable expectation.

Employment as I cited in my brief is at

both New Hampshire and New York

and he was in the technical field

which was rapidly evolving in 2016 as it is today.

Few people these days can expect to stay in the same job

for 30 years with the same employer.

He had to have been worried throughout the end of that

of his tenure there that he was an overpaid legacy employee

and that seems very foreseeable

that one might lose one's job

even if I only cited employment cases.

It seems very foreseeable in this context.

He saw the modification and he won that

and the outcome was fair.

For Donald while he might not be able to pay alimony

from present earnings he anticipates a sizable salary

when he graduates in May.

His wife helps support him.

He enjoys a house, a car boat,

a country club membership, a comfortable life

in upstate New York.

He made over $1.5 million in his last two years of employment.

He gifted away $300,000 of that after he lost his job.

He gambled away another $160,000 in cryptocurrency

and he better time the sale of his own stock options.

He still has a million dollars in assets

which he can access without penalty

and give his current low income at very low tax rate.

For Roxanne she has need for alimony

because retirement savings still lags is

and she depends on his payments to maintain her lifestyle.

What about the fact that she's contributing

a substantial amount to her 401k?

Wouldn't that go to her lack of need?

Well, she's probably not in the same financial circumstance

that she was during the time

that she was getting alimony payments.

But her job is not secure,

her level of earning is not so secure.

As in Walker and Canaway,

one can't give away assets

and then claim the powersman.

Does the alimony go into termination in 2026

or did the trial court extend that?

No, the trial court gave him credit

for what exactly that means.

I suppose it means it gets extended a little bit

but the total amount will be the same.

So Donald can gift all his money

and join the circus if he wants

but that doesn't mean Roxanne has to pay for it.

My fourth argument is as I said

there's many equitable ways to modify

and giving him a reprieve

or a partial abeyance for two years

while he's in job retraining

is one of just many ways

the trial judge could modify

and it's fair

and given the level of deference

this court pretty much has to defer to the trial court.

As to arrearages which is still out there

those are just alimony that wasn't paid

and I can't see...

But the court found that he didn't have the ability to pay it

at that time.

He didn't have to pay it out of present income

but the existence of the arrearages

my point is that there's no separate analysis for arrearages

arrearages are just alimony that you didn't pay

and so there's no some separate analysis.

Doesn't the trial court have to make a determination

as to the moment that the relief kicks in

so at some point it was changed to a thousand dollars a month

the trial court affirmatively determined

that that moment would be

well after he stopped receiving the severance payments, right?

I'm not sure I understand the question.

Well if he stopped receiving severance in April of 22

presumably during the time

he didn't have that ability to pay the five thousand dollars

but for the severance amount

so the seventy thousand was calculated

from that April of 22 to the year

whatever the exact date was

but that's a determination

a discretionary determination, right?

For the trial court

the trial court would have said

well he filed a motion to modify back in 2020

so I'm gonna say that the effective date

of the reduced amount is the date he filed.

Well the effective...

the effect of the first motion to modify

was that he was not held in contempt

and you know because he had commission

and he did the non-contemptuous thing

but he had no ability to

he had no ability to pay out of his income

but he still has ability to pay

because he has all these assets.

Right, what I'm specifically asking is

the trial court had to make a determination

what date do I make the one thousand dollars a month effective?

I think it said October

I think it said it picked a date

but we could determine that that was an erroneous date

we could say really it should have been April of 22

when he stopped receiving severance.

Well that's a factual determination

I think that the family court made that

it gets deference so maybe...

Still stuck on the answer to Justice Bassett's question

a few minutes ago

how do you reconcile his inability to pay

as of October with

an order for arrears just for five months beginning in April?

That's the point at which he was not able to pay.

Assets, I think the call comes to assets

alimony can be paid out of assets

and if he doesn't have an income at a certain time

he's got assets from which to pay the alimony.

I answer your question and I don't know why.

It seems like there's an inherent conflict

between finding out of October

he has no present ability to pay based on his income

when that condition has in fact existed since April

when his severance arrangement ended.

That's inconsistent

and I think that's what Justice Cowell is getting at.

I don't think it's consistent

in that he has all these assets to pay alimony

so what his income is at a particular time

is not really that important when there's all these assets.

I see there's no more questions.

I'll rest.

Thank you.

So just to deal with that last issue your honors

that is really the crux of the issue here.

My client made the alimony payments

during the entire time he received his severance pay.

He had a motion to modify alimony that was filed in 2020

it was never acted on by the court

the record will reflect we're litigating other issues

that had to deal with taxation of exercise stock options

that was going on at the same time

we had a hearing on those issues

and the court never adjudicated the first motion to modify

so when he stopped paying alimony after his severance stopped

Roxanne Nixon filed a motion for contempt

he filed a renewed motion to modify

to re-tie up this issue for the court

his financial circumstances had not changed

by the time we reached the hearing

he was still not receiving severance

he has only source of income with the VA benefits

the VA disability benefits he was receiving

and the job retraining that he was undergoing

so that is significant in this case

cases that talk about using assets for the payment of alimony

are cases where obligors have been found

voluntarily, unemployed or in contempt

that is not this

and to hear that Roxanne Nixon feels as though

she's in a downward spiral financially

simply not accurate

you look at her financial affidavit

it's in the appendix at the time of the divorce

you look at the one she filed at the time of our hearing

she owned a home in Bedford

with more equity than my client's home had

she had over $600,000 in 401k

my client had just over $400,000 in his 401k

he does have a defined benefit pension

that is not yet receiving

the value of that I guess is a little bit uncertain

I think he had put the accumulated contributions

on his financial affidavit

but Roxanne Nixon has approximately

$887,500 between equity retirement

cash and other assets

at the time that we went to this hearing

so what's going to happen if my client

is ordered to pay this $70,000

is he's going to have substantially less than she does

thank you very much council

the case is submitted

we'll be right back
