This is case 2023-0205, state of New Hampshire versus Cody M. Frye.

Good morning, Dr. Rothstein. I understand you reserved two minutes.

One, Your Honor.

One minute.

I'm sorry.

Thank you. And may it please the court. My name is David Rothstein and I represent Cody Frye.

He is charged with the distribution of a drug with death resulting under RSA 318B26 subparagraph 9.

That offense carries with it the possibility of up to life in prison upon conviction.

So, in setting bail, the court applied the standard for bail under RSA 591-C instead of RSA 5972.

This is an appeal of the court's ruling that the state met the standard of detention.

I would ask the court to consider a few undisputed points in the record points that show the evidence here was not strong or clear nor convincing.

36 hours, 36 hours passed between the delivery, alleged delivery of a small quantity of offense on July 29th and J.S.'s death on July 31st.

Cody Frye was not implicated in any other delivery. J.S.'s parents may have even destroyed what was delivered on July 29th that same evening.

Even if they did not, based on the passage of time between the distribution on July 29th and the death on July 31st.

Do we know how much fentanyl was in the bag that was found next to Mr. Smith's body?

We don't.

How's that possible?

I don't know. You read the record, Your Honor. I believe the court even asked the question and the officer did not know.

There's the passage of time. There's also a significant here is J.S.'s severe pattern of addiction and history of addiction and his opportunity to have obtained drugs from other sources.

Based on all of these things, the state did not meet the standard for detention.

What about the text on July 30th from Smith to the dealer that indicated that the dirty girl was a beast?

What does that refer to? Is the dirty girl the fentanyl?

The dirty girl in the vernacular in the context of hearing would have been the fentanyl.

That's evidence that Smith consumed it the night before.

What's this?

That's evidence that Smith consumed it on the 29th.

Well, it's evidence that there's clearly evidence in the record that Smith consumed fentanyl on the night of the 29th because the testimony was that on that night, that same night,

his mom found him in a state of what she would recognize of having consumed fentanyl.

There is testimony in the record that there was some destruction of something, drugs or paraphernalia,

and that the mom stayed up with J.S. that night to make sure that he didn't consume any more drugs.

And you have that text the next day.

In the same text, does leaned on refer to just cocaine pretty?

Or does it?

I don't know, Your Honor. I mean, leaned on, and again, these terms, I mean, they are, I guess street terms, they were not clearly defined.

I believe the questions posed to the officer and he didn't, he gave his answers.

I would, in my looking at the plain language of leaned on, that would mean,

I'm out. I consumed it.

But the question is, did he consume pretty, or did he consume both fentanyl and cocaine?

I think that's the question. I think that's the question.

Do you have a position on that based on the record?

I think the state would argue that it was just the cocaine.

I, based on the record, am not so clear on that, but I think that's what the states are.

But pretty and dirty girl, two separate things. Are they not?

Pretty and dirty girl. When he ordered, there's earlier texts, when he was ordering the fentanyl,

ordering the drugs from the way things set up, just to play it out.

There's a person named Manuel Gomes.

Walter Peake Antolin contacted Manuel Gomes, apparently, to get at least the fentanyl portion, if not the other drugs.

There was a package that was obtained by, I believe, Gomes that were brought to,

these are all the allegations that were brought to my client, Cody Fry, who lives in Freiburg, right over the border.

There was testimony that there was some sort of a package brought, and that J.S. ordered from Peake Antolin.

He ordered a quantity, a small quantity of fentanyl, a small quantity of cocaine.

He ordered a dirty girl and pretty, I believe, were the distinguishing terms.

He also ordered some edibles, and he ordered, I think, a zip, which I believe is referred to as marijuana.

So there was some sort of a package that was delivered to my client to bring to Mr. Smith on July 29th.

There was no testimony, the detective was not clear on how these drugs were packaged.

And there was later indication that the zip was not included in the package, and that Peake Antolin owed Smith the zip.

So, yeah, there was a distinction between dirty girl and pretty.

My understanding is that distinction is that dirty girl is heroin slash fentanyl and pretty is cocaine.

So what's the evidence of your client's substance misuse? The degree of his addiction?

No, Joshua Smith, in other words, yes. The evidence in the record, Your Honor, is that it was severe and protracted.

There was testimony that 10 years before this that he had overdosed at a court appearance,

and that he had, according to his mom, he was well known to the Conway police,

that he had struggled with this addiction all the way through.

At the time of his death, and I asked the officer about this, there were a series of track marks on both arms

that the mom had attempted to bandage up.

He had overdosed, the police had been called, or the EMS had been called for an overdose on June 4th of 2022.

So he was in the grips of a significant struggle, and one of the points that I was making on the record

is that, you know, when you have someone, the more severe someone's addiction is, the more of the drug they need

in order to just stay, stay in tune, to be able to function, to be able to go to work.

And the combination of factors here, the passage of time, if you think about how long 36 hours is,

if you think about it from tonight, it's to 9.30 tomorrow morning, to 9.30 tomorrow night,

two nights of sleep, at least six meals, two full days of work.

This young man had, unfortunately, a very severe addiction, had a very small amount of drugs delivered to him,

a very, very long time to acquire more drugs.

I'm not saying that it's not possible for the state to go to trial and get a conviction here, but that's not the standard.

The standard here, what we're talking about, is we're talking about detention,

and we're talking about a detention that's very different than under 597.2 paragraph 4.

Under 597.2.4, the court is allowed to consider alternatives,

strict alternatives like electronic monitoring or pre-trial supervision if they would guard against danger.

The court is allowed to set conditions, like a curfew if things like that regard against danger.

The court is also allowed on 597.2 in considering danger and detention

to consider the personal characteristics of the defendant, the defendant's criminal record, the defendant's history.

Aren't these actual findings to which the trial court is of deference?

Well, under 597.2, they are, but the point I'm trying to make here is under 1C, none of that matters.

Under 1C, the only thing that the court considers is the quality of the evidence put forth,

and I understand the rationale for that, the rationale is that you have an offense that's an elevated offense.

You have an offense where the, as here, maximum penalty is life without parole.

So for that reason, the individual characteristics and the alternatives are not considered,

there is some trade-off, there is some trade-off, and the trade-off is you look at the quantity and quality of the evidence

and in Ferbill, the page 217 quoted in my memo, proof is that it means clear, strong evidence

which leads to this passionate conclusion that the offense has been committed as charged.

But on appeal, I didn't read the brief as suggesting anything other than 1C applies to this statute.

I am, I'm only trying to draw a distinction between the two and trying to...

You are what? You are arguing that only 1C, that 1C is the standard?

Well, I'm arguing that, and here's how I see things work.

Do you have a statute where the penalty is up to life? Yes.

If so, then 1C applies. Go under 1C.

If you meet the standard, the evidentiary standard for detention under 1C, then we're done.

The person is detained until trial. If you don't, then I see it's remanded.

And one of the two things happens on remand.

Either the state says, well, maybe we didn't meet 1C before, but we've got some new evidence.

We have evidence that I'm not saying this exists, but we have evidence that Cody Fry confessed.

Somebody heard him talking about how, you know, how much fentanyl he delivered, or something like that.

Maybe they can, with new evidence, maybe they would try to make another showing under 1C if this one didn't work.

In all likelihood, what would happen is, on remand, we would proceed under 597.2,

and we would go under that formulation, 597.2 being the standard bail statute,

and we would go under that formulation instead of under 1C.

But didn't the trial court already do that?

Well, the trial court, on appeal, all the trial court found is that made a finding under 597.2.4

that because a person is alleged to have brought a drug from Maine into New Hampshire,

that he is, per se, dangerous under 597.2.

I'm not understanding on remand what would be the legal basis to divert from 1C

if it's a crime punishable by other life in prison.

Well, I guess the other alternative would be that if you don't meet 1C, then the person is just released.

And it cannot be held at all.

I would submit that that's probably not the way the statute is intended to work.

I would submit, I mean, this is not a have.

I'm not arguing that he's, I'm not arguing that he's being unlawfully detained

such that if you find once he doesn't apply that he is released

that this court should issue an order of release.

The order would be one of remand.

I see.

And the other thing, Your Honor, just on your 597.2 question,

I would submit, and I argued in the memo,

that if this court found that 597.1C did not apply, which the trial court did,

I would still argue that that could change the trial court's 597.2 decision

because obviously 90% or more of what we argued about was 1C.

I just want to make sure that the court follows that.

I would, frankly, I'd like to be able to argue that if 1C doesn't apply

that this court releases him.

But I think that, I think that the rational conclusion would be

that if 1C doesn't apply, the court has to set bail

and the default position would be under 597.2.

And bail calculus under 597.2 would be a de novo hearing

where 597.1C would be off the table.

And I'm not, I don't know what the court would do.

Maybe the court would make another finding and go another route

to find that my clients should be $50,000 cash.

I mean, obviously I don't know that.

What I'm here saying is that the evidence in this case

was not sufficient under the standard to meet 1C.

I guess your point about dangerousness on 2A, or 3A,

597.2.3A is simply that interstate transport of drugs

however dangerous fentanyl is, is not sufficient to constitute dangerousness.

None of us are, none of us are pro-interstate transport of drugs.

But there is no, I mean, just in terms of reality

and what we know from everyday practice,

there are people who transport drugs from Massachusetts to New Hampshire

and they go under 597.2.

Many of them are released on bail from Vermont to New Hampshire.

This gets back to my earlier question under the setting of this case.

Right.

Should we reach that issue?

I do not believe the court,

I believe that this court should reach the 597.1C issue,

should rule that 597.1C was not met

and should remand four proceedings consistent with the order.

Now those proceedings could be that the state would say,

well, wait a second, all right, fine.

The Supreme Court found that on March 20th of 2023,

we did a hearing and we didn't meet 1C.

We've got some new evidence that we think is going to meet it

so we want to have, we want to present new evidence

or the state could say, all right,

they found that we didn't meet 1C, let's go back under 2.

And the state can argue, the state is free to make the argument

that the interstate transport alone is enough.

Frankly, if they did, I might be back up here arguing that it's not.

But I think it changes the dynamics significantly

if this court makes a finding that 1C wasn't met.

I think it changes the dynamics of the 597.2 hearing.

I just have one more factual question.

The night of July 29th, is the record clear

that the drugs were delivered at about 6 p.m.

and was after that that the victim's mother

discovered him in a overdose or near overdose state?

That is my clear understanding of the record.

And again, in terms of the record,

in the light most favorable state,

there is evidence on this record that my client

made a delivery to Mr. J.S.

that delivery was after 6 o'clock p.m.

My clear understanding is that the mom discovered J.S.

in a compromised state later that evening,

the inference being that he used the part of what was in that package.

But what we don't have is the amount delivered,

the amount left over.

We don't.

The amount consumed.

We don't.

I know you ordered two.

You and two grams.

Well, I mean, we know that it wasn't,

the officer didn't really reasonably believe

it was two kilos or two ounces.

Grams occurred to me during the hearing to ask.

I don't know, but that's the state of the record.

Thank you.

Thank you, Rustin.

You reserve one minute.

Thank you.

Attorney Baldritch.

Welcome.

May it please the court.

Robert Baldritch for the state.

And I would just like to dive right into the defendant's argument

that the evidence case was not clear and convincing

because there was a 36-hour time gap between the delivery

and the discovery of the victim's body.

Not only is there no support that theory,

even after examining the victim's phone

and through interviews with his coworkers, neighbors,

gardener, and people who worked in nearby businesses,

that theory would have required the victim to have acted very

unusually based on what we know about his final hours.

If I may recount the relevant timeline, just briefly.

Delivery of the federal fraud occurred at 6 p.m. July 29th.

We know the victim used that night

because he suffered some kind of overdose.

And around noon the next day, July 30th,

the victim was Texas drug dealer Walter P. Antriman,

who's a public private associate about wanting to obtain cocaine.

Well, is this when he referenced the dirty girl was a beast?

Yes.

There are statements like, no, dirty girl is a beast.

What do you think that means?

That means that he, the reason we inferred

that he used some of the fentanyl,

that was caused his overdose,

maybe in conjunction with the cocaine,

perhaps by itself, and it was strong.

Because there's a copter's statement about it

and the text to do that included a probable cause statement like,

I wouldn't have gone easy had you not warned me.

But again, he's asking for more cocaine.

How do we know he's asking for more cocaine?

I'm looking at the text message right now.

The text is, I'm going to need.5 more

and then I think the next one is of the pretty,

if I'm recalling correctly.

Detective Guadrero, understanding based on just his experience,

was pretty referred to cocaine

and dirty was fentanyl or heroin fentanyl mixture.

And 25 is a lot different than two.

I believe it was.5.

Yeah.

But again.

So the track court heard this evidence,

made some factual findings that these terms

refer to fentanyl and cocaine.

Is that something that we can get behind?

Is that something that we owe deference to?

Yes.

Any factual finding,

as long as it's supported by reasonable inferences,

I'll just examine the actual written order

to make sure I'm not misrepresenting anything.

Yes.

The track court references the dirty as fentanyl.

So that's a factual finding that's out of deference to this court

and supported by the officer's testimony as well.

But,

knew the next day after the likely use of fentanyl.

Joss Smith is saying,

he's asking for more cocaine.

Does not say anything about wanting any more fentanyl

or needing any more or heroin.

So that would mean that if someone else did deliver the fentanyl,

Joss Smith,

that would mean he got it from someone other than his normal drug dealer.

Despite talking to his drug dealer that day

on the topic of attaining more drugs.

There's only really two realistic windows

of when Joss Smith could have used the fentanyl.

Out of the 29th,

and he suffered an operation that day,

in the night of the 30th, early morning hour of the 31st,

because we know he worked his shift at Cafe No Jet,

1 p.m. to approximately 10 p.m.

and he was seen hanging on the porch afterwards by a couple of people.

So what happens if you call the lab up

and you ask them to weigh the fentanyl that they found

next to Mr. Smith's body

and there's three ounces in that bag.

Does that indicate that he,

that the see it in,

had another transaction obtained drugs from another court?

That would certainly help to define his argument.

I guess the next inquiry would be

the big debut on what the two referred to.

Now we know the actual cost

and the detective realized that

based on the amount they asked for,

they were probably discussing grams or parts of grams.

I don't necessarily say if it's three ounces

that would disprove the state's theory, but...

It would certainly do damage to the strength of the state's case.

Great.

It would definitely...

probably more in the defendant's favor than the state's.

And the victim was with a number of other people

on the night of the 30th, wasn't he?

How do we know that somehow

the drugs didn't come from there?

We know he was with two people.

His friend Tim Gardner said

they hung out at the back porch of Cafe No Jet.

I think they had a beer and they played some video games.

Just a ritual.

Tim Gardner had a history of opioid use,

but there was no evidence he was actually a dealer.

I believe his testimony was

he's been trying to avoid people who are using drugs.

And there was another individual named Joe Roberts.

All the record reveals about Roberts

is that he lives above the Cafe No Jet.

And I think he also works there,

so that night he came home,

saw the victim on the porch,

and his relevance is it just helps

to please piece together the timeline.

I haven't heard anything or recall anything

and he's involved in the use of drugs,

let alone the sale of drugs.

And it's also important to note

that Pink Angeline delivers.

We know that from the record,

so even if he did somehow use up,

which I don't think is consistent with the record,

why is he not contacting

his normal source of fentanyl?

Because the police reviewed his text messages.

And the relationship between Pink Angeline and Joe Smith

goes back to 2019.

There was a purchase on June 4th

that they suspected with Pink Angeline

was the supplier,

because they reviewed the text messages of the victim.

If the text

refers to the text

where the victim says he leaned heavily

on the drug,

if that refers to cocaine,

what accounts for the bag of white power

discovered by his body?

I mean, if the argument is

exhausted, his supply of cocaine,

what are we to make

of the bag of white power?

Well, lean doesn't necessarily mean exhaust.

It just means he needs more

based on the context of he

going to take the.5 of the dirty.

So I don't think there's any

consistency with the fact

that he may not have gotten any cocaine.

But even if he did,

his source of fentanyl is Pink Angeline

via fry, or at least Pink Angeline.

So I don't think, even if you want to say

there's evidence that perhaps another cocaine delivery,

which we know he's asking for cocaine,

but we don't actually have any proof

that it actually arrived.

I don't think that it's inconsistent

with finding that fry.

So it's possible there was another drug transaction

during that time?

Well, in the sense that we can't account

for, you know,

every second of the last day of his life,

but we do know.

But isn't that the point?

No, because the standard

is clear and convincing.

So we talk about

this hour of 36.

It's really 24, because his body was found

in the early morning.

And we know, in this common sense,

the victim that you saw was fentanyl.

And the time to get more is when he's speaking

to a drug dealer that afternoon.

She's commenting on the dirty

burnt to it as a beast.

And the fact there's also context of, you know,

thanking Pink Angeline

for warring how strong it was.

He did not use all of it

because he had been warring how strong it was.

And yet some of it was

whatever he did take on the 29th

was strong enough to

have him overdose, but not die.

Yes.

So it's reasonably certain that

whatever portion of a fentanyl

arrived, that fentanyl caused

his death just in the same manner

that it caused his first overdose

on the morning of the 30th.

Well, I'd say it's more than reasonable.

There's all the available evidence

points of that direction.

And this is not a situation when a state

basically is using its own superficial

investigation against the defendant.

We looked through the victim's own

and they interviewed people he worked

with, friends, some neighbors,

people who worked at businesses

nearby his place.

There's more than reasonable and certain

when all the evidence points that way

and all we're left with, well, maybe we can

maybe it's not impossible for that.

So the

cocaine and the fentanyl that was found

to the decedent's body, is that with the state lab

right now? Do you have that evidence?

I'm not sure

where the actual fentanyl is.

You can't introduce fentanyl's exhibit

just without a court order.

I'm just curious, does somebody weigh it?

Tell us how much they weigh it.

Yes, it's in the lab results. The officer's testimony

was, I know it wasn't a massive amount

but he couldn't get an estimate

and he said it was in the lab results.

I think about this case with the lead prosecutor

it appears that he had a family member

test positive for COVID.

So someone else had to step in

and do the actual questioning.

So that might have been a lab report

wasn't introduced.

You argue that even if we were to

vacate under 1C that

the court's ruling can be

sustained on the basis of section

2?

Yes, absolutely.

But it does seem like Mr. Rothstein

can read what the court did on

2.

I do not think it's a thin reading

because this is a case dealing with fentanyl

and that the defendant is knowing

and repeat participant in delivery of fentanyl.

It's a little poison.

It kills four more people than any other narcotics

in the state, any other narcotics

combined.

What about the argument that 1C

if we find

that the court's reliance on 1C

wasn't appropriate that that

it infected the court's thinking

so that it ought to be remanded

the court to fully reassess?

No, the appellate

review would be to review 1C

and then

if they agree to defend on that front

then just move on

597.2

the trial court explicitly found that they would hold

under a dangerous finding

under

597.2

and again

1C

knows the dealer pink antlin

and he's also been seen with the guy

Emmanuel Gomes who was the man who

arranged for this delivery to

pink antlin

and there's warning

that this is

this cause or nearly cause of

overdose which common sense

that any drug cause an overdose

so if you have true drug dealers warning each other

about these particular drugs

it's the inferences that's even stronger

and the victim was warned as well

he was

and um

there's been no explanation as to why they would

have these drugs delivered to Fry

if the expectation was he's not going to be the one

who's actually delivering them and getting on the community

and providing some kind of insulation

for the actual

people making the purchases

which seems to weigh enough

that he is dangerous, even more dangerous

because he's an integral part of actually delivering

this very deadly drug

are you aware of any

court that has that particular finding

that just bringing drugs

bringing fentanyl into

another state is the basis for

holding somebody on a dangerous finding

we're not having anything in the record

about a previous finding

the court does not have to have to create a per se

rule especially in this case when the evidence

that the people involved were aware

that it was uniquely dangerous

the defendant was arranged as kind of the

point person that had the drugs delivered to his house

and deliver them

and

there is a text message he sends

post delivery if he confirms

meeting with Fry

and pardon the language

but it's good stuff for real

yeah but he does not say good stuff

yes so that means he knows what he's dealing with

and review another statement

for that about stopping at another house

which supports

the court's conclusion that there was another delivery

even after Smith

and that

that this was not a one time

occurrence this is not somebody who's just

doing a thing for a friend

he's actually involved in this

I do not read Judge Corey's

written order suggesting that

because Fry's a manor that makes him more

dangerous I think it just shows he's willing

to travel

this is an impersonal business like

involvement in these transactions

and there's no other questions

the state is

willing to rest on his brief

I want to ask the court to affirm

the trial court's analysis on 5971C

and 5972

thank you

actually harkening back

to your observation about the

photograph

of the

I believe the photograph of the bathroom that I submit

which shows a bag of white powder

healthy looking bag of white powder

if we accept

the inference in the record that leaned on means

at least used a lot of the cocaine

so I don't have much left

and we look at that photo where there's a healthy bag

of white powder

that means there was another drug transaction

that this man participated in between July 29th

and 31st

saying that peak antelone is

my drug dealer's like saying Hannafer is

my supermarket

there's a lot of supermarkets out there

I might prefer to go to Hannafer

because people who need drugs

are going to find drugs at other places

there are other texts that indicate that

one thing that peak antelone wanted from Smith

was money

so it may be that peak antelone was

not the greatest source for more drugs

at that point

Cafe Noche all I'll say is that out on that

back porch there was testimony

the officer finally admitted

that Tim Gardner was not only a

long time opioid user but in the past

had middle drug deals himself

with Dr. Josh Smith

based on all these facts

that the proffer under one C

was not sufficient

and you could ask the court to reverse

thank you very much

case submitted

Court's adjournment
