This is case 2023, 0664, state of New Hampshire versus Christopher Stewart.

Morning, Attorney Swenson.

I understand you reserve one minute.

I do.

Good morning.

May it please the court.

Carl Swenson appearing for Christopher Stewart.

I hope to address two issues this morning.

First, the sufficiency of the evidence in this case.

And second, the compelling justification

it would take to pierce the patient therapist privilege.

So to begin with, the state had to prove, in this case, two elements.

Then Mr. Stewart threatened to commit a crime of violence

and that it was in reckless disregard of causing

an evacuation, serious public inconvenience, fear, or terror.

So what this court is considering de novo

is evidence that Stewart was aware his words would

be understood as a threat to mass shooting

and there was a risk they would instill fear, terror, in a public way.

So to do this, the state has to rely on circumstantial evidence

of what was in Stewart's mind, what he was aware of,

and consciously disregarding.

Disputed that he was aware that the statements

would be disclosed to other people?

Yes, I think it is a reasonable conclusion

that he anticipated that his words would

be shared amongst the mental health team that was treating him

and that he disclosed that within that privileged situation.

So what's the evidence that he was aware of the policy

and the exception to the policy regarding confidentiality?

The evidence was ambiguous because we

had a supervisor testify that it

was the practice of the mental health program to go over this.

But that neither he nor the other witness, McDonald,

were the ones who actually did go over the policy.

So there was this, I guess, circumstantial evidence

that because it was their policy to do so,

they must have done so in this situation

with Stewart individually.

I don't believe there was actual testimony

that either witness went over that policy with him.

But McDonald told him that she would report his statements.

What does that tell us, if anything?

Right, I think what that tells you,

especially in the context of their conversation,

is I'm going to have to report this to the other team members.

They're coming from a session he's just

had with his therapist that she accompanied him.

And she's saying these kinds of over-the-top rhetorical

questions, what's it going to take

committed by shooting, other sort of things

we're going to have to discuss as part of the treatment

team.

I think that is a reasonable conclusion,

given the context of all the text messages

and the context that she describes,

his words that they came in.

Does it matter that McDonald was more of a career counselor

and less of a mental health therapist?

No, I don't think it does for two reasons.

First of all, it wasn't an issue that was really

taken up below and argued by the party.

The judge did speculate at some point

at the close of evidence at the end of the case.

And if they had taken an analysis of the privilege,

it covers anybody who works under the supervision

of a person licensed under the statute.

And clearly a social worker is licensed under the statute.

Ventola testified as the supervisor,

was a licensed social worker, and McDonald

was working under him.

Did the state see that at trial?

Yes, they did.

And certainly when the court made its decision

to pierce the privilege and issue that order,

both parties had acknowledged that this

was a privilege communication.

That was not taken up.

And I don't think this court should even reach it.

And even if it did, they would find it was privileged.

So I think it is important to take a close look

at the actual context of those words as they came in.

And it was a rhetorical question.

I think that's a reasonable conclusion

to draw, and we're firmly under the test

for circumstantial evidence, which

requires the evidence to include all reasonable conclusions

except guilt.

And this was literally a rhetorical question.

What's it going to take me doing a mass shooting

to get my point across?

And then I'm going to have to report that

from the team member.

And then a clarification from Mr. Stewart.

It was a figure of speech.

It was a quick comment.

And when there was some mention of reporting it,

he clarified it was a figure of speech.

And then there's a whole series of text messages.

And if you look at the context, and it's in the appendix,

it was a submitted exhibit at trial,

you see that the texts are a lot of comments

about him being expelled from class at the campus.

And going to jail.

And there's the comment.

It's the right thing to do, even if it means going to jail.

If you look at the context of those text messages,

it's all about, I'm going to go there and protest my expulsion.

I'm upset about this.

It's not fair.

It's not just.

It's the right thing to do for me to go there and stick up for.

Even though he's been warned, look, if you go back,

they're going to remove you.

This could be trespassing.

That's a reasonable interpretation

of the text about if it means going to jail

and his comments to his counselor.

So moving on to the second point I wanted to address today.

And that's about the compelling interest

or compelling justification that's required here.

And what the court has to weigh against each other

is the value of convicting Stewart for what he said,

trial year after the actual statements,

against the value of the therapist's patient

confidentiality.

And the purpose that our court has time and time again espoused

as being fundamental to that relationship

and to the mental health of the community.

And under 330 A32, Privileged Communications,

the only provision that would allow

for a piercing of that privilege is a court order.

And a court order requires two things,

that there's no other available source

for the targeted information.

And again, that was established below and taken for granted

at that point by both sides.

So really the only issue is the compelling interest

or justification and whether that out

is the public interest that the privilege serves.

And there's a lot of instances in this court explaining

just how important that privilege is,

that confidentiality between therapist and patient.

There are very few examples of piercing this privilege.

I think that the strongest line of cases

that talks about piercing the patient therapist's privilege

is Gagney, Gerard, and Zirella.

Obviously, this court has dealt with most recently.

And I think what Zirella does is it reaffirms,

if not raises the bar for the importance

of that confidentiality and the significance of that interest

in maintaining patient therapist confidentiality

and how difficult it is and should be to pierce that privilege.

And there, the compelling justification

would only be reached if there was a reason

to believe, a reasonable possibility,

that this privilege information could alter

the verdict in the criminal case,

could result in a not guilty verdict.

And that is a justification for piercing

the privilege between a therapist and a victim

and their confidential statements.

That's not the level we're at in this case.

And I think this court in NRCT took a very close look

into what a compelling justification would be.

And time and time again, they have safeguarded this privilege

and said and waited for the legislature

to see fit to carve out an exception to the privilege.

And the legislature has, in some cases,

but certainly this court has been loath to go there

without some action from the legislature.

What this case illustrates is the value

of the therapist's patient privilege.

In this case, it illustrates how it enhanced the safety

of the public and also enhanced the strength and value

of the patient therapist's purpose,

the mental health of our citizens.

Because of the privilege, Stewart was

able to openly communicate with his trusted mental health

team.

He was able to speak out openly and vent

about his frustrations to his team members.

And because of that trust, the information

was divulged, an alternative means,

not at a criminal trial subsequent to that,

but when his therapist or mental health team member

believed that it was necessary to prevent imminent harm.

And that is a very different process and position

or stage in breaching this confidentiality.

So a robust therapist's patient relationship

and the confidentiality is the basis for the trust,

for that relationship.

And without that, our community is more dangerous.

I see that my yellow light is on,

so I will reserve the remainder of my time.

Thank you.

Attorney Gagnier.

Your Honors, may it please the court, Sam Gagnier,

for the State of New Hampshire.

I am going to give my presentation in the order

that Defense Council did, so I will also

bring, excuse me, begin with sufficiency,

addressing a few points that were just made,

making a few of my own, and then move into privilege.

But I welcome this court's questions on any of your time.

Do you agree that the state's evidence was circumstantial?

The evidence of recklessness, Your Honor,

the mental state.

Yeah, we don't have, I think as this court has mentioned,

almost always, evidence of mens rea is, excuse me,

circumstantial.

There are some cases in which the defendant even testifies.

And even in those cases, sometimes the evidence

has been found to be circumstantial.

So the evidence of recklessness in this case

is circumstantial, but there's a lot of it.

And certainly, it can be rationally concluded

on this record that the defendant recklessly

disregarded the risk that he would cause serious public

inconvenience, evacuation of a building, fear, or safety

throughout the public.

So is there any relevance to the fact

that he possessed a firearm and ammunition in his apartment?

Yes, Your Honor, I think those are circumstances that

speak to reckless disregard.

And I think this court certainly

can consider those circumstances.

What about the issue that the threat was never communicated

to the public, per se?

I don't think that makes any difference, Your Honor.

The defendant was told that the statement

would have to be reported.

There is evidence, as Justice Dunn had been discussed,

with Attorney Swenson.

There is evidence that every client

is told about confidentiality in the bounds of it.

And although there is no evidence

that Ventola or McDonald told this defendant about it,

drawing inferences in favor of the state

says you have to draw the inference that he was told,

just like all of their clients were told.

So he knew that this was going to go to the police

or to the target, because there are three ways that the.

So it's not a rational conclusion

that when he said that the focus was on the treatment

team, that the statement was going to be reported

to the treatment team?

No, Your Honor.

That is not a rational conclusion.

There is no reason that that is the team

that Jessica McDonald would have reported it to,

especially in light of the fact that the defendant was

told about confidentiality in the bounds of it,

and that the bounds of it are when you make a threat that

could harm others, harm the public, harm the safety,

threaten the safety of others, those

will be reported to neutralize that threat.

There's no reason for the defendant

to believe that in a circumstance where safety was

the concern that they were just

going to discuss it privately amongst the treatment team

so as to figure out what next steps are

while this threat just lingered out there.

You can see that McDonald is covered by the privilege?

No, Your Honor.

The state's position is that McDonald certainly

is not covered by the privilege.

And while the state did mistakenly acquiesce to that,

throughout this is not the case.

We had a similar discussion in the court myself.

State acquiesced?

That's the, I think, the most charitable word

I can give in that they continue to call her a therapist.

And everybody seems to believe she was a therapist right

until the end of trial when the court said, wait a minute,

I'm picking up on something.

Indeed, the facts of the trial court's pretrial order

refers to her as a therapist, says

that these statements were made in the context of treatment.

It's unclear to me how the prosecutor and the defense

were laboring under that assumption.

But again, this is not Rodriguez, the conversation

that I had with the court where the state conceded

something in the trial court, assumed it without deciding it

because of that concession.

Here, the trial court was, certainly

I have no reason to say intentionally.

I don't believe anybody was intentionally

misrepresenting this.

But everybody's laboring under a misrepresentation.

And at the end, the trial court picked up on it

and does not say, OK, then I'll

assume that without deciding it.

She says, wait a minute, I want to put something

on the record just in case there's ever an appeal

so that this court could review it.

She did it specifically for that purpose.

To put on the record, another reason

that supports her pre-trial ruling,

and that was that Jessica McDonald is not a therapist

and she's not covered by the statute.

And she did not have to go through the intensive analysis

of, well, are you supervised by somebody under 330A?

Because even if we were to, Ventola is certainly

less than under 330A.

The state would first argue that he does not

supervise Jessica McDonald for any purpose that

requires a license under 330A.

Ventola testified that he is the community program supervisor

and he supervises things like a team of managers who

oversee therapists, and he supervises

what he called adjunct services.

So he didn't supervise McDonald?

Is that what you're saying?

He was layers up.

So when McDonald, Ari and above him,

above Ari was Ventola.

So below Ventola you have therapists,

you have physical health services he testified to,

you have adjunct services, which

include the housing, the education facilitators.

So while Ventola likely used his credentials,

his license under 330A, to be able to supervise therapists

that he supervised, he did not need that license

to supervise the adjunct services.

But even if he did, even if this court

said no, she was supervised by Ventola,

McDonald was still not covered by the privilege

because the statute says that those communications

with somebody who is supervised by somebody who

was licensed under 330A, those are only privileged

when the communications are necessary and customary

for diagnosis and treatment.

This text message conversation does not

show somebody trying to obtain a diagnosis or treatment.

It shows somebody who is frustrated

that their financing fell through with their education,

which is exactly what Jessica McDonald was tasked to help

the defendant with.

The trial court didn't consider any of this, right?

The trial court did not specifically

go through the analysis that I just did,

but the trial court did put on the record

that she is, as a basis for her ruling,

she is concluding that Jessica McDonald is not a therapist

and is not covered by this privilege.

And because she considered that, we can consider it up here.

And our preservation rules aren't violated.

Preservation rules are not violated

because the preservation rules is really in fairness

to the court because it really cannot be said

if this court is reviewing a ruling through the lens

of an argument that the trial court did not hear,

it cannot fairly be said that the trial court's ruling

being reviewed because the trial court never even

got the chance to consider the argument this court's

considering.

That's the real purpose of the preservation rules.

So while this argument was somehow

lost on all of the parties, it was not lost on the trial court.

The trial court considered it and decided it

and it's preserved for this court's review as well.

Wasn't McDonald part of the treatment team?

Your Honor, that was asserted in the defendant's motion

and the trial court seems to adopt it

in its factual findings.

And if we were part of the services team,

I would hesitate to use the word treatment.

The issue was part of the team that

helped certainly the defendant with his work

through his mental health issues, but also helped him facilitate

living out in the community with those issues.

One of them is actually diagnosis, treatment,

the sort of stuff that is covered by the privilege.

The other is facilitation assistance

to help somebody live out in the community.

While that is certainly an integral part

of what Lakes Regional Mental Health

Services, excuse me, Lakes Regional Mental Health Center

provides, it is not the therapy component which

would be covered by RS33832.

Well, let's assume the privilege.

Is there any evidence that the state

had an essential need for the admission of this statement?

Sure, Your Honor.

So assuming the privilege, as attorney's points out,

there is no dispute that there is no alternative source

for this information.

The compelling justification is that this

is the basis of the entire charge.

If the state can't get this communication,

they cannot prosecute this case.

This court held that a compelling justification,

I believe the deskless case, would

it be that the information will help

to establish an element of a felony offense?

In this case, without the privilege communication,

there is no basis for the charge at all.

It is.

Well, couldn't the trial court have declared that the provider,

let's just say, could not testify?

And then that would become an unavailable witness

and here say, could be admissible?

Why would you concede that that's

the only source of the information?

Because the police had written report that documented the call.

Your Honor, the defense has conceded

that that was the only available source of the information

and the state does not dispute it.

But isn't that always true, privilege communications?

You could have a client communicate to a lawyer

that the client committed a crime

and there's no other evidence that the client committed

the crime.

Are we saying that in that circumstance,

the lawyer can be made to testify to what the client said?

Certainly not, Your Honor.

This case is different from that case

because this is forward-looking.

A crime I am going to commit.

And in that circumstance, the lawyer

could disclose as well if they believed

that there was a reason to believe

that the client was going to commit substantial bodily harm

or death or significant injury to property

in that circumstance.

Certainly backward-looking, no, the attorney could not

disclose that.

And if this were covered by the privilege

and it were backward-looking, 330A35 would not

have kicked in for a duty to warn.

Bernie Swenson referred to our cases

interpreting the privilege.

And I think it's fair characterization

that we've interpreted fairly strictly.

And here you're asking for us to adopt new exception.

It's not in this statute.

How do you square that with our recent cases, state

versus Doyle, for instance?

Sure, Your Honor.

So first, I would agree that this court has been clear,

as other courts are, that privileges

are to be strictly construed.

And before I turn directly to Your Honor's question,

I would suggest that as a very strong basis for not

going to an analysis that makes this somehow applied

to Jessica McDonald in circumstances like this,

because that causes the privilege to sprawl out.

But the way that I square that with this dangerous patient

exception is through that statutory hook

of that this privilege is placed on the same basis

as the privilege provided by law between attorney and client.

And as we just discussed with Justice Gould

in this circumstance, an attorney could disclose

that forward-looking threat.

So it stands to reason that if this privilege is

on the same basis that a therapist could disclose

that forward-looking threat in these narrow circumstances

where this dangerous patient exception is met.

And I think the court will find that the rationale

for this exception is sound if it compares the reasoning

of the 6th, 8th, and 9th circuits.

And then I would point the court specifically

to the 5th circuit.

I apologize for not having case names at the top of my head.

But the 5th circuit has a very persuasive analysis

as to why the 6th, 8th, and 9th circuits are off base

and engaged in a miscalculation.

In summary, the 6th, 8th, and 9th circuits

hold that there is only a marginal connection

between the disclosure itself and the later trial testimony.

Ultimately, they conclude that the benefit of having

this testimony at a criminal trial

does not outweigh the damage that

is done to the aura of competence and the privilege nature

that surrounds the therapeutic relationship.

As the 5th circuit explains, that is just a miscalculation

because the duty can be fulfilled

by passing that warning on to the police or the target.

And as the 5th circuit points out,

we would all be kidding ourselves

if we enclosed the idea that once the threat makes

it to the target, it's not going to go any further.

That person is very likely going to tell their family about it,

their friends, coworkers, and the repercussions

of that warning going out can start as soon as it goes out.

The person who made the statement

might suffer adverse employment consequences.

They might face a civil commitment proceeding.

And as the 5th circuit points out,

the therapist would be permitted to testify

in that civil commitment proceeding.

And while there is a distinction legally

between civil commitment and criminal incarceration,

as the 5th circuit put it, that's not

going to matter much to the fellow being committed.

What that person is going to see

is their therapist up on the stand giving testimony that

causes them to be incarcerated involuntarily.

That is going to damage the aura of trust and confidence

around that relationship, whether it's

at a civil proceeding or in a criminal proceeding.

Does piercing the privilege in this context

amount to a waiver of the privilege altogether?

So all communications with McDonald,

with the other treaters, providers at the facility,

is all of that now a fair game if the privilege is waived?

I'm sorry, is pierced?

Every communication he's had with anybody at the facility,

is that the question?

I haven't thought that through, Your Honor.

But I don't think so.

No, I don't understand that to waive his privilege broadly.

Indeed, quite the opposite.

I view this as not so much a waiver of the privilege,

but to the extent that I viewed it that way,

I would view it as a narrow sort of waiver.

But I hadn't really conceived of it that way

or thought of it too much that way.

And quickly, I just want to state that the major issue

with defense counsel's sufficiency argument

is that to reach any of the conclusions that he reaches,

you have to draw inferences in his favor.

This is not a rhetorical question to suggest

that you'd have to draw the inferences

in the defendant's favor.

And the idea that he wasn't aware of this policy,

again, you'd have to be drawing inferences

in the defendant's favor and under the standard

of sufficiency of the evidence that

have to be drawn in the state's favor.

Unless the court has any further questions,

the state would rest on its papers.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you, Attorney Gagnia.

Attorney Swenson.

I'm wondering if you could address the state's,

the argument that Attorney Gagnia just made

about the statute's reference

to the Attorney Client Privilege

and how that provides a pathway

for the dangerous patient exception

that they're seeking.

So what I hear the state arguing

is that it is a compelling justification,

sufficient to pierce the privilege,

just because they want to prosecute.

That is the compelling justification

to obtain a conviction in this context.

At this point of a criminal trial,

it is backward facing.

It is not talking about an imminent threat

in the future where now you have other statutes

that require a therapist

or even an attorney may disclose.

And that is to warn of an imminent danger.

It's very different from the position

that a trial court is in at a criminal proceeding

like Mr. Stewards was over a year afterwards

where the initial imminent danger has been addressed,

mitigated, treated,

and indeed the trial court essentially was time served.

So I think there's a very big difference

where a justification to prevent imminent harm

could be quite compelling.

That's not the case when we're talking about piercing

the privilege at a criminal trial.

And I just want to reiterate that the preservation issue,

the court did not undertake any significant analysis

of the relationship or the supervisor relationship

between Donald and Stuart.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Case submitted.
