This is case 2023-0550, state of New Hampshire, versus Tyrese Harris.

Good morning, attorney.

Good morning. May it please the court, Christopher Johnson, on behalf of Tyrese Harris.

I want to focus this morning on the two evidentiary rulings.

So my plan is first to address the question of the admissibility of the jail call statement,

and second to address the question of the exclusion of the statement in the police station.

I'm happy to take the court's questions.

Beginning with the jail call, this is a Rule 403 analysis.

So one begins with the value.

Here it was low if offered as it was as a reliable report of Harris's actual mental state a month earlier.

I think of probative value in this context as a function of two factors.

So one of these factors is the nature of the event he's talking about, the shooting.

And the other factor is the circumstances of Harris's life at the moment he's making the statement.

So when you look first at the nature of the event he's describing, it was a shocking, utterly unforeseen,

violent confrontation with a total stranger.

His mental state, whatever it was, arose and subsided in a flash in seconds.

The second factor is so the circumstances in which he's speaking about that moment 34 days later.

He was in a moment of intense frustration and emotion.

He felt disrespected by various people in the system.

So he's not speaking in a spirit of calm reflection.

The state argues an appeal that his circumstances, those circumstances when he spoke,

are not relevant to the probative value of the words he said.

And that's, I disagree, a speaker's mood and emotional state is highly relevant to the sincerity

and reliability of the things they say.

We all have the experience.

Well, doesn't that don't you consider the entire context of the conversation with the mother?

I mean, he was talking about being spit upon.

Isn't that an indication of accurate reflection as to what actually occurred?

So the context of the statement, the jail called, the statement to his mother,

was that he had just learned that he'd been denied bail after a contested Fergal hearing.

He had expressed frustration that another inmate in the jail had stolen his pin

and so drained his phone account of money and he felt disrespected or unattended to by his lawyers.

So that is the context around this moment when a jury could find, he's speaking,

knowing that context, a jury could find, this is sort of bravado.

He's sort of displacing this feeling of disrespect onto the event that has led to him being jailed.

They don't have to find that.

I get that there's different interpretations, but that context puts a different picture on it.

The prejudice is when the jury doesn't know that context, the probative value of his statement to his mother

will be artificially elevated.

It will seem more probative than it is because they think he's sort of making an admission to his mother

that is not motivated by anything other than the truth.

And so that's the problem.

That's the unfair prejudice if you don't hear the context.

The unfair prejudice if you do hear the context is that we find out that a judge has made a discretionary decision

to incarcerate him pretrial.

And that implies that that, as is in fact true, that that judge made a finding that he's guilty

because that's what the inquiry at a Fergal hearing is.

So a jury, the danger is a jury will be influenced by that.

So what is sort of the contours of the context we're supposed to consider and what cases guide us in that inquiry?

Well, I think this is not a sort of an unprecedented kind of 403 analysis because you can look at it as

what is the probative value of the statement the state is offering.

If you don't know the context in which he's speaking, as I've said, the probative value will seem higher.

It will seem like he's confessing to his mom what really happened at the shooting.

That's powerful. That's what the state used it for.

But if you knew the background of what was happening to him within minutes or that day that he's having this jail phone conversation,

the jury could say this is a young man who is sort of displacing, feeling these powerful feelings,

a deep disappointment that he's going to be incarcerated for the rest of the pretrial period, that he had hoped not to be.

And he's displacing that and this cocktail of disrespect that he feels backwards on to the event that he's speaking about.

But isn't his reference to being sped upon a reference to the exact facts of the charge?

Right. Right. And so that's the state's theory, is that Harris fired the shot not because he was afraid of D.C.,

but because he felt he was angered by the disrespect inherent in being sped upon.

Again, and so maybe to make my point more clear, if the frustration Harris was feeling in this moment at the jail

were not about disrespect, but it was like he's just annoyed by the delay in processing his case,

I wouldn't have this argument because that sort of kind of frustration isn't going to translate into sort of

psychologically translating that disrespect to the event.

If you're frustrated about something, the delay, that's not going to happen.

So it's a very narrow sort of unique situation.

This maybe gets me to the opening that door is the second piece of evidence that we're challenging that the court aired it and missing.

And so here is a statement where Harris said to the police several hours after the shooting that the reason for it was fear of D.C.

So it's a different account, a different explanation of why he fired the shot.

I think I want to begin here by making a point about a distinction between the law governing opening the door

and the law governing the doctrine of completeness.

The doctrine of completeness applies when within a single conversation there's a claim that there's a misimpression about the totality of what the speaker said,

you know, the defendant said in that conversation.

And that's typically one conversation.

And that's typically one conversation.

And so that's not what we're arguing.

Opening the door I think is more broad and it would apply when there's a misimpression not about a single conversation,

but about a defendant's sort of explanation across time about an event.

And that's what we have here.

The state has packaged this statement to his mother with the statement he made in the car to Morales about Spitt together to sort of present

sort of the idea that Harris was consistent across time and across the his interlocutor in his explanation for why he fired the shot.

So it was to Morales moments after and to his mom a month later he says the same thing.

And so when that's the state's position and in that closing argument they brought those together,

the statement to the police would rebut the misimpression because they're making a point about multiple conversations.

So the defense is asking to add in a third conversation that was in between those two where he gives a different statement,

a different explanation for why he fired the shot.

So we have these two errors are presented as alternative arguments.

Error in the admission of the jail call and error in exclusion of the police statement.

The state has not argued harmless error.

And so if the court finds error as to either of them, reversal would be required.

Court has questions.

That was what I had to add.

Do you want to address your sufficiency of the evidence?

Sure.

So very briefly.

So this is sufficiency of the evidence with respect to falsifying physical evidence.

The core point here is that the states, the evidence, these sort of undisputed evidence shows that the state failed to find the gun when and where they looked for it.

And they never asked Harris what happened to the gun?

Well, it's not clear.

They didn't put in any evidence of what he might have said to the police.

So the evidence before the jury, as far as the jury knows, they didn't ask him.

As far as I know, they didn't ask.

Maybe they did.

But in any event, the evidence before the jury, there's no statement from Harris about it.

The evidence showed, you know, incontestably that they searched his house before he got back there.

And they didn't find the gun then.

But he hadn't gotten back there yet.

And so the crucial point is that the state hadn't excluded the possibility that he did the very natural thing,

bringing the gun back to his house with him and leaving it there.

And Morales never testified about what happened to the gun?

Morales didn't testify about where the gun was.

I mean, the people that pursued Harris didn't see him throw it out the window.

So there's this video of him, the convent video shows him going into an apartment.

He's carrying a big basket.

You don't see the gun.

But he never goes back to his car.

The state's position seems to be that he's guilty because he didn't sort of take the affirmative step of turning himself, turning it in.

And I don't think the court has ever sustained a falsifying physical evidence conviction on that.

They don't have to find it, but they have to prove he did something, for lack of a better word, unnatural with it, or unexpected with it.

Whereas here, for all we know, he brought it home and left it there.

Thank you.

Thank you, Attorney Johnson. You reserve one minute?

Yes.

Good morning, Your Honours.

And may it please the court, Adriana Makula, for the State of New Hampshire.

The call in this case that was admitted to the jury was properly admitted.

It was highly probative of arguably one of the only facts of consequence in the case, which was the defendant's intent.

And that's because the defendant raised self-defense as a defense, meaning he essentially admitted to all the other elements of the two homicide charges, except for that mental state.

Whether he acted in self-defense or not, or whether he reasonably believed that there was fear of deadly force that would be imminently used against him.

This call, 34 days after the assault, after the murder, was highly probative of his mental state at the time, because he's talking to his mother.

Probably a trusted individual in his life, or at least the jury could infer that, about what happened in those seconds at the car.

So he admitted to committing the shooting.

He did.

So what motive does he have then to falsify evidence, or hide the gun, or destroy the gun?

So if we're talking about sufficiency of the evidence for falsifying, in that instance, Your Honor, the state's theory of the case was that he did not act in self-defense.

That he did feel disrespected in those seconds.

And that's why he shot the victim the way he did point-blank in the face.

And that's why he fled the scene.

That's why he changed his clothes.

That's why he left his car at his friend's apartment for days, it seems.

At least that's what the surveillance video certainly showed the jury.

And the gun was never located.

The jury didn't hear any of the defendant's interview with the police, but they did hear that the police, while the defendant was fleeing, searched the defendant's apartment and didn't find the gun.

Which makes sense with Morales' testimony, because she testified that he keeps the gun in his car.

They did find everything else that you would need for a gun, so the box, some ammunition, other things in his apartment that suggests he owns a firearm, but not the firearm itself.

So that's the state's evidence. They did not find the gun when they searched the apartment.

And that's the evidence that supports the conviction for falsifying evidence?

That's part of the evidence that supports it.

What's the other evidence?

The other evidence is looking at the facts of that day as a whole.

So his immediate flight from the scene, his decision to speed over 100 miles an hour away from the scene to conceal himself from the scene.

If this were self-defense, if he felt he did nothing wrong, he, like the other people who followed him, would have called 911 to report what happened.

He would have remained at the scene.

He flees the scene at over 100 miles an hour in the city of Manchester, not on a highway in the city of Manchester where the roads are 30 miles an hour.

He gets to his friend's apartment.

He goes inside with a laundry basket.

When they searched that apartment nine days later, they find that laundry basket with the shirt that he was wearing when he murdered the victim in that laundry basket.

They don't find the gun.

But they find the clothes that he tried to conceal.

They find the car that he left at his friend's apartment.

They search the car.

There's no gun inside the car, which is where he keeps the gun.

And you have Morales' testimony that after this shooting, they were running around not knowing what to do, trying to hide, essentially, trying to flee the scene and flee detection.

So all of that combined.

It is a circumstantial evidence case.

The state doesn't disagree.

But the state at trial excluded all other rational conclusions consistent with innocence based on all this other evidence, not just not finding the gun.

Well, isn't there a rational conclusion that he left the gun in his apartment after the police searched it?

It's possible that he did that, but...

The rational?

It is rational, but if his purpose in leaving the gun in his apartment after he knows the police are looking for him, after he knows that there's an investigation into the murder of the victim, if he puts it in the apartment and prevents the police from finding it, that's falsifying physical evidence.

He's doing something with the gun concealing.

It doesn't have to be unnatural or unexpected the way defense has claimed.

It just has to be he prevents the gun from being found by police.

He's concealed it in his apartment.

Well, what if he lawfully put it in a safe in his apartment after the police search?

Would that be falsifying physical evidence?

It would be in this case because if he knows the police are looking for that item and he prevents the police from finding it, it doesn't matter if he's lawfully storing it.

The police are looking for it.

What could he have done?

I mean, it seems like you're saying he should have just turned it into the police.

Is there anything else short of turning it into the police that he could have done?

It's hard to say without knowing the facts surrounding his decision to tell the police about the gun or not, but in this case, based on the evidence that was presented, the fact that he knew the police were looking for him,

I will be honest, I can't remember if the jury learned at all that there was an interview with the defendant, but they certainly knew that he'd been arrested by the police at some point.

But if after he knows the police are looking for him and believe he's committed a crime and his decision to not provide them the gun, that evidence alone is proof of his mental state to prevent the police from finding a gun that he now knows they're looking for, regardless of where he's keeping it.

What if he just put it on his kitchen table?

Again, if he knows the police are looking for it and his purpose in leaving it in his apartment, which he knows they need a warrant to search if he doesn't allow them inside, he's purposely concealing it from the police.

That's falsifying physical evidence.

So under that theory, anytime a defendant didn't turn over a piece of evidence under that definition, it would be falsifying physical evidence.

It could be, it would depend on what proof or evidence the state has of the defendant's mental state.

The purposeful piece of this statute I think is what prevents the state from charging anyone and everyone who doesn't bring any little thing that may have significance in an investigation to the police.

It's the purposeful mens rea.

If this defendant did not know, the police were looking for him, his car, his gun, his clothes in this murder investigation and he put the gun on his kitchen table and then learned later the police were looking for the gun and he says,

oh, here it is, he may not have been charged with falsifying physical evidence or if he was, he may not have been convicted.

But that's not what the evidence was in this case.

The evidence in this case is he shot a man who then fell backwards and bled instantly, which he presumably saw.

He then flees the scene at over 100 miles an hour, changes his clothes, prevents his car, hides his car because he doesn't park it at his house and doesn't tell anybody about the gun.

Presumably because none of the witnesses who knew him testified a trial that they knew where the gun was and the gun was not admitted as an exhibit at trial.

So based on the facts of this case, the state, there was sufficient evidence in this case to prove that he falsified physical evidence.

To get back to the recorded jail call in this case, it was highly probative of the defendant's mental state and it did not open the door to the defendant's police interview because this call, as it was, did not create any misleading advantage for the state as it was.

It was a statement that the defendant made to his mother that can come in under, as none here say.

It was certainly probative of his mental state at the time and it did relate to what Morales had said the defendant talked about in the moment of, moments following the shooting about this disrespect and the spit.

And so while the state was able to connect those two dots and create and be able to present a theory to the jury that the motivation for this crime was disrespect and not fear or self-defense, that alone does not make it misleading.

That makes it proof that the defendant did not act in self-defense.

And so that cannot be considered opening the door to getting in a police interview that's from a completely different point in time in a completely different setting and in a completely different context.

If there are no further questions on the call, I would like to talk briefly about the jury instruction, unless the court has questions about anything else.

Here, this jury instruction from Eddie N. was proper. Eddie N. is not dicta. This court had to decide the issue of whether this particular paragraph of 627-4, specifically paragraph 2, included within it this common law doctrine or this common law idea of self-defense, deadly force, being reasonably necessary.

Sorry.

What accounts for the dissonance between paragraph 1 and paragraph 2 on that issue?

Paragraph 1, I believe, is about non-deadly force.

Non-deadly force, but it's degree of force which he reasonably believes to be necessary. The legislature didn't include that in paragraph 2.

That's true. I hear that.

But this court in Eddie N. found that even though they did not include those explicit words, that idea has always been part of the use of deadly force in self-defense.

And this court cited cases back to 1873 that talked about this idea that if you're going to take a life in self-defense, it has to be reasonable and it has to be necessary.

And so just because the legislature did not include those specific words in paragraph 2 does not mean they did not know about them.

This court has held time and again, at least in three cases I cited in my brief, and probably more, that if the statute does not explicitly abrogate the common law,

then this court believes that the legislature knew about the common law's existence when it wrote the statute and its decision not to abrogate it explicitly means that it was including it in the statute.

But the legislature has amended the statute since Eddie N.

It has. And it has not added this language but it's not explicitly abrogated the common law either. And there was a case before Eddie N. I believe State v. Warren from 2002 where a similar issue arose

and the legislature did not amend the statute to include or exclude this reasonably necessary element of paragraph 2.

And I think if we look at the model jury instructions from 1985 as well on deadly force, they also not in the same, not in the paragraph that's in Eddie N,

but they also involve this idea of the amount of force you're using being reasonably necessary, that you have to reasonably believe that you're in danger of death or serious bodily injury.

So this idea of reasonably necessary has been in deadly self-defense for really forever, but certainly from recorded law and certainly from those jury instructions that were not amended by the 2010 draft ones

and so have been used probably across courts since 1985 and probably even before.

So the fact that it's not in the statute does not mean that it's not a concept that the jury needs to decide when they're deciding whether someone acted in self-defense.

And this court's decision in Eddie N. on that point is not dicta. Even though they noted that the legislature had amended the statute, the legislature has not amended this paragraph though.

And so Eddie N is the law of the land, essentially, and the defense has not asked this court to overturn Eddie N. It has just asked this court to consider Eddie N. dicta.

And that is not appropriate in this case given how important that was to the decision.

So if there are no further questions, I will rest on my briefs.

Thank you, Tony.

Thank you.

Tony Johnson, rebuttal.

Very briefly, two quick points.

On the evidence issue, I agree the evidence was important because the issue is hotly contested and that's why this is not harmless error.

But an unreliable item of evidence does not become more reliable because it's offered on an important issue.

And second, a quickly point on the jury instruction issue, the legislature has not amended the statute since this court's decision in Eddie N.

It amended it before this court's decision.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

The case is submitted.

The court invites counsel in appeal.
