Committee 019, John Doe versus the Department of Justice at all.

Good afternoon. I'm Brad Davis, the appellant in this sculpatory evidence schedule case. I do weigh in my uninterrupted time.

If I add 10 seconds to something that's caged up, is this clearly an issue of material factors to whether Doe lied during an internal investigation in 2013?

And yet you filed a motion for summary judgment.

I actually did file a motion for summary judgment.

I'm curious, how's that possible?

So I originally filed. The issue was the notice that are in this case indicated that the Belmont and Guilford Police Departments had placed Doe on the exculpatory evidence schedule in 2018.

So I began to discover and look for, okay, which department and what was the issue.

When discovering the interrogators, I sent to both agencies asking for any of the reports to the Department of Justice.

Both Belmont Police Department and Guilford Police Department indicated that they never requested Doe to be included in the EES.

At that time, the Guilford Police Department provided their personnel files where I saw 2013 internal investigation identified as investigation number 64.

There was no discipline as a result of that internal investigation.

So my motion for summary judgment was this is what the notice letter said.

Here's the discovery. Here's the sworn testimony that night in the department submitted to be included in the EES.

I then went into a raised your argument because this investigation was actually brought to the Laconia Circuit Court by County Attorney Go Branson, now Justice County,

for a court's termination of whether that contained any potentially exculpatory materials.

The court found concerns with the investigation in the term that there was no potentially exculpatory information.

So that was another argument on summary judgment and then also raised the due process argument.

So at that time, it was still a clearance to what is the conduct or misconduct that is causing Doe to be on the EES.

In the response to that is a cross motion for summary judgment by the Department of Justice, which they prevailed on.

The court's order is where the court finding that it investigates in 2013 investigation.

So I began to look at that a little more closer to reconsider, boiling it down to what we have in page 84 of the appendix to our brief.

Here's the question. I asked Doe what he first knew about this investigation.

So this is 2013. Doe really stumbled with the response and said, from the thing, making a rectangle with his hands and pointing towards my door, which is the department mailbox.

So we're referencing a formal letter that was an internal investigation.

So if you read the conclusion here before we get down this road, what happened to the two departments that are part of this action?

Did the trial court's order resolve the claims against them or did you not suit them?

I actually not suited the Belmont PD.

Nothing in the discovery showed that Belmont Police Department had ever reported anything at that time.

So being concerned about costing the town attorney's fees and continuing litigation, I didn't have anything further.

And so we actually not suited Belmont PD.

What about the other one?

The other PD we kept in because it became clear that it was the 2013 internal investigation by Milford that is really giving rise to the issue.

So is this an interlocutory appeal or is that department bound by our decision?

The department would be bound by the decision.

This case was decided on summary judgment.

There was no hearing on summary judgments. It essentially was decided on paper.

Really the question of are the material facts in dispute?

And it may need to be a remand back to the Superior Court to determine ultimately.

So would that look like to be hearing as to what your dose of response was to that question?

Is that something that's in dispute?

Yes.

Okay.

It is because getting back to the investigative report because this is all we have in the record is the conclusion was

essentially he says, don't lie to me during the interview before me was from my letter to him,

which is different than the finding of fact.

The previous one he asked specifically when he first knew about the investigation.

So I was raising that a complaint in an investigation.

Law enforcement are very, very different.

Lots of complaints come in.

That doesn't mean it's going to be a formal internal investigation.

So that's a material fact in dispute.

Which was it?

Was he asked when he knew about the investigation, which is what the report says?

Or was he asked when he was aware of the complaint, which is what the conclusion says?

There's a distinction there.

And so we have an investigation vote.

Do we have a sustained finding of any sort?

We don't.

We have the investigator who was also part of the government police department finding that go headlight on the particular nation for termination.

The file essentially goes cold at that point.

But you have a letter from the chief explaining the situation to the investigator.

I assume, right?

Yes.

And it doesn't seem it's inclined to discipline.

So at that point, is that a fair assessment?

That's possible.

We do know that there was no discipline.

And there's likely to be an argument saying, well, don't left the department.

Moved on to Belmont Police Department.

I believe it was almost a month after this investigation that there was just no action.

And quite frankly, I'm not sure how this material made it to the Department of Justice.

I don't have anything in discovery ultimately showing how it actually got there.

Is that material?

It probably isn't.

The investigation exists if they have it.

I use material for one of the new statute where it does indicate that officers being added to the EES after the enactment.

That it has to come from a law enforcement agency.

Then it'd be material.

But I guess the statute that says if the officers are already on the list at the time the statute was enacted in September of 21.

It's silent as to, does it have to come from law enforcement agency?

So I don't have an answer to that.

However, if it had to come from a law enforcement agency, then I would be arguing that, yes, it would be material as to how this information wound up at the Department of Justice.

Would it also be material as to what the Department of Justice did to investigate or are there process issues there?

Yes.

And talking to the due process issues, I understand that there's a good argument that the due process from 2013 is what the court would review.

I'm not so clear about that because here we have a notice in September 2021.

Best I can see in the record is when Doe ever showed up on the EES was February 1st, 2021 when County Attorney Livernois noticed him on the list and reached out to the Attorney General's office in a letter requesting that he be removed.

So the process problem is a formal notice in September 2021 referencing added in 2018.

There's nothing in discovery regardless of 2018.

So I'm not sure if that in fact was the date he was added, why it was so, you know, four years or five years or whatever after the 2013 investigation.

That just seems to be fundamental fairness.

Officer moves on, no discipline, never hears anything further.

And then suddenly seven, eight years later is told you're on the expulatory evidence schedule.

So the due process argument is whenever he got on the EES before 2021 he should have had notice.

Yes.

Yes.

No notice at all.

In fact, there's nothing I can find that Doe's ever disclosed to defense counsel after 2013 or even in 2018 where the letter says he was added that he was ever disclosed, you know, to defense attorney is being, you know, potentially that there's potentially a sculpatory information.

So there's a remand?

Where'd the remand go to?

Any general's office?

In this case, the remand would have to go back to the Superior Court.

Right.

The Superior Court says that your client didn't get due process.

The statute provides that the case should be remanded for another opportunity for due process.

Who's going to get your client that due process?

Is it the attorney general's office?

I would see that in the statute that there would be a separate proceeding.

I think if the Superior Court, well, correct me on that.

The statute does say that it actually is remanded back to the law enforcement agency for due process requirements.

That would be, again, the AG's office?

Probably would make the most sense, but the statute could also be referring to remanding it back to the Guilford Police Department, which would be, I don't know how effective that would be with the amount of folks that would have moved on because this is such a stale situation.

The argument is he didn't get due process when sometime before 2021 he was put on the list, so that would have been the law enforcement agency presumably Guilford that put him on the list.

Correct.

Yeah.

So that's where due process was owed at that moment in time.

Right.

Right.

And that's what I'm raising here.

If you look at 2013, yes, he was brief questioned by the lieutenant who was investigating it.

Doe had said, no, I don't need a union.

Had the discussion to answer the questions and really just kind of never heard anything again.

Moved on.

Never came up again as an issue of, hey, you're being disclosed under the EES or under the Lawry List to Defense Council, any of the proceedings.

Probably because when County Attorney Branson brought that to Judge Carroll, it seems like the parties treated that as being a final order, as being conclusive that the court ruled that there wasn't any potentially exculpatory information in Judge Carroll's order.

And probably relied on that moving forward.

But again, I don't know if it provided a discovery why in 2018 he was added to the list.

And like I said, the only reference to when he actually was on the list was on when a County Attorney Livernois saw in February 1st of 2021 that the name appeared and then actually was requesting that he be removed and referring back to the

ruling.

What's the report?

Page 84 of the appendix.

Was that available to you before you filed summary judgment?

It was made before I filed summary judgment, yes.

So didn't you have the burden of proving to the court either on your motion or response to the cross motion that there was no underlying conduct that would have placed this officer on the EES?

Well, I think raising it in the motion to reconsider I didn't fairly bring it to the court is another...

But it's your burden as the moving party to say there's no conduct here on summary judgment?

I kind of... I did that on summary judgment by saying neither the police department ever reported him, so before there couldn't have been any conduct that would place him on the exculpatory evidence schedule.

It's a little bit different than saying he never lied in the first place.

I want to specifically say, hey, here's what I did in the investigators report, here's a distinction between these two terms.

But I make sure I raise that with the court.

When I saw that the court was relying on it, we're basically finding that the investigator's conclusion was it.

I was focused more on nothing from these departments had reported him to be on the list, so therefore, you know, there's nothing that I have that says he would be on the list that there was any conduct like that.

Did you have the investigator's report when you found that motion?

I did, yes.

And so that's why I wanted the court, since that was overbooked to have the court look at that once again.

The court did fortunately take a look at that argument.

But again, no hearing.

That was denied and which brought us here on this appeal.

I still believe that the Reuters kind of applies, even though I understand that the representatives were different between the Laconia ruling and this particular case,

Department of Justice versus a county attorney, they're still representative of the state of New Hampshire.

But there's still two fundamental different questions, aren't they?

Whether your client's name should be on the EES list as opposed to whether or not his record should be disclosed in a fact-specific criminal prosecution.

And I believe that in that situation they were looking at that particular case in Laconia.

But it specifically refers to investigation 64.

And I think the conclusions of Judge Carroll, it's not in that particular case that it wasn't.

It was more that the judge called substantial dispute as to the basis for the finding of internal investigation 64 of the Guilford Police Department.

The information calls into question the finding.

So that sounds more than just in this particular case, maybe credibility wasn't as much of an issue because the officer just transported a defendant or something like that.

That seems to say that this investigation is flawed.

And the court can't conclude that there's any potentially...

Why would that bind another trial judge?

I think it's because the parties are in privity.

That is my argument.

The fact that apparently there are other disclosures made.

But it's essentially the same cause of action as we have here.

And I think the party is true though that is though it was a final judgment because it was never brought up again.

It seems like that that resolved the questions that the county attorney at the time had.

And ultimately there was no further disclosures after that.

So if there are no further questions, I'll leave my case submitted there.

Thank you.

Erin Davis.

Erin King.

May it please the court, Jessica King, on behalf of the New Hampshire Department of Justice.

It promises the last time you'll see me for a little bit.

One vote of the conduct is exculpatory.

The petitioner has exceeded this issue.

If the line happened, that is exculpatory.

So we're really focused on the due process piece here.

Under RSA 10513D, Roman II, D3.

A court may find that an officer did not receive out of due process in examining the underlying conduct.

And the court may then abandon the enforcement agency for further due process proceedings.

Here, petitioner is granted more than adequate due process in his underlying conduct.

And the court should uphold the Fire Court's decision.

How is that?

There was no hearing.

You didn't have a conversation with the chief.

You just resigned.

So you think that's sufficient?

Yes, because petitioner affirmatively resigned.

So he was granted an investigation.

He was granted a chance to participate in that investigation.

And then that investigation was forwarded to a chief who was able to make a determination on that investigation.

But we don't know what the chief's determination was.

Because the petitioner affirmatively took himself out of that process.

So if you look at the process that was granted in Ganford, it's very similar.

And this court has found that that process is sufficient to protect the reputational interests.

But this is different, because he was taken off the list and then apparently put back on the list.

And what process was there to get back on the list?

So that goes to the, there are two different due process pieces and three different dates.

So you have the 2013 date when he went on the list, the 28, I'm sorry, he committed the acts,

allegedly committed the acts, the 2018 date when he went on the list,

and the 2021 date when he was notified of his basement on the list.

The 2013 due process piece, and I kind of slightly get the answer.

The 2013 due process piece, that is, did that conduct happen?

We are looking at whether the conduct happened, the law enforcement agency is examining that,

and they're the ones making that decision.

That's why the court gets to remand it back to law enforcement agency for completion of that due process.

Did the conduct happen? That's the first due process piece.

The second due process piece, that's what's happening right now.

The legislature realized that this list was an informal list.

It was put together to start not in a very organized manner.

As we went along, we started to organize, we started to firm things up.

But people were adding to the list, yes, without notification.

But in 2020, one of the legislature's due process satisfied.

Didn't he have the notice, wasn't he entitled to notice and an opportunity be heard

if his name was added in 2018?

Yes, yes he was, but that due process is being satisfied now.

The legislature when they implemented RSA 10513D,

they implemented a process for which an officer can charge the placement on the list

prior to becoming public.

Prior to, this is three years after, or four years after,

how is due process satisfied in that situation?

He had no contemporary in his ability to challenge placement on the list in 2018.

Right.

Because he never had notice.

Right. And he didn't, given that he didn't have notice,

there's nothing the department can do to go back and say,

well, hey, he didn't have notice.

But what we can do is now, now under the procedures,

he was giving the question is what, under the constitution,

what protection is he provided at the time that his name goes back on the list in 2018?

Go ahead.

I'm not sure that he's entitled to that protection at that time

because there was no, there was, we don't have any case on it to say that

he's entitled to that due process at that time.

So your position is there's no case that establishes

that someone who's facing a deprivation like that

isn't entitled to notice an opportunity to be heard?

I know that he's entitled to, or that he's facing a deprivation at that point.

The point of deprivation is the release of the name to the public.

That's what impacts the reputational interest.

And so that, the deprivation takes place.

But that's not what Danford says.

I mean, get on the list is a deprivation.

He was on the list, off the list.

Now that he got back on the list,

I mean, prior to enactment of 105,

30, that's the point in time I'm focused on.

Yeah, and Danford says that the officer has an opportunity to challenge that placement.

It doesn't say that the officer has an opportunity to challenge a pre-placement,

but once the officer does learn of the...

He can challenge it if he knows about it.

That's the problem.

He didn't know about it until September of 2021.

And so when he knew about it, he challenged it, and now he's getting that process.

Hasn't he been prejudiced by the delay?

Now we're talking about something that's 11 years old.

I don't think he's been prejudiced by the delay.

We still have conduct, the investigation.

We have all of the discovery that has been gathered in this case.

I don't see any prejudices.

I don't see any allegations of prejudice in this case either.

Was there any process?

Well, there was a due process at DOJ when he went on the list.

What did they do?

I'm not aware of any due process that DOJ had when placing names on the list at that point.

But I do know that DOJ would receive these names from outside agencies.

Well, that seems to be a factual dispute.

What I wrote in my notes is Guilford and Bill on deny sending letters,

and DOJ says otherwise.

That's what my notes say.

Is that wrong?

I think that's a little bit.

I'm not sure how this officer got on the list.

The typical procedure is that somebody,

an employee law enforcement agency,

sends that information to the Department,

now to the Department of Justice,

before it was the killing attorneys.

But now it sends that information to the Department of Justice.

And the Department of Justice adds that name to the list

where there's a sustained finding of this conduct.

I can't find them.

I'm sorry.

There was sustained finding of this conduct?

Who sustained that finding?

That was prior to the implementation of 10513DA.

I apologize.

But it was the employee agency that would sustain that finding.

So I'm talking about in 2018.

I can't find the facts here right now.

But my memory was that actually the county attorney

said he wanted him off.

But somebody at DOJ made an affirmative decision

to put him on, even though the local agency

or police officers were saying no.

So it's confusing to me

if the county attorney is saying he shouldn't be on.

Somebody is saying, oh, no, no, no.

We're going to put him on.

And I think that's a point that it's good to have DOJ in this process

because the county attorney wasn't saying this factual piece wasn't sustained.

The county attorney wasn't saying this didn't happen.

What the county attorney was saying is, well, this isn't exculpatory.

And so DOJ has made the decision that, yes, it is exculpatory

and this officer is staying on the list.

And we don't know how the information got to DOJ.

I don't have that in front of me.

Is that material?

I don't get it as material.

I think officers' names, prior to the enactment of 10513D,

officers' names came onto this list in a variety of different ways.

Typically it would come from the employee agency,

but it was maintained county by county

and then at DOJ.

And so it had some places that kind of could have come from different areas.

And so what the legislature did when the enactment of 10513D is a formal list right now,

we're going to give you process to ensure that you are appropriately on this list.

So we're going to hold your name out of the public sphere.

We're going to allow you to file suit in Superior Court and have a neutral arbitrator decide

what if you had adequate due process in the conduct and if your conduct was exculpatory.

And so the legislature recognized that for the folks who are already on that EES,

there had to be something there because of the concerns that you raised Justice McDonald.

Will this officer have an opportunity to go before the misconduct committee under 106L after this process?

Or is that not available to him now?

That is a great question.

I don't know that the agencies are referring for misconduct that is this old.

He's no longer an officer. He's retired right now.

Yes.

The petitioner did receive adequate due process.

The petitioner is entitled to due process in establishing whether the underlying conduct

that generated displacement on the EES did enact her.

So I'm pulling from Duchain here, but Duchain says these officers have a weighty interest

in ensuring that their names are not placed on the list when there are no proper grounds for doing so.

And so we are really in this first piece of due process what the statute completes the remand for.

That is that piece.

Did they actually commit the conduct?

Once there's a determination that the officer did, there's no protection of a reputational interest.

There's no hiding from the public what you've done.

In fact, defendants have a right to know what officers have done.

In fact, I want to quickly switch to the Race-Judicata argument.

Can I just ask you, so should it factor into our analysis in any way that Judge Carroll made a ruling in 2014?

Yeah, which is going into the Race-Judicata argument.

I don't think that factors in at all.

That ruling was moved into the case before the circuit court.

The circuit court was looking at the evidence before it and even said in its decision it applies to this defendant.

They used the phrase this defendant.

And so all the factors that we're talking about with Race-Judicata, they do not apply.

You've got the parties are not the same.

The county attorney and the Department of Justice are not the same.

Petitioner was not a party.

Even this court has said the county attorney and the AG's office are not one and the same in Reed.

I understand not being bound that there's no privity, but what about, I mean, we can find it persuasive reasoning.

Sure.

Or as an example of somebody who, a judge who gave a careful consideration who decided it was not exculpatory.

Sure, yeah.

And this goes back to the exculpatory piece that I talked about in the two earlier cases.

But when a court is deciding if it's an exculpatory, in fact, they're using the cases in front of them.

They're using the facts and evidence to determine if that is going to be fatal to the defendant.

When we're talking about whether it's potentially exculpatory, that's a broader, more wide-sweeping, bigger net that we're casting.

It has to be because not everything is going to be exculpatory in all cases.

So what one judge might say is not exculpatory in an assault case might be highly exculpatory in a DWI case.

We just don't know about the facts in front of us.

And so that gets to the exculpatory piece.

Here I don't think that is a question because if what is underlying the investigation is true, then lying during the course of an official investigation is certainly exculpatory.

So do you see the difference between responding to when did you first learn about the investigation as opposed to when did you first learn about the client?

Is there a distinction there?

When you see the distinction, I think that it could be a distinction with that merit.

It's very clear that the investigator found that the employee lied.

And then the police officer did not challenge that.

He affirmatively chose to resign rather than trying to challenge that determination.

So he affirmatively gave up those rights and that was brought up on a motion to reconsider.

Judge Leonard decided that she was not going to consider that on the motion to reconsider and that is well in her discretion to do so.

Back to the issue of how he got on the list.

Was discovery served on DOJ?

Is this part of the summary judgment record in terms of discovering being served and whether DOJ responded as to how he got on the list?

Yes, discovery was served on DOJ.

I think that's why we got some of the letters from Associated Attorney General Strelzin and Senior Assistant Attorney General Jeff Ward.

So I think that's how the record came together.

But nothing in there about how he got on the list?

Not that I'm aware of.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.
