This is case 230023, Catherine R. Brady v. Lawrence P. Somsky, Chapter 13, trustee.

Good morning, Mr. Deming.

Good morning, Your Honors.

I understand you're dividing time with the intervener of the state.

I'm sorry, Your Honor.

Dividing time with the intervener.

Yes, I am. Seven minutes for myself, seven minutes for Mr. Stewart with the Attorney General's Office, and I'm retaining one more rebuttal.

Please proceed.

Your Honors, may it please, as I am here to represent the appellant Catherine R. Brady in this matter,

relative to the two questions certified to this court by the U.S. District Court for the District of New Hampshire,

having to do with the application and construction of the homestead exemption,

especially as it relates to the non-owning spouse of an occupying intact family.

Two words that are of significant interest, I suppose in this matter,

are ownership and interest, which appear in RSA 480.1.

And those two words are critical, I suppose, to understanding exactly what the general court meant in acting for 8.1.

But in truth, we need to look at the entire statutory scheme

in order to understand exactly the intent of the general court

and how this is understood today, how the statute has evolved since it was first enacted in 1851

to the present time, the most recent significant amendment and change to the statute which occurred in 1983.

If I get no chance to say anything else to the court today,

I would ask the court to go closely at the Robatai case, which is a case decided by Judge Wajling

in the Rockingham County Superior Court,

in which the bad court in construing the Maroon case decided by this court

found that a logical reading of the homestead exemption

exactly tracks for the appellant's position that we press here today.

And so if I get no other chance to say that, and in that case, she looked at it

as looking at the decision of the Maroon v. Deutsche Bank by this court in 1914

and assumed that a logical reading said that the non-owning spouse has a separate,

non-contingent vested homestead interest, and it exactly expresses the appellant's position here today.

It is not very often, I believe, that the Superior Court has ever had to address this issue.

That is the only one that I could find in which the Superior Court did address this issue.

The general perception of the general court, of the state courts, is indicated by Robatai.

And by homeowners across the state who have a vested interest in the protection of their home

and being divested of that protection is extremely critical in understanding

how the general court looks at this statute.

For instance, it's an RSA 529 colon 28.

The court clearly states that there are two exemptions.

Clearly it references the expectation that there are two exemptions.

$120,000 for the one spouse and another $120,000 totaling $240,000.

This is not a static statute.

There is one that's evolved over time, and it's been amended a number of times.

For instance, in 1961, requiring both spouses to sign.

Is there anything that indicates my time?

I just want to make sure that I don't overrun.

A yellow light.

Okay.

Great.

Okay, thank you.

In 1977, the amendment to the statute made specific that manufacturing housing did not allow,

they're not going to get an exemption.

And the general court did a complete about face in 1983,

recognizing the change in the use of manufactured housing as being the home of many persons

and saying that they do have an exemption.

Now when the general court introduced this language in 1983,

they didn't change the first sentence which says interest, that each person has an interest.

All they did was they indicated ownership relative to manufactured housing.

And the purpose of the statute was not to upset the apple cart of exemptions

as it was understood by the general court and by the public at large.

It was really to say, it was really almost an afterthought.

It was like, oh, it's a home.

Can you clarify, is it your position that although this case involves manufactured housing,

that that's, you're asking us to adopt a rule that would apply to any housing?

Yes, we believe it doesn't play any housing.

The, my brother trustee going to press upon this court that the ownership language,

again, the second sentence applies to all housing.

We're going, we take the position that the first sentence which says interest is a credit for the entire statute.

And the real reason for the, that language has only to do really with the general court's concern about the land

that lay under the manufactured housing and making sure that if you wanted to take an exemption there,

then you had to, you had to also own that land.

And so in this case, in fact, the underlying house at issue is not manufactured housing.

Correct.

It's stick and stones.

Well, we take the position that I, I mean, the question is, I suppose in the bank actually

court didn't really answer this clearly.

But the question is, I guess, whether the statute is ambiguous on its facts.

If we assert that it was not ambiguous, then the appellant reveals this matter.

Because she had sticks and stones housing and it's clearly only in the second sentence that it refers to ownership

of manufactured housing and ownership of the land.

But we don't believe that that's really what the intent of the general court was as we've indicated in our brief.

We believe that the manufactured housing that was incorporated in that second sentence was a special,

was a special concern of the general court.

And if it's, if it is ambiguous, I did extensive research in the state archives for the legislative history that we would look to.

And there is page 24 of our appendix highlighted information which states exactly how the general court expected the exemption to be applied relative to manufactured housing.

And it was the same as regular housing and that was the debtor gets their exemption and the spouse of any gets a like amount.

And then the creditor, if there's anything left over, gets what's left over.

And that's what, and that's what the general court intended to have occur.

So our position is we prevail either way.

If it's not ambiguous, she has sticks and stones.

But we think it is ambiguous.

We don't think it's clear.

And looking at the legislative history makes clear.

Your Honor.

Did you read the brief submitted by the council for trustee Eskenizer, the amicus brief?

Yes, I did.

And there's a different interpretation of legislative history there.

And what's your response to that?

My response is that that was the amicus brief for trustee Eskenizer focuses on the 19th century.

We're not in the 19th century today, Your Honor.

We're, this has evolved.

This statute has evolved through time.

For instance, in 61, when we're now suddenly spouses, both spouses of guidance of ownership have to release the homestead exemption.

480.3-A is amended to take away children in terms of being in the definition of the statute for the duration of the exemption.

Not the creation of the exemption, but for the duration of the exemption.

And how it says the spouse and they take the children out.

It's constantly evolved.

And the biggest evolution of all really was in 1983 because it was a complete substitute of the statutory language.

For the language that was there in 1977.

And I yield to the Attorney General.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Mary Stewart.

May it please the court.

I'm Mary Stewart.

I'm Assistant Attorney General of the State of New Hampshire.

And we have the State of New Hampshire.

The homestead statute clearly and unambiguously grants a homestead right to both the owner and the non-owning occupying spouse of the owner.

The use of the words homestead and his or her interest as a homestead indicates there are two methods to establish the homestead right.

One is the owner and one is the holder of an interest of the homestead.

The interest of the homestead is defined for the non-owning spouse in RSA 483-A.

The court ruled as much in the Maroon case 167, New Hampshire 220.

In that case, this court, the non-owning spouse effectively waived his homestead right by affidavit.

That holding is predicated and dependent on a finding that the non-owning spouse in fact had a homestead right to begin with.

The reading is also supported by the purpose of the statute to support the stability and shelter for debtors and their families.

The second sentence of 480 column was added as part of a larger amendment in 1983 regarding the treatment of mobile homes as real estate as a personal property.

The intent of the amendment was to expand the application of the homestead exemption to owners and spouses of mobile homes.

It is not uncommon for a manufactured home to be located on rented land.

The ownership language in the second sentence applies only to manufactured homes and attempts to address this bifurcation of ownership and clarify the circumstance and application of the exemption protections.

The release of the homestead right doesn't establish that it's still not contingent.

Wouldn't it be prudent to require the release of the spouse even if that interest is at that point in time contingent?

The provision of the statute that allows for release by the owning spouse and the non-owning spouse doesn't really establish whether the non-owning spouse's interest is contingent or not.

Well, we don't believe that the non-owning spouse's or the owning spouse's interest is contingent.

It's established clearly by 480 column one by the statute.

The homestead exemption is referred to in some case law as inchoate.

I think it's inchoate because its intent is to protect.

A homestead right cannot be transferred or assigned unless it has been fully established.

So if there's a foreclosure sale or a sheriff's sale and the amount of the exemption is determined, that determination can then be assigned.

But if I am a homeowner or a spouse of a homeowner, I can't transfer my interest as my homestead interest to another person.

No, but if we're transferring the property, if the owning spouse is transferring the property, the non-owning spouse is going to release their homestead interest.

Well, correct.

So it doesn't really establish the status of that non-owning spouse's interest as being actively in hand, if you will.

It could still be contingent, I guess, is where I'm struggling.

Just that part of the statute that seems to recognize the two interests doesn't really answer the question of whether it's excellent at this point in time for the non-owning spouse.

Well, it's our position that the statute creates the homestead exemption.

And that's how the courts have observed or applied that application of the statute.

And this court, I mean, whenever the issue of a homestead exemption arises in the court, there's no precursor to having the homestead exemption.

I mean, it exists.

The court assumes that it exists.

The history of the statutory language and application of homestead exemption supports the appellate and the state's position that the non-owning spouse of the owner holds a present vested non-contingent homestead right in his or her own, which is currently valued at $120,000.

So the answer to the first certified question should be yes.

The ownership of language at the 1983 amendment applies exclusively to manufactured housing, however, is not intended to limit the application of the homestead exemption as set forth in the first sentence.

So your position is that the first sentence, that's where we should confine our analysis because the second sentence doesn't really change anything.

Your Honor, in this particular case, I think that you could answer the first certified question and that would resolve the rating matter.

However, the bankruptcy court's opinion is predicated on a determination that the second sentence creates a limitation on the application of the first sentence.

That's why this district court certified the second question and why the state believes it's important to answer both certified questions.

Manufactured homeowners are more likely to be persons of lower economic resources given the economics of legal representation.

These homeowners are less likely to fully and fairly mitigate this issue in court.

And as a matter of public policy, the state requests that the court clarify the interpretation of the full meaning of the statute and including the second sentence.

And definitively state that owners and spouses of owners of manufactured homes share the same rights as owners and spouses of stickpills.

What's the argument, go ahead.

What's the argument against the position that by not putting the spouse's name on the deed or on the deed, there's a protection there perhaps.

Saving the property from creditors for the non-owning spouse.

So is there a balance then, an intentional waiver, if you will, of the homestead right, baked into that decision by the spouses?

Well, the homestead exemption is for the benefit of consumers.

In establishing the amount and the extent of the exemption, we're not balancing the rights of creditors and the rights of homeowners.

Choosing, there's lots of reasons why a person may choose to have only one spouse have their name on the property.

There's all kinds of factual scenarios, could be second marriage, could be the person is not available or there's just lots of reasons.

And that's not, I don't think the legislature intended to have married couples if only one person's on the house.

There's no reason to not allow both exemptions.

That wouldn't support the policy of homestead exemption which is liberal application of the statute and to support stability of housing.

So it doesn't make sense to jeopardize those people.

Turning to your red light sign, thank you.

Yes, thank you.

May it please the court.

My name is Lauren Somsky, I'm the appellee in this case.

Good morning, justices.

This is a case about statutory construction.

Judge Harwood in the bankruptcy court issued an opinion which was adverse to Mrs. Brady and said that one has to be an owner and an occupier

but realistic to get the full benefit of the homestead right.

This was a build up to the federal district court and despite the many cases cited by my colleagues here.

I go to Judge McAuliffe's opinion which you've all had before you there.

And note that he said in his opinion that the homestead statute was, and I'll quote a few things from his opinion,

it was defined reasonable people can interpret it in contradictory ways.

The legislative history is murky.

The sign points, sign posts here are most more than modest and blurred.

And most importantly he said the Supreme Court has yet to address these nuanced issues because we're not just looking at the homestead as a simple concept.

There's parts to it and there's more than one part.

There's the sexy part, the $120,000 of value that is protected.

There's other parts too, the ancillary parts.

The right to live there, the right to inherit it, the right to survivorship.

All those things are a different part.

Now the three parts.

Are you saying that there's disparate treatment between the $120,000 as you say the second part and the life of state?

Why wouldn't they be treated the same?

Not everybody gets both parts.

Everybody gets the survivorship, the residency, and the marital dissolution parts.

Every one who lives there, every person has the same.

So the unnamed spouse gets kicked out on the curb?

No, no, they get that.

I just said they get the right to residency.

What they don't get is the $120,000 of value unless they're an owner.

And that's the distinction we have in this case.

And the point I guess is that there's no case in which this has been exactly decided by the court.

And the court only decides what's before it.

And that issue hasn't been brought before until today.

But it's before it's rarely today.

Now when we're interpreting the statute, we know the rules of construction.

We have to look at the plain words to see if they're easy to understand.

And if they are easy to understand and there's no nuances,

then the court and all courts should apply them thinking that's what the legislature intended.

We only get start looking at legislative intent and other things like that if the words are not clear.

So what are the words here in this case?

We know about the amendment in 1983 to the statute and it added the second sentence.

The second sentence is a very long sentence.

And it has to be divided to have it make sense.

The second part of the second sentence talks about what seems to be an incredibly obvious truism,

which is that you can't claim a homestead interest in property that you don't own.

So if you have a manufactured home and it's on someone else's property,

you can't bootstrap the value of someone else's property.

As I said in my brief, just like Miss Brady who has a non-mature manufactured home,

she can't rely upon the value of her neighbor either.

She has to rely upon what she owns.

So anybody who owns a manufactured home can only rely upon the value of the home itself,

not the part or somebody else's property.

That seems pretty obvious, but there it is.

But when we take out that incredibly obvious part that was added back then

because manufactured homes were a new concept and they were a new permanent dwelling for people,

then we're left with the statute, section 481.

The second sentence, when you take out that part, it says,

the homestead right created by this chapter shall exist in manufactured housing,

which is owned and occupied as a dwelling by the same person.

So ownership and occupancy are required for manufactured homes.

Going back to the statutory construction principles, it seems again,

those are simple, easy to understand words.

So I think it's conclusively shown that when it comes to manufactured homes anyways,

in the beginning of my argument, you have to be the owner and the occupier, both.

It would be an extremely tortured interpretation to say that doesn't mean what it says

and you could be an owner or an occupier.

You don't have to be both. You have to be both.

So let me go back to the first sentence.

The first sentence was not changed.

The second sentence was added on.

The reason for the second sentence was clear.

We all read a legislative history show as one thing.

The point was to provide equality of treatment between the types of homes.

Manufactured homes were new, traditional homes were always there

and prior to 1983, owners of manufactured homes were specifically treated as second-class citizens.

They weren't entitled to a homestead exemption in a manufactured home

or a mobile home as they called it back then.

They were specifically, in so many words, not entitled to that exemption

and the citizenry of the legislature found that that was inappropriate

because that was an evolving form of permanent home ownership of people

and so they expanded it.

The express purpose for the 1983 amendment was to provide equality

and to treat both types of homes equally.

So the first sentence does not use the word ownership like the second sentence does

but one of the principles of statutory construction of course as we all know is

you can't interpret it in a way which leads to an absurd result

and an absurd result would be to determine that in its effort to provide equalized treatment

and to raise up second-class citizens who own the manufactured homes

to be on par with the traditional homes as part of that process

will have an additional burden that the manufactured home owners would still have.

So what is or of his or her interest therein referred to?

That's the first sentence.

Yeah. What is it referred to?

Right. It refers to the different components of the homestead right.

Sometimes it's $120,000 or whatever the number is as it changes.

Sometimes it's a resident's report.

It could be both but the second sentence qualifies that.

The second sentence...

It's an odd way for the legislature to qualify a sentence that's been in existence for many many decades.

Well as I said in my pleadings it would have been better

when they were trying to do something.

The objective was to provide equality.

It probably would have been better to wipe the whole thing out and start over

and say everybody's equal whatever the homestead right is it pertains equally to everybody.

But they didn't do that.

They added the second sentence and the second sentence has specific words requiring ownership

and it just seems to make sense to me that to make that effectual

and to provide true equality both types of homes have to have the same requirement.

So the first sentence is ambiguous.

Many people understood it to mean a certain thing.

Maybe people understood that the homestead was one thing rather than the right with several components.

But the second sentence clarifies that.

It says there's a requirement of ownership.

So what about 529-28?

Yes it's got very broad language.

It doesn't create rights by itself.

It's got very broad language in.

It says the notice says your spouse may be entitled to a homestead.

You and your spouse may.

It doesn't say you and your spouse both are qualified.

It says you may.

So you may, well sure you may if you're a owner.

What about the next sentence that mentions another sexy number, $240,000?

Well sure, if as very common as the court well knows,

if as is very common the husband and the wife are both owners,

they each get the $120,000, that's $240,000.

But if only one is entitled and that's only $120,000, not $240,000.

And it does use the word may.

It's not automatic.

Well the first, the beginning of the section it says if you or your spouse.

Are you or your spouse?

It's an ambiguous construction.

But if you and your spouse or your spouse both of you or one of you are owners,

whoever is the owner gets the $120,000.

So how do you recognize the language in Sabato?

Well I say this, it says it recognizes the homestead,

but it doesn't look at the nuances that I'm discussing here today.

So it was wrong?

Sabato was wrong?

It wasn't an issue before you.

You only decide what's before you.

What's before you today is looking at the homestead statute as a whole,

looking at the second sentence and seeing how that pertains to the first sentence.

That wasn't discussed in Sabato, or any of those cases.

It's an undecided issue until today.

And I think it's an important issue for you all to discuss.

I'm going to move on to other things then and say this.

Before you do that, where does the statute separate out the $120,000 exemption

from the survivorship or residency rights that are bound up in the bundle?

Well the second sentence says to get the $120,000,

you have to be an owner and an occupier for a manufactured home.

And there's nothing in the statute that says to retain residency rights,

I mean the statute doesn't specifically address that.

Right.

And as the state says, everyone who lives in a home,

and the first sentence uses the word every person,

every person that lives there, including the adult children,

including the relatives and whatever,

they all have a right of some sort of a homestead right.

They have the right to live there.

Some of them have a right to occupy after the death of the owner.

There's other things besides the money.

The money is important, and the money is the sexy part as I say,

but it's not the only thing.

Looking at the survivor statute, I think helps my argument.

480.13A, that says that in a situation where there's a married couple

and only one is the owner, and the other one is not the owner,

but when the owner dies, the non-owner gets something,

namely the $120,000.

At that point, the contingent right goes from dormant to active,

and they get that right, and they get the survivorship,

and they get the right to live there and all that.

So the question is, if my colleagues are right,

and the spouse who's not an owner already had that,

then what's the point of that statute?

That statute wouldn't be there unless there's a purpose.

Well, they'd already have the residency rate, the survivorship rate.

Right.

They'd have the others.

But they don't have $120,000.

So the survivorship statute only affords them the exemption?

Exactly.

It bestows the $120,000 value.

They already had the residency, agree, Justice,

but they didn't have the $120,000.

Despite what my colleagues say, they already had it,

because just by virtue of being married to the homeowner,

they already have that.

And that's just not true.

Otherwise, the statute wouldn't be necessary.

My time is short, so I want two more points to make.

We talked about, one of the justices mentioned,

the choice that people make.

Sometimes a married couple makes a choice for one party

or the other to be the owner rather than both,

as is more common.

And that's perfectly fine.

There's nothing nefarious that I have raised in my pleadings

about the choice that this Mrs. Brady made.

But it was a choice, and it has consequences.

Many people make that choice.

Many lawyers make that choice.

They practice in a PLLC to try to provide some civil liability

to protect their joint property with their spouse.

And there's nothing wrong with that,

but it does have consequences.

And in both of our papers, I raised the point that

if she decided she didn't like that particular choice,

she could have easily changed it

and bestowed the $120,000 on her husband

unambiguously by executing a quick link

to give him ownership along with her.

And my colleagues in their papers, I think, agreed

that by that simple $50 expense,

both parties would be owned,

both parties would therefore be entitled to the homestead.

And therefore, we wouldn't be here today, frankly,

because if they're an owner, they get,

they're entitled to the $120,000 part

of the homestead exemption.

Last comment is, you've already referred

to the brief filed by my colleague.

It's not permitted to orally argue today.

And you're all aware of that brief.

It was submitted by agreement.

It was not, it didn't come out of the left field.

And I'd urge you to take a look at that,

even though there's no oral argument about that

before you make your decision.

And unless there's any other questions, thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you, Your Honor.

I agree with Tartan as many as I can.

Issues that were raised here.

The trustee didn't indicate that a reasonable person

can construe this statute differently.

We, of course, press upon this court to construe it liberally

as it has in the past to protect people in their homes.

The trustee is here, obviously,

having a fiduciary duty to creditors.

But the homestead exemption statute is a shield

against creditors to protect people in their homes.

We had asked the court to liberally construe that exemption.

Your position, though, is there is no ambiguity in the statute, correct?

Your position is there is no ambiguity in the statute.

My hearing is bad. I'm sorry.

Is the statute ambiguous?

This court will decide that if it's ambiguous.

But if it is, the legislative history clearly indicates

what the general court intended.

I'm asking your position.

Is the statute ambiguous?

I think it is.

It is.

I think so.

I think it's not.

My client prevails because she is in a six-in-ones home

and only applies to manufactured housing.

But like Judge Wangling said, in the Roebuck High case,

that makes no sense.

You have to give it a logical application of the statute

as a whole.

And the logical application is that there is an interest,

which is to the non-owning spouse.

Can you address the trustee's argument with respect

to Section 3a, the duration portion of the statute?

And that's exactly what that section has to do with, duration.

It does not bestow the exemption.

The exemption is bestowed in 480-1 in the first sentence.

The second sentence, that 483-A, which was revised in 1961 to

or 63 to reflect that children are no longer involved

as espouses.

And my time is up, but I won't respond

to this question.

I refer to reflect the duration, not the bestowing of the

exemption.

It continues.

The non-owning spouse continues to have the exemption

that the non-owning spouse already have, bestowed by RSA

480-1.

Thank you very much.

Case submitted.
