This is case 2023-0128 in the matter of Deborah DeSenzos, Paul, and Brian Paul.

Good morning, Attorney Gordon. I understand you've reserved one minute for a rebuttal.

May I please the Court? I'm Joshua Gordon. I represent Deborah DeSenzos.

I was here this morning. I reserved a minute.

This case is an establishment of alimony. At the time of divorce in 2017, the family court declined

Deborah's request for alimony on grounds of inability to pay and insufficient need.

And as a result, the court did not make an alimony order.

On the pre-printed form, the box-labeled alimony is not checked.

And thus, there's no alimony order to modify, and this is an establishment case.

So if the form included a check and a zero, would that be a different argument?

Absolutely. Then there would be an alimony order for zero dollars, and anything subsequent would be in modification.

Dr. Paul's position requires this court to interpret the lack of an alimony order, in fact, as actually an alimony order, as you suggest, for zero dollars.

And it is possible, as you suggest. But here the box was unchecked, and there's no alimony order.

And you can't modify an order that has not yet been established, and this court should reverse on that grounds.

But it's also your position that if we view it as a modification, that standard was satisfied as well?

If this court sees this as a modification, Deborah is required to prove a substantial unforeseen change in circumstances.

And foreseeability depends upon what the party's plural actually anticipated in a matter of Arventus.

Thus, the chronology, what Deborah knew when, matters.

In 2014, there's a party separated, and Deborah filed for divorce.

In 2015, or 2016, Mr. Paul presented a forged court order to the school district, I don't know the exact year.

August 2016, the first day of the divorce hearing, Deborah is testifying, the school superintendent appears in the courtroom,

a prize for the court of the forgery, the hearing abruptly ends, and the court suggests to refer to the county attorney.

In January 2017, that's about three months later, the second day of the final divorce hearing,

Mr. Paul is still a medical resident with two years left and a very moderate income.

His criminal defense attorney was in the courtroom.

He says he was then negotiating with the state whether or not he would be charged with a felony or misdemeanor,

and they were discussing possible dispositions with the county attorney.

And that was the last thing Deborah knew because in March 2017, there's a divorce decree.

At the time, she could reasonably foresee Mr. Paul would be charged with a felony, go to prison, and lose his career.

Later, in June 2017, Mr. Paul pled to two misdemeanors, he was sentenced to 60 or 90 days, I'm not sure which,

and then in July, a month later, Dartmouth withdrew his residency, his salary, and his benefits.

Deborah filed a notice of appeal in the divorce case, which evidenced her contemporaneous understanding.

The question she presented to this court was whether the family court should have ordered alimony,

where pending criminal matters resulted in inability to obtain physician's license restricting his earning potential.

And that was filed when?

That was filed within 30 days of the decree in March 2017.

Why was there the delay between 2018 and the time that the petition to change the court order was?

There's nothing in the record about why, but the statute doesn't care why somebody procrastinated.

The statute cares that the petition was filed within five years of the decree, which it was by a few days.

A month after?

Help me with the dates, because I get hung up here.

The final decree, the orders underlying the final decree were signed on March 30th, 2017.

We don't have the notice of decision, so we don't know when that actually issued.

And then there's a reference, I think it's in your brief, about Judgment Day being February 2018.

So I've got this timeframe that is confusing.

Yes, that was a dispute below, but it hasn't been appealed.

And I think the whole thing was resolved that the five-year timeframe was complied with.

That was resolved below.

It started on the March date.

I don't know, Your Honor.

Because it wasn't an issue here, I didn't follow it carefully.

I do have a similar question.

You said it too was just convincing a two-year residency requirement.

Pardon me?

At the time of the divorce, Dr. Paul was just commencing a two-year residency requirement?

I believe he was, the record is sparse on this, he was in a residency program, and I think he had two years left on it.

Whatever Dartmouth requires, I think that was the situation.

A second residency program.

Maybe it was a second residency program.

There was the required residency, and then there was an additional public health residency that he was in the middle of.

That's what I understand.

That's possible that that's true. I found the record unclear on what exactly he was doing when.

But if he had completed his requirement for that first residency and he was entitled to go out and practice, doesn't that make a difference?

Well, he hadn't been a licensed doctor yet.

He had yet to, there was something left of his education.

Whatever the precise, precisely it was, is unclear to me, but he was not done with his education, and he had not yet been gone through his licensure to be a doctor.

But wasn't her overall alimony argument that one way or another he had an ability to pay, regardless of the criminal piece?

At the time of the divorce, he was making, I think, $50,000 or $60,000 as a stipend from his residency, and her argument was he had the ability to pay something then.

The court disagreed.

A month after the divorce, he's working at menial jobs and his child support is reduced to a statutory minimum, but unbeknownst to Deborah, and this is after the divorce,

there were heroic efforts to salvage Mr. Paul's career, and he was only charged with misdemeanors rather than felonies.

He kept his residency.

Mr. Paul was involved in these efforts.

His divorce and his criminal lawyers were involved, and the judge was involved, but Deborah was not.

She was not a party.

She was not a victim.

She was no longer married.

The father was estranged from the child, so there wasn't even that opportunity for her to gain information.

At the time of the divorce, the last Deborah knew there was going to be felony charges, a lost medical career, menial jobs, child support at the minimum,

and Deborah didn't have any facts to foresee anything other than Mr. Paul had tanked his medical career by his crime.

And there are a lot of ifs between Mr. Paul's transition from felony to doctor.

There's incarceration.

There's completing the medical school or the medical residency.

There's regaining the lost residency.

He has to finish it.

He has to survive the licensure with the record of a crime memorial turpitude on his record.

He has to go through a job interview with those same issues, presumably, and then actually get a job that earns a lot of money.

I want to address my sister's waiver argument, which is based on an unfortunate misuse of technical terms in Deborah's petition.

But her claim that this was an establishment of alimony rather than modification was presented to the family court, argued,

addressed by the court, and in her original petition, Deborah requested alimony under separate statutory grounds and merely modification.

She asserted that justice requires alimony, referring to RSA 458, 19, Roman num 2,

which says that the court may make alimony orders whenever just and equitable.

And you can see that in the appendix of page 192, paragraph 7.

Is there any dispute as to which version of the statute applies?

2014 version.

And that was not...

Because of the date of the final decree, not the date of the arguably new request for alimony.

Correct.

It's the date of the...

It's the statute at the time of the divorce, not now.

In August 2002, excuse me, 2022 in the modification establishment case,

the court requested, you know, took notice that this was an issue and asked the parties for a trial memorandum.

And in Deborah's trial memo, she argued it was establishment.

And you can see that in the appendix of page 233, paragraph 12, 13, 16, and 19.

That is not cited in my brief.

Alimony is not like the criminal or domestic violence where proceedings are limited to the allegations in the initial filing.

And in any event, the family court squarely addressed the issue and it was preserved and not waived.

And finally, this issue of underemployment, which I see all over my sister's brief,

it's not relevant to this appeal in any way because it doesn't help in distinguishing establishment from modification

and because it's unrelated to foreseeability.

Do you think that lifestyle during the marriage is similarly not applicable?

It doesn't matter to the issues before this court.

It certainly matters to, if there's a remand from this court, it matters to the family court about whether Ms. Desenzo is self-sustaining

and what her employment situation is.

It will matter later, but it doesn't matter to the decision here.

Thank you very much.

Thank you, Attorney Gordon.

Attorney Connor.

May it please the court.

My name is Doreen Connor and I represent Mr. Paul on his former wife's motion to modify Alimony.

The trial court properly concluded that the motion did not assert sufficient grounds for which relief could be granted and dismiss the motion.

I'll take any questions at any time.

So are we in agreement that the five years is not an issue?

No, Your Honor.

Interestingly enough, that argument has been changing over the course of time.

Initially, in the first order for the trial judge, the trial judge indicated that if using the March 2017 date,

the first date the decree was issued prior to appeal, then the petition for establishment of new Alimony was late

because it was not received until March 31st, 2022.

And do we know that the date of issuance is the same as the date the order was signed?

That's a legal issue.

I believe, and interestingly enough, what they argued below, but are not arguing now on appeal,

is that the effective date of the decree was once this court remanded it, which was February 22nd, 2018.

That's the judgment day?

Correct, which means that it was not too late.

It was not outside the five years.

But interestingly enough, if you look at the circumstances that were known to the wife by February 22nd, 2018,

it becomes extremely difficult to suggest that there was any unforeseen circumstances.

At that time, she knew that her former husband had completed his psychiatric requirements.

That's in the addendum, the letter from Dartmouth Hitchcock, which indicates that he had met all of his requirements

by June 25th, 2017.

That's at the appendix 148.

That letter makes very...

So is that Alachi's argument?

Excuse me?

Is that Alachi's argument?

No, no, no.

What I'm trying to get at, Your Honor, is looking at the effective date in February 22nd, 2018, a whole lot had happened.

He had completed his psychiatric requirements, and Dartmouth had acknowledged that.

He was simply removed from the second residency program, not his psychiatric...

So that's only relevant to the modification argument.

Correct.

I will address the other as well.

But the other thing that was important by February of 2018, he had been sentenced

It was determined that he played guilty to misdemeanors, and he was already out of jail.

He was already looking for work, and within three months of the effective date of the decree,

he was employed at Riverban as a full-time psychiatrist.

Now, there's some suggestion that wife knew none of this.

That is not true.

If you look in the appendix, she was fighting for child support the whole time he was in jail,

and as soon as he got out, she knew precisely what was happening.

So there was no unforeseen circumstances, and she continued to argue that she should be entitled to child support

and alimony because of his greater employability.

So to suggest that there was an unforeseen set of circumstances just does not exist.

At what moment in time should we be assessing what is or is not unforeseen or foreseen?

As of the effective date of the divorce decree, February 22nd, 2018,

in comparison to when she filed her motion to modify five years later.

The case was on appeal here for nine months before that or something, right?

Correct.

So the divorce was not final?

Right.

But there was nothing that could have been going on in the family court in relation to those issues

because they were up here before us.

Well, child support issues were ongoing.

If you look in the appendix, there was a dispute about when he would be relieved of some obligation to pay child support

because he was incarcerated.

Then when he got out, a request for benefits based on unemployment, there were a whole bunch of pleadings.

That continued as collateral issues, but not the issues that were up here in the final decree.

Correct, Your Honor.

So if the date is February 2018, then why is the request for, if it's not modification,

if it's a new request for alimony, why is that untimely?

It is not untimely, Your Honor.

Okay.

The judge indicated that if you're using the March date, it is untimely.

And I want to make clear that we're not using that date.

She knew less about what the future might hold at that point.

Exactly.

In 2018, she certainly knew what was happening with the criminal matter

and understood that people had gone out of their way to make sure he would get his job.

So the judge's conclusion that if you use the March date, it'd be late,

that went by the wayside as things proceeded.

Correct.

With regard to the notion that...

May I just follow up briefly on Justice Countway?

What's the basis for starting the clock on foreseeability at the time that the decree goes final in February of 2018?

Where do we find that?

You find it in the statute.

You find it in the case law that talks about it's what was known at the time of the divorce.

So you're saying the time of divorce is when it goes final when the mandate issues here?

Correct, Your Honor.

I want to talk a little bit about this notion that if you check a box on the form

and you indicate zero alimony, that somehow is different than what happened in this case.

In Hoy, which was decided at 171 to Hampshire 373,

this court noted that the court can consider a post-divorce alimony in two circumstances.

And the first is when a party seeks alimony for the first time after divorce.

That's the concept.

Otherwise, you're suggesting that if somebody gets just a little bit of alimony

that they then can't later on argue that it's the first time,

but if you get zero, you get a second bite at the apple.

That doesn't really make sound tough.

Well, but if they get a little bit, then the five-year clock starts running when that little bit runs out.

Correct, but the standard of review with regard to a renewal or modification is much harder.

And that's why it would not make sense to suggest that if you ask for it

and you get zero as opposed to asking for it and getting $10 a month,

that there's somehow going to be a different standard applied.

That does not make sense, and frankly, you have to look at what you said in Hoy

where you said one of the opportunities is if you ask for it for the first time after divorce.

And that clearly was not what was done here.

Should this case turn on whether that little box was checked or not?

No, Your Honor.

This case should turn on whether or not there was a request for alimony

and the fact that the parties were heard on it.

She had an opportunity, she presented it, and it was denied.

And therefore, the only way she can get it is to then meet that higher burden within five years

that there was an unforeseen and substantial change in circumstances.

And on the facts, it's simply not met in this case.

The other thing that I would point out before I rest on the briefs is it was quite clear,

even at the time of the divorce trial, that the petitioner expected that her husband

would become employed and would earn a whole lot of money.

The transcript, she references that he's going to earn in excess of six figures.

And that's why she should be entitled to alimony.

Well, when was that testimony? Wasn't that in, like, 16?

That was on the first day of trial, page 58 of the August 16 testimony.

She knew what was coming next. They called the superintendent.

This is no big surprise who then testified later in the day on August 16.

And then on the final day of divorce, which I believe was January of 2017,

they proceeded on offers of proof at that point because they had a partially stipulated divorce agreement.

And her lawyer argued in the offer of proof that she was entitled to alimony

because of husband's greater employability because of his decree.

Now, granted, that's not testimony from the wife, but it's an offer of proof on behalf of the wife

that even after the notice of what he had done had come to light,

she still thought she was entitled to alimony because he was going to go on to become a practicing psychiatrist.

I was going to say the basis for the trial court's order was that at that point in time,

he was not at the point where he'd be earning that increased salary.

As I read the trial court's order as to why no alimony was granted is because the wife didn't carry the burden.

One of the issues also being she chose not to be self-supporting.

Right, but he also couldn't afford it at that point in time given what he was facing.

Correct.

Do you agree that the issue with what Mr. Gordon said about the issue of underemployment

isn't really relevant to the legal issue in front of us?

No, the legal issue before you is whether or not the trial court properly granted the motion to dismiss.

Right.

The issue of employability has to do with the original grounds for denying alimony.

If this court were to find that there weren't sufficient grounds for the motion to dismiss

to have been granted and there's a remand based on how this is going to go,

if it happens to be an initial request, then employability certainly is that issue.

Right, but in terms of what we have to decide, it's not an issue.

You agree?

I agree, Your Honor.

What this court has to decide is whether or not there was an unforeseen change of circumstances

between February 22, 2018 and the time that she filed the motion.

And as noted in her pleading, the very grounds for which she sought alimony were precisely the same

as they were the very first time.

If we were to use the March 17 date, has the standard for modification been satisfied?

No, Your Honor.

But your argument is based on the 18 date?

No, Your Honor.

My argument is that it gets even better when you use the effective date.

But even if you use the earlier date, there has not been an unforeseen change in circumstances.

If you use the March date, she cannot seek it as a matter of an initial request

because she's outside the five-year window.

And there's no disagreement that the 2014 version...

Well, the statute in effect in 2014 is the one we apply.

Your Honor, the record's not particularly clear on that part.

Pursuant to the statute, you use the one in effect at the time of the divorce proceeding.

The current alimony statute also indicates, however, that if the parties agree,

you can use the more recent version.

It is not clear to me from the record whether there was any kind of agreement.

The trial judge used the current statute.

Nobody filed an objection.

But I cannot represent one way or another as to whether or not there was an agreement.

Because it looks like the current statute was applied.

Yes, the good news is, as noted in Attorney Gordon's brief, and I agree,

the standard in the applicable language is the same under both.

So, fortunately, we don't have a situation where which version is critical to the outcome

or the analysis of this court.

So, based on that and the reasons set forth in our brief, we would ask that you affirm.

Thank you.

Thank you, Attorney. Attorney Gordon.

The checkbox is everything. There's either an alimony or not.

It's a binary issue.

And the question about whether, you know, when you ask for alimony,

there's no law saying that establishment must be in response to the first request.

And actually, you may have to act for alimony in the initial proceeding

or risk forfitting it later.

And there's some language in the manner of Maynard in 2007 saying that.

And seeking alimony at the time of the divorce, quite said,

is just one of several possible situations.

And if you don't get alimony the first time and you come back repeatedly

within your five years and the court keeps saying no,

each time is an establishment, if there's no alimony order,

unless the court orders a zero-dollar award.

But wouldn't it be different if she had never asked for alimony in the first place?

No, it wouldn't be different at all.

There's no limit in the statute about how many times you can come back.

And in fact, I think the statute encourages you to come back whenever

it's just inequitable.

And so there's no race-judicata type of issue.

People may agree to no alimony agreements if you final orders

in reliance knowing that they can come back within the five years

if things change or not.

Maybe.

Thank you.

Thank you, counsel.

Case submitted.

Court will take a brief reason.
