This is case 2023-0540, state of New Hampshire versus Karen Pierce.

Good morning, Karen Sissy. I understand you reserved two minutes for your bottle.

I have, thank you.

Please proceed.

And good morning. May it please the court. My name is Mark Sissy, and I'm here today to speak on behalf of Karen Pierce.

We had argued a case of his on January 3rd, 2024, although the case was reversed based on a mistrial assertion that the court agreed with.

There is something that has been ruminating between then and now, and it's a continuing issue, and that has to do with the view.

And I want to address that again. It may not have been vetted properly during the argument on January 3rd, and I want to make sure that we're very, very clear.

First of all, in the second trial, there was a different alleged victim. The motion was made by Attorney Harwood for a view.

And there may be some misunderstanding here, and I want to make sure that we're very clear.

We've done some research, and we have not, to this date, found a criminal case where either the Attorney General's Office or County Attorney's Office was denied a view on a privacy assertion that was not, by the way, asserted by the tenant or owner of the property, but merely speculative in nature.

We have not seen a case where it was speculative as to there being a possible alteration of some substance in the particular structure.

We have seen cases, and there are civil cases, and I would also assert here that in a civil case there is a difference between a view and a criminal case and a view in a civil case.

That difference is that the view in the criminal case embraces a constitutional right, both state and federal, with regard to presenting proofs favorable during the course of the defense.

The civil case that we came upon was quite illustrative.

That particular case decided by our court, Kellgren versus Chadwick, and that was decided on April 23, 1991. It's reported in 134, New Hampshire, 110, kind of laid out why that view was denied in the civil case.

And that view was denied because of objective reasons that were laid out by the court in that particular order, and the objective reasons were that the condition of the particular area would have substantially changed.

And it was a slip and fall, in essence. I think it was an ice slip and fall.

And the trial went on in the summer, and the question was whether or not there would be a difference substantially in the evidence if the jury went out and took a look at the sidewalk in the summer versus the winter, and of course there would be.

But more to it, there were photographs that actually accurately were presented to the jury.

So is it an analysis of relevance because it's a piece of evidence? Is that what the analysis should turn on in these cases?

I think that that analysis of relevance is important, and I think when you join it with the theory of the defense in the case, I think it becomes even more important.

But the interesting thing is that it seemed when you read the transcript of the short hearing that was made with regard to that motion that the burden was being placed on the defendant to come up with reasons why there was no change in the structure

and that the owner or tenant had some superseding right to deny the defendant a view.

I mean, I've never seen it before. I have to say, I mean, I've been doing this for 45 years. I've never seen where the Attorney General's office was denied access to private property,

whether it be an apartment complex, a drugstore, a mall, a highway, because of a privacy assertion.

The trial court also rely on the fact that the defendant provided no information about the new owner or whether the mobile home was in the same condition that it was back in 2016.

I think that that's in the ether because, frankly, let's take a look at this. The defendant in a sexual assault case in this context is an adverse party to start with with regard to the confines of that particular trailer.

Remember, the alleged victim lived there to start with. So to get for the defendant to have to go in and establish those things is a burden, a shifting of a burden on the defendant that should not be there.

What should be there is that the objecting party should be coming in and asserting those factors that were even laid out in the civil case, that there was a substantial change.

That to go into that particular trailer, that single-wide small trailer and for a view for the jury would be misleading in some way, shape, or form.

Not based on speculation. And if you look at Attorney Cormier's argument, it's speculative when he's making the argument to Judge Leonard.

What do you think our standard of review is on this issue?

Well, one, I think it's important. You know, I was thinking of this because the two issues that I wanted to present to you both have interesting privilege and privacy kind of aspects to it.

The counseling records issue has the, you know, the privilege. How can you overcome a privilege, you know, basically?

And this one has some kind of a privacy assertion that, by the way, was not made, but a privacy assertion that I think, I don't know if we have to jump that hurdle, but both of them should be overcome by due process.

And it should be a very low hurdle, just like when you're examining gagny material or material in Gerard. We don't have to jump that high.

All we have to do is make, one, an assertion that it was a small area. Two, it's relevant to the case at hand.

Three, you see by the motion to set aside verdict and the record in the case that the alleged victim claimed that in this particular trailer there were at least five people present and the door to the bedroom where the offending acts allegedly took place was open.

But you're alleging a constitutional violation, so our review should be de novo, shouldn't it?

It is a constitutional violation, we believe, without any question. And quite frankly, if you're going to go to discretionary aspects, which I don't think it is, I think it's a clear constitutional violation.

Well, John, isn't in arguing that it's de novo, aren't you trying to set aside a long line of precedent that we have that the standard of review is either plainly wrong or unsustainable exercise of discretion?

I think it's both.

And you haven't made a story decisis argument that those cases are wrong. And we have a long series of cases that say that.

But the problem here is that I think it's much simpler than that. I think we're overanalyzing this particular aspect. What we're doing is we're just trying to put in a piece of evidence at a trial.

What we're really saying to the court here is that we were denied the ability to put forth a proof favorable to the jury, a relevant piece of evidence.

Views in this state, unlike other states that I practice in, are defined as being evidence.

But isn't the standard for our analysis of that even in regard to purported evidence, unsustainable exercise of discretion?

It's an unsustainable exercise of discretion, but it's a constitutional denial to Mr. Pierce.

The defendant could make that argument about any piece of evidence in a criminal case that's being offered in the trial court.

Rules that's not admissible.

Right.

And then that would implicate a constitutional...

Right.

And then you certainly would review that.

Unsustainable exercise of discretion.

That's true.

But the backdrop is that I don't want it to be lost.

The backdrop is that it's really a Part 1 Article 15 violation.

And we have to embrace that.

Sorry, there's some procedural hurdles here.

When was this motion made?

Gosh, this motion was made prior to trial.

Was it the day before trial?

No, no, no.

It was not the day before.

Do we have a record now about whether or not the owners would object to a view?

Or whether or not the premises has been altered since then?

We have any information about that?

There's no information on that.

But again, I don't think there has to be that assertion.

I think the presumption is that it is intact.

That it is the way that it was at the time of the alleged offense.

The mobile home might be gone by now, for all we know.

The mobile home at the time of the motion prior to this trial was not gone.

And there were no photographs or diagrams of the interior of it.

So there's no alternative to present how close these allegations would have been

to other individuals in the trailer at the time.

If the layout were, in fact, different,

it would have been proper for the trial court to deny the motion.

If the layout, if there was an objective fact where there was a substantial change

in the alleged crime scene, yeah, I can see where the court could make that finding.

Where it would be misleading to the jury to present that.

And just picking up on Justice Bassett's line of questions,

there appears to be a line between unsustainable exercise of discretion

and at some point a threshold constitutional issue becomes involved.

That's the way I'm understanding your argument.

Yes.

How does the harmless error...

Oh, this is not harmless error.

I'm not going to stress this.

The state argues it's harmless error.

Yeah, I mean, harmless error.

This was not overwhelming evidence.

There was conflicting statements made by the alleged victim.

And we would actually say that it's interesting that by eliminating evidence,

you can argue harmless error.

I would say now assume that that evidence was admitted,

assume for a moment that that evidence was admitted,

that it's a small trailer and that the lines of vision would have eliminated

the fact that somebody would be doing a sex act in a room

with other individuals closely at hand.

I mean, I'm just saying, you know, we got cut out of that whole aspect of the trial.

But weren't those aspects explored on cross-examination?

Cross-examination is a munchkin compared to a photograph or a view of the premises.

Cross-examination doesn't fill that gap.

It's not adequate.

And I guess that's part of the argument,

is that there's nothing that could substitute for the actual view.

In the civil case that I cited, there were photographs, for instance,

of the alleged scene where the ice head, you know, accumulated.

Did you find any case that stands for the proposition that it's a constitutional right

and a criminal case for a defendant to have a view?

Well, I mean, the only thing we can depend on is that a view in the state of New Hampshire

is in fact defined as evidence.

It's something more than an aid to the jury.

In other jurisdictions, at least the ones I practice in other than New Hampshire,

some of them don't define a view as evidence.

In New Hampshire, we can argue to a jury that they saw evidence.

It is evidence that the view is the beginning of the presentation of evidence.

In fact, there are standard preview statements

that are made by the court all the time with regard to pay particular attention.

We're going out on a view.

It's evidence like everything else that will be admitted during the course of the trial.

But is there any case that says it's a constitutional right

for a defendant to have a view when requested?

I'm not asking, and I want to make this clear,

I'm not asking this court to say that we can whimsically ask for a view,

okay, and if it's denied that a constitutional right has been denied.

That's not what we're asserting.

I don't want that to be so overbroad because that's not this case.

And as I've always been taught, what I'm before you folks at the Supreme Court

is why is my case different than the general assertion of all other cases.

But I guess I've got my mind.

And where do we draw, just to follow up on that,

so we have to think about the next case.

So why is your case different and where do we draw the line?

Okay, why is this case different?

There's no alternative to the view.

There are no photographs, there are no diagrams

that can easily or adequately show the jury the aspects of the dimensions

and the sight lines inside of that particular trailer.

We asserted that that's important.

It's important for the jury to see that, to sense that,

to see it themselves and we didn't have any alternatives.

We didn't have diagrams, photographs.

We didn't have a walking video like we see all the time in homicide cases now.

We had nothing like that cut out with regard to making the argument

that it would have been impossible for this act to have taken place

with five people in the trailer and the closeness.

But I'm sure that argument was made.

It was attempted to be made, but it's like tying your hand behind your back.

You know, you want everything if you can get it.

It's not an extraordinary ask.

It's done in almost every criminal case.

So I do have reason to misread it.

Thank you, Mrs. D.

Good morning and may it please the court, Adriana McCullough,

for the State of New Hampshire.

I think the only person here asking this court to overanalyze this view issue

is the defendant.

This is not a constitutional issue at this point.

The defendant filed a motion for review.

That motion for review was asking the court to admit evidence.

The defendant is the proponent of the evidence in this case

and therefore the defendant had the burden to prove that that evidence

was relevant and not unfairly prejudicial at that hearing.

As this court has held numerous times, including in the first Pierce case

earlier this year, a view is evidence.

And evidence is reviewed.

Or the weather court admits that evidence is reviewed

for an unsustainable exercise of discretion.

Because that is a discretionary decision the court has to make

weighing all of the arguments the parties are making

and weighing all of the other evidence

that's presented to the court in the moment.

Well, you would agree that the view was relevant.

Would have been relevant.

I can't agree with that based on the record that we have, Your Honor,

because nobody knew what the inside of the trailer looked like.

It's very possible that, as you pointed out, Justice Donovan,

this mobile home may not have even been the same mobile home itself

because nobody went to the address to look at the outside

of the mobile home to see if it was even the same.

And so in that case, I would say it was not relevant

to have a view of that outside or inside of that home.

So why didn't the police document that?

Why did the police take pictures?

It's readily available to them at the time they're conducting

this investigation.

And, in a sense, they are cutting the defendant out

by virtue of not documenting it.

So not in this case.

And that's because this was a delayed disclosure case.

And frankly, it shouldn't have been because the victim did disclose

to his grandfather the day that this happened,

but the grandfather did not report that out to anybody.

This came to light from the police's perspective three years

later in 2019 when the victim disclosed to his therapist.

By that point, the victim and his family had not been living

in this mobile home for two years.

And at trial, the police officer who investigated the case

said that she did not go to the house to see if it was the same

because so much time had passed.

Now, I agree with you.

Maybe she could have gone to see if that trailer was the same,

but so could the defendant.

And I know the police investigate the case.

The state provides that evidence or that discovery

to the defendant, but nothing prevents a defendant

from investigating his own case and his own defense.

And so, in just the same way as the police officer could

have driven by this trailer to see if it was there

and the same, so could the defendant with his attorney

have driven by to see if it was the same?

But the defendant has no obligation to present any evidence.

He does not, Your Honor.

But if he's choosing to present evidence,

then he is the proponent of that evidence.

And he has the burden to show that that evidence is relevant

and not unfairly prejudicial.

And in this case, he had none of that information

to provide to the court.

Frankly, it appeared he hadn't even tried.

It appeared from the record anyway that he had not even

sent an investigator there to speak to the homeowner

to even look at the outside of that trailer.

And that's important not just to lay a record

or to create a record to say that this is admissible.

It's also practically important because the court

is going to need that information if they're going

to coordinate a view.

So if the court had granted this motion,

the homeowner at some point has to know

that 15 plus people are going to arrive

at his or her home.

So even if that homeowner objected,

the court, I'm assuming, would have held a hearing

and would have decided if the defendant's

constitutional rights and or right to have this view

presented to the jury trumped the homeowner's right

to his home.

That didn't happen because we didn't even know

who the homeowner was or the tenant was at the time.

You rely principally on your brief on Part 1 Article 2B

and asserting on behalf of the homeowner a privacy interest.

It's not clear to me from the actual text of that article

that actually is implicated here.

And if it's your position that it is,

do you have any authority from other states

with similar constitutional provisions that support your view?

I do not, Your Honor.

I don't have any to give to you at least at this time.

But what I will say is that in general,

I think it is recognized that people

have a right to privacy in their home.

Whether it's in Part 1 Article 2B,

whether it's in another part of the Constitution

about requiring a search warrant before police enter a home

to search a home, or whether it's not,

even if it's just about providing the homeowner's

the common courtesy and decency of saying

we're going to have strangers come into your home

to view this area, here is notice of that decision

and an opportunity for you to come to the court

and say I do or do not want you here.

That doesn't automatically mean the trial court

is going to agree with the homeowner

and say you have a Part 1 Article 2B.

Is that a procedure that's typically followed?

Unfortunately, I don't know from my experience, Your Honor.

I haven't done a view in a case where the homeowner is objecting.

I haven't done a view in a case where there's

a new person living in the home, frankly.

There must be, though, some process,

whether it's even if it's not constitutionally recognized,

to alert people that a large group of people are coming.

I know when I did a view outside of someone's apartment

in a different state, we coordinated

with the Massachusetts State Police

and the sheriff's deputies of that county.

So everybody knew we were coming with jurors and a bus

to walk around the neighborhood.

And again, even if this view had been granted

based on this limited information,

it would have been very difficult for the parties

in the court to coordinate that view

because the defendant, as the proponent of the evidence,

had not gotten any of this information

that would have been required to have the view.

At some point, I just want to pick up on, again,

Justice Bassett's line of question to Attorney Sisti.

At some point in the exercise,

in the trial court's exercise of discretion,

does it become constitutional?

I mean, is there a...

If evidence, for instance,

obviously in the criminal context

is completely exculpatory,

the trial court denies the motion

or denies the evidence from coming in.

Is that of constitutional dimension?

I hate to be a lawyer about this,

but it depends, Your Honor,

and I think that's because

part 1 Article 15's right to all proofs favorable

does not equal the admissibility

of all of those proofs at trial.

And I think that's to draw the line

between what is a de novo review

of a constitutional issue

and an unsustainable exercise of discretion

about evidence admissibility.

A defendant is entitled to the Constitution

to all proofs favorable,

whether he goes out and gets them himself

or whether that's from the state.

To provide exculpatory information,

that's why the state is required

to investigate a self-defense claim,

perhaps in a case,

and provide all that to the defendant.

However, or even in the in-camera review,

you may be entitled to those documents,

but even in this case

and every other in-camera review case,

you have to make a separate motion

to the trial court to admit that evidence at trial.

To show to the trial court,

here is the proof.

I think it's relevant and not unfairly prejudicial.

And if you cannot do that pre-trial

or at trial,

that evidence is not admissible.

And that's because at some point

we transition to the rules of evidence

to rule the admission of evidence

and that is marshaled by the trial court

who's in the best position to decide

based on the information it has

whether that evidence meets the rules of evidence.

And that's where I think you can draw the line.

So maybe if this motion were not a motion for review

and it were a motion saying,

court, I would like permission

to go inside this person's house and take photographs

to see if this is

relevant and admissible evidence in my trial.

Maybe that at that point

would be a constitutional issue

and the court would have to decide

if it could grant that motion for the defendant

or the state even in a search warrant context

to go into the house and take these photographs.

Then there would be a second motion,

a motion for review,

and we'd have the information and the court could decide

this is your proofs favorable

that you were provided.

Now let's see if it's admissible

based on the rules of evidence.

And that's where I think you can draw the line in this case.

What's your response

to the burden-shifting argument

that Attorney Siste raised?

That it's the burden in this case

is shifting to the defendant unfairly to prove.

Yes.

Again, it is a burden shift,

but it's because he's the proponent of the evidence.

So for removing the labels of state and defendant,

the party,

this court has held that the party

has the evidence, has the burden to show

that it meets all of the rules,

whether that's the defendant or the state.

And because, again, this is a motion for review

or a motion to admit evidence,

he does have the burden.

I think that's a well-settled principle of law.

I do agree

that he would have the burden to also research

ownership of the property

and make that

preliminary factual determination

or should that be on the state

and the investigators?

I don't know

if I want to use the word burden.

Should the state or should the police officers

have tried to investigate this

better? Perhaps.

But I don't think that was a constitutional requirement.

To the extent the defendant thought it was

a constitutional requirement,

he could have filed a motion

either saying, court,

go make the police get this evidence

and give it to me, or allow me

to go in and get the evidence.

And that certainly then becomes the line

theory, a trial of this police

investigation was so poor

or not done well, and that's why

we don't have all this information jury

that would help you decide this case.

I've seen that defense many times

in sex assaults and other sorts of cases.

But to say it's a burden,

I don't know in this case that it's a burden

because nobody knew what the inside

of that trailer looked like

for themselves, but

the children, at least this victim

in his CAC in this case

in her case,

in their CAC interview presumably

described the inside of that trailer

and both children in this case

did testify about the inside of that trailer

at trial. So it's not as if there was

no evidence at all admitted to either

party pretrial or a trial

about the inside of this trailer.

There was. And it did seem

fairly small given the way the children

described it. And they did

describe in order what rooms were

from the living room, which was sort of

the home that you walked into.

So again, to the extent that this court

thinks this is

that the court improperly denied this motion,

it was harmless error.

Not only because this evidence came in

in another way, but also because there was

overwhelming evidence of guilt in this case.

The victim provided very detailed testimony

about these sexual assaults.

Both the defendant, the victim and his sister

described the inside of this apartment

and it was speculative

at best to say

that that view would have provided

the jury with any helpful information

versus misleading information.

If there were no further questions on it.

Actually, I have another question.

What's the state's perspective on the timing

of Gerard in this trial?

So Gerard came out

12 days before

the defendant filed his

motion for in-camera review.

That was assented to. I would point out

that I believe my read of that motion

yesterday. I don't even know that

I did Gerard in that motion.

However, this court

trial courts everywhere

are required by the judicial code of conduct

and other case law that this court has decided

to know what the current state of the

law is and to apply that law

fairly to the facts of each case.

And there's nothing on this record to suggest

that the trial court did not know

about Gerard when it received

that motion for in-camera review

and did not know about Gerard about a month

later on November 13th when it issued

documents to the parties based on

that in-camera review.

I don't know that this court should presume

that trial courts are not following

presidential opinions that this court

is issuing, absent some sort

of information on the record.

This court has also held on this exact

issue that when a trial court issues

an order that says, I'm releasing

this information under the applicable

standards, that this court

finds that that means they're

considering all of the case law. Gerard

and then all of the cases from Gerard

all the way back to Gagney.

This court itself has referred to the

in-camera review standard as the Gagney

standard in orders it has issued

after Gerard has come out.

So there's nothing on this record to suggest

that the trial court did not know about Gerard

when it reviewed those records.

Whose obligation is it to

transfer the counseling records

to this court?

I think it's the trial court's

because they're in the possession

and frankly because

their records that are reviewed in camera

neither party possesses

them until

the entirety of the counseling records.

If you're talking about the records

that are released to the parties

for use in the trial.

No, I'm talking about the entire

volume of those

records. What would trigger the trial

for it to send it to us?

I think frankly your honor

in these cases it should be your order

asking them to transfer it after you've

looked at the issues in the briefs

and or had oral argument on the case

and decided if the defendant has alleged

some sort of prejudice

or some sort of violation of his rights

that's not merely speculative.

Saying, as

Attorney Sisti does in this brief

maybe more records should

have been released based on what was

released in this case. Without Attorney

Sisti or anybody down below in the trial

court filing a motion to reconsider

or renewing a motion for in-camera

review saying there should be more based on

what I have. That's a speculative

argument

that there should be more in these records

for you to review at Supreme Court

and provide to the trial court.

If you are going to do it frankly I think

it would be helpful if it happened

before a trial. If really the

only issue is these records

should have been reviewed and provided

to the parties before trial. If there

was some mechanism for this court to review that

in an interlocutory appeal

it would prevent this issue of

now we have to maybe have a second trial

just because records were reviewed

because somebody says maybe there are more

records that are relevant and admissible.

But again here if the trial

court was using Gerard

which it was in

reviewing these records then also

it's review of those records. You should

review its review of the records

for an unsustainable exercise of discretion

which means you're deferring to the trial

court's decision about what records

were relevant and material

based on what the trial court had before

in the motion about the defense strategy

or the case itself.

And again I think saying

speculatively on appeal maybe some more

records would have been admissible or

material or relevant is not

sufficient to trigger a

Pella review of those records.

Can I just ask you to clarify

did the state make up

Part 1 Article 2B argument

it did not your honor. I see

my red light is on so if there are no further questions

I'll rest on my brief. Thank you.

Just briefly if I could

just address a couple of things

before you

in the notice of appeal

you do have the motion for a view

I'd ask the court

to compare that motion for a view

in this Pierce case

with the motion for

a view in the prior

Pierce case and this may actually

aid us in getting to the

point of specificity

and the point as to whether or not

it was a denial of due process

because the second motion

for a view filed by attorney

hardwood was

more extensive

than the first motion for

a view and in fact

stated in its allegations

that it's

anticipated that J.M.

will testify that Mr. Pierce

J.M. from the living room

to his sister's room

where sexual assault occurred

seeing the layout and size of the

home is necessary for the jury

to assess the believability

of J.M.'s testimony

goes on paragraph 7

J.M. is also expected to talk about

an assault that occurred in a bathroom

it is necessary for the jury

to see the size and layout

of the bathroom in order to

understand and assess this testimony

it incorporates

the other arguments that were there

we're standing here today

and the word speculative has been

thrown out there a couple of times

it's an ugly thing to be

speculating as to

whether or not this would have been

helpful to the defense and who has the burden

to bring these things forward

quite frankly we should

not be burdened by anything with

regard to this we can't do that

I mean if we're going to do that

I'm going to put together today

a stock motion and follow

with every criminal case I

have stating that

the owner or occupier

of the property where the

accused is said to

committed a crime should be frozen

in time right now

and that no substantial change

can be made to the property

that it has to be frozen so that we

know that at the time we

are going to do that for a view

it will be preserved and will be granted

and we won't be coming up with the

speculative objectives

objections that it was changed

and it might unduly

prejudice the trial as we go forward

just one question do you agree

with Ms. McCoola that

the burden is on the

proponent of any particular

piece of evidence to

establish its admissibility

again burden is an interesting

thing to put forth in the motion

for the view the reason for

the view which then makes it

as Justice Conway says

a relevant piece of evidence

that should be placed before the jury

it's not some specious argument

about a case in the ether

it's about a theory of the case

that's even laid out in the motion for the view

as to why we need the view

so I mean I think that satisfies

the burden

thank you very much counsel

thank you
