Give us this case 2023-0647 in state of New Hampshire versus John Santiago.

For the record, the Chief Justice is disqualified and Justice Bassett is not participating.

Attorney Swenson, I understand you've reserved two minutes for rebuttal.

I have.

Please commence.

Good morning. May it please the court. Carl Swenson representing Mr. John Santiago.

I want to address two points today. I know I raised a third in my brief.

If there's time, we can discuss that.

Number one, Santiago's challenge to the execution of the wiretap order in this case was not untimely.

This is a situation that arises fairly frequently.

There's a mistrial, a retrial, or a trial is delayed or rescheduled.

So there are multiple dispositional conferences scheduled.

So we agree with you. What's the remedy?

Do we go back for a suppression hearing that didn't occur?

Yes. The remedy we're asking for here in any event is that it be remanded back to the trial court to hold a hearing on whether or not the court's wiretap order was strictly adhered to.

Specifically the two issues that were raised and the one that I discussed in the brief were the interpreters physically in New Hampshire in the wire room at the time the intercept was first heard.

So convictions would remain in place pending the decision on the suppression motion?

Correct. They have the suppression motion and then the trial court would have the first opportunity to address the effect of that motion to suppress.

And as I argue in the brief, it would be quite dramatic if it succeeded because it would mean going back and reassessing a different motion to suppress where you are excluding any evidence that was relied upon from the intercepts.

So the rule of criminal procedure contemplates the timeframe from dispositional conferences.

Was that June hearing, excuse me, the July 10th hearing, was that noticed as a dispositional conference?

Yes. And what I'm relying on is I'm looking at the specific orders that are in my appendix, I believe, that come or issued by the court and they're entitled a dispositional conference order and it cites to the criminal rule procedure.

No, I'm asking what was the notice for the hearing? What was the hearing called in the notice for the hearing?

I would have to refer to, you mean like perhaps with the court.

When the court scheduled the hearing, was it scheduled as a dispositional conference or was it scheduled as a status conference or some other conference?

I think the state argues that this was a and should be treated as a status conference and something else. My argument is that, and I'm not sure if to answer you specifically what it was scheduled as, maybe it would be in the court docket paperwork.

But regardless, what I'm asking the court to rely on is what the court called it and the order that was issued from it that cited to the rule 15B that allows for motions to suppress to be filed 15 days after.

I understand.

And I think it is important to look at the timeline here.

The trial court continued the August trial after it denied the motion to suppress on timeliness grounds. Is that right?

Correct. So I mean, had the court ruled differently at a different time, it would have had firmer ground to say that it was untimely.

So we had the first trial and I should make a correction. I think in my summary of the case, I said the first trial was in 2020. It was March 2023 that it was mistried.

Then there was the first dispositional hearing after that in preparation for the second trial was in April. Then there was another dispositional hearing in May, May 8th of 2023.

And it was after that that Santiago filed his challenge to the wiretap, the execution of the wiretap order on June 22.

Now, if that were the only dispositional conference, there would be an argument that that was late. It was more than 15 days after.

But instead the state timely filed their objection to the motion to suppress and there was a subsequent dispositional hearing on July 10th, 2023.

And at that point, the scheduling is reset and all the parties are aware that there's ample time because the motions have been filed to have this evidentiary hearing on the merits.

And it was a very or a well narrowed issue that would have been before the court would not have required an extensive evidentiary hearing or a lot of witnesses.

Was it accurate, would it be accurate to say that the motion was based on facts that were developed during the first trial?

Yes. And in the motion to suppress, council does cite a specific exchange during trial that I think highlighted the ambiguity of where the interpreters actually were.

But didn't agent commander testify at the second trial that they were located in Bedford and that testimony went unchallenged?

It did go, I guess you could read into that and infer that he was suggesting they were there.

But reading through that transcript and the places that the state cites to, it is not clear to me that he's saying the interpreter was actually there in the room in New Hampshire.

The concern here is that the investigators took a shortcut and sometimes they had interpreters listening from Florida or online or from somewhere else.

And that would be in violation of the order. That was not specifically addressed at trial.

And I agree Defense Council perhaps could have pursued that further.

But at that time, I think the feeling was that that ship had sailed and there were a lot of other issues that he was addressing at that point.

Can you argue that the standard of review is de novo? The state has a different interpretation. Can you address that?

So in the first instance, I think it is a de novo review of interpreting and applying the statute, the rule, rule 15B.

And I think that is clear and unambiguous. It's 15 days after the dispositional conference.

And that's where I'm relying on what the court called that conference.

Does the statute provide a different time frame?

Yes, the wiretap statute, which is quite broad and extraordinary in granting any agreed party the right, says any time before trial.

And that is the timeline that Council cites in his motion to suppress.

And I think that's a good point. Look, this statute here in a sense could preempt the rule of criminal procedure if we were to rely on that alone.

But because of the proceedings, we have both to rely on.

And that wiretap statute explicitly says any time before trial this can be filed.

Now, I could see that leading to some unfair situation, whether it would be prejudice or there wouldn't be time to burden the court's schedule.

But that wasn't the circumstance here. There was ample time to have this hearing.

So in the first instance, when you're looking at the statute, I would say it is a de novo review.

In the second instance, if this court were to find that it was strictly untimely by some interpretation of the rule or the statute, then it would be a discretionary.

And even then, under these circumstances, I would argue that that was an error of the court under discretionary review.

A denial based on timeliness alone, I think, is proper if the delay would impair the operation of the court's docket, if the state would be prejudiced, if there was some evidence that the defense was gaining the system, or if it was a frivolous motion.

But that's not the case here. I think it was a significant challenge and the statutory scheme.

And the case law suggests that this court is expected to really scrutinize these wiretap orders and make sure they're adhered to.

When any agreed party raises it any time before trial, I did cite briefly to Part 1 Article 2B, and our right to privacy, as I know this court has recently dealt with.

There is a special amount of scrutiny that this court is expected and trial courts are expected to subject these invasions into privacy by the government, which is clearly a wiretap is.

Do you agree with the state that there had been about five other motions to suppress filing?

Yes. In fact, many, many more than that. For a significant period of time, there were different attorneys on the case, and Mr. Santiago was filing a lot of pro-say motions.

However, when Council ultimately took this to trial, came in, he was able to narrow that down and essentially say, look, we're not going to pursue all of these pro-say motions.

And there was an extensive colloquy with the judge about that. However, when it did become apparent to Council in a timely manner that there was a non-fribulous, legitimate issue with this execution of the wiretap order, he properly raised that.

So I think Council did a good job in raising the issue that should have been heard.

From the perspective of the trial court trying to manage its docket, should we think about how many motions had been filed given the timing and the issues raised or not raised?

Only if they were raised in a manner that suggested bad faith or in a way that prevented the court from functioning efficiently or on time or that impaired the state's ability to respond.

And that wasn't the case here. While there may have been numerous motions, the way and the time that this one was raised would not have impaired the court's ability to hear it effectively.

Thank you.

Thank you. You have the two minutes. Attorney McCoola.

Good morning, Your Honours. And May it please the court, Adriana McCoola, for the State of New Hampshire.

The trial court in this case sustainably exercised its discretion and that is the review here, when it denied this motion to suppress as untimely.

This motion, there was, according to the case summary that's in the defendant's appendix, only one dispositional conference in this case.

When it was in December 2019, all of the other hearings in this case were either evidentiary hearings, status conferences, or scheduling conferences, including that July 10th hearing.

So wouldn't a dispositional conference occur after the missed trial?

So not every time. And that's because the purpose of a dispositional conference is really for the parties to alert the trial court whether the case is going to be a trial or a plea.

I guess that could have happened at the status conference, that would have happened in April, but that, again, that hearing was noticed as a status conference because the parties did not need a full dispositional.

Well, I mean the parties could very well come to an agreement after trying a case and it being mistried. So there would be a purpose to having a dispositional conference, wouldn't there?

Not necessarily, because the other purposes of the dispositional conference are to set up all of the pretrial deadlines in the case that relate to either the trial or the plea.

So expert witness disclosures, any deadlines for motions to suppress, any deadlines for motions in limonays, any deadlines for motions to dismiss, all of those deadlines are built into the case depending on how complex the case is.

Some of those deadlines are just what's provided in the court rules. And if it's a longer case that will require weeks to try, then those deadlines are built in.

That's not what happened at that April 12 status conference because everybody already knew how long the trial would be. People had filed motions in limonays, they had filed motions to suppress, all of that had really been litigated.

The state generally agrees that sometimes in a case a result in a mistrial there may be new evidence or new information that's developed at that trial that no one knew before that may lead to a new motion in limonays or a new motion to suppress.

That did not happen here. To answer in part Judge Abramson's question, Commander also testified at the first trial that these interpreters were in Bedford. No one, to my memory of that first trial and I did include days two and three because those are the relevant pieces of testimony from the state's witnesses,

no one talked about the potential of these translators being online or in Hawaii or some other state.

Zaglinoff in both trials testified that in general this is how you set up a wiretap. If you need translators, they're in the field office. The field office may be in Bedford, it may be in Boston, it may be wherever the wiretap is happening.

And then you had Commander who provided testimony about this specific wiretap. Zaglinoff knew nothing about this wiretap other than the tech needed to set it up.

Was there evidence that the interpreters were sworn in?

Yes, not in March 2023. There were no O's that the state had. Those came later. I think the DEA couldn't find them in their file, which is why the state did not have them before that March 2023 trial.

But in August, the state provided those O's to the defendant as discovery because Commander found them as he was reviewing his file to prepare to testify in the second trial.

But to that point, there was no motion to suppress that was filed before March 2023 about these missing O's. There was no motion to suppress before March 2023 about where the translators were, which was in Bedford.

So if those were the two issues for suppression, one of them was addressed in the first trial in March. Commander provided testimony that they were in Bedford and that went unchallenged as you'll see in the transcript.

And there was no indication, or even on cross, that these people were somewhere else.

Those O's did not exist, but Sergeant Infante, who worked for the state police, was able to translate the interceptions that were used as exhibits and said that they were translated accurately.

And so that sort of, from the trial court's perspective, took the place of those O's because at that point, defense had raised an evidentiary objection to those O's coming in.

They can't be translated properly or we can't rely on them.

And that was dismissed based on Sergeant Infante's testimony.

But again, no suppression motion was raised even at trial relative to the missing O's.

So by the September trial and before the court ruled on this motion to suppress, the O's had been provided to the defendant and there had been testimony in March 2023 from Commander that the translators were in Bedford.

How do you reconcile the wiretap statute with the court rule?

So the wiretap statute does provide that in general suppression motions can be filed before trial. That's true.

However, it's not specific in providing a timeline and I think that's really because there are times where issues with the wiretap itself may not arise until closer to trial or even at trial.

And so that statute, from the state's perspective, is providing the parties an opportunity to file a pretrial if they know that there is some legitimate or legal issue with the wiretap order as it is, as it stands.

And in this case, these sort of issues do sort of fit squarely in that, meaning that they could have been known pretrial.

So this was not a scenario where at trial in March everybody figured out or there was some concern that this wiretap order was somehow invalid legally.

These issues with where the translators were and where their oaths were existed, frankly, when discovery was provided to the six attorneys the defendant had before the attorney that filed this motion to suppress.

And presumably to that attorney once he was assigned to the case.

But the oaths wouldn't have been produced until after the first trial.

That's correct. But you would have known that and could have filed that suppression motion in January or February 2023 when the court had those hearings about the pro se suppression motions.

That the defendant had filed, none of which included this issue.

And I'm not faulting the pro se defendant for that.

But his four suppression motions that he'd filed on his own were about excluding the Berlin prison phone calls that the judge cannot author that Amy Judge Messer could not authorize this order.

That the two officers who applied for the warrant were not permitted to apply for this wiretap warrant and that the chain of custody for the drug evidence was somehow disrupted.

Those were the four issues the defendant had cited.

He had a conversation with his attorney about those and none of those were adopted as suppression motions.

So presumably they had deep discussions about this wiretap order for them to come to this agreement that the defense attorney would not pursue these issues with the wiretap order.

And the defendant was okay with that based on that the outcome of that colloquy.

It sounds like a waiver argument.

It does sound like a waiver argument and maybe it is possible that he waived this suppression issue because he should have known about it well before even the March 2023 trial.

Although his attorney did not, he was not assigned to the case until December 2022.

Is it the same attorney in both trials?

Yes.

Yes.

And so even if he didn't waive it, the court certainly was within its discretion to dismiss this motion to suppress as untimely.

Because as the court pointed out in its order, there had been numerous trials scheduled at that point.

Before and after March 2023, there had been numerous hearings that the court had had, whether they're status conferences or scheduling conferences, which is what they all were noticed as.

But even if this court treats them as dispositional conferences, there were numerous hearings where the defense attorney could have said, I'm exploring the suppression issue or I'd like to file this motion to suppress.

I could have even mentioned that at the May 6th status conference.

I'm going to file a motion to suppress.

And then that could have been, the deadline for that could have been worked into the pretrial leading up to the case.

But he did not do that.

He filed it really eight weeks before the trial started.

Six weeks after the May 5th hearing, if we're considering it a dispositional.

And before he even had noticed that there'd be a July 10th hearing because the hearing notice for that hearing went out on June 30th and he filed his motion to suppress on June 23rd.

So from his perspective, all he knew when he filed that was that the state had filed a motion to continue the trial for witness unavailability that had not been granted and that the judge was hesitant to grant because he wanted more information.

And that the next hearing would be the final pretrial in August, at which there was no way to have an evidentiary suppression hearing.

As you all well know from your experience, the final pretrial is five to ten minutes long.

You cannot possibly have an evidentiary suppression hearing in that time.

And to defense's points about, you know, you could have denied this as untimely if it was an improper operation to allow the judge to manage his docket or to prevent some prejudice to the state or to prevent the defendant from gaming the system or filing a frivolous motion.

Frankly, all four of those are at play in this case.

This was the trial court operating in Hillsborough North, one of the largest counties in the state, one of the busiest counties in the state.

Knowing it only had eight weeks of time, which included all of the summer months, really, to schedule this suppression hearing on something that the defense knew or should have known even before March 2023.

You have, there was no prejudice to the state in that the state was able to respond timely, but to then schedule an evidentiary hearing with witnesses, one of whom probably would have been commander who was actually stationed overseas in a different country at the time of this.

We had to fly him back for the September trial.

That would have been difficult to coordinate in eight weeks of time, given his assignments, as well as if we needed the translators or any other witnesses to come testify.

In terms of gaming the system, this defendant has gone through, as I said, multiple attorneys that he had multiple conflicts of interest with throughout the case.

He filed four pro se motions on his own that he just let go.

He repeatedly asked for continuances of the trial through his counsel, as you'll see in the case summary.

And granted, he was, he did receive some COVID happened in while his case was pending.

So all of that delay during COVID months, maybe are not his fault.

But certainly after COVID ended and we restarted trials, he did not make any moves or effort to have his trial happen faster.

And then for the last part, the frivolous motion.

As I've said, the facts that were underlying this suppression motion, I know we didn't have O's, but the facts came out in that March 2023 trial.

So all of those reasons that the defense has cited in his oral argument as reasons for the trial court to deny this are at play here.

So this cannot be an unsustainable exercise of discretion.

If there are no further questions on this, I can move to the ineffective assistance of counsel claim.

Sure.

So in that regard, if this court finds that the trial court sustainably denied this motion as untimely,

then the defenses argue that his attorney provided ineffective assistance of counsel for essentially filing a late motion to suppress.

He asks you in the first instance under Thompson to decide this on the record itself.

And the state's position is you cannot do that because you do not have information about why this was filed when it was.

I know that defense has argued in their oral argument that the defense attorney, when this became apparent to him,

he filed this motion to suppress in a timely manner.

Those were his words at oral argument.

One, it's not timely based on the rules, even if you're counting May, that hearing in May as a dispositional conference.

But two, we don't know that.

We don't know when it became apparent to him.

We don't know how it became apparent to him.

We don't know if he wanted to file this motion to suppress all along and the defendant told him not to do that.

Well, if we decide there's no merit to the motion, then there'd be no prejudice.

That's correct.

We can just add in the prejudice problem.

That's true.

And you could certainly decide it that way.

And I think that is apparent from the record at trial just because, although we don't know how people would have testified at a suppression hearing,

but I think this court can infer that Commander would have testified consistently a third time, as he did in March and September.

And these oaths, although they did not exist until August, would certainly have been presented as exhibits at that suppression hearing

that would have have to have happened after August.

So I guess from that respect on that prong, there is evidence on the record at trial to decide the case

and to say that this was not an effective assistance of counsel.

But whether we're in Thompson or not, there's certainly not enough information in the record before this court about the strategic decision to file this when it was filed.

Regardless, I mean, there is no prejudice from the state's perspective, but you also don't have any evidence of that prong as well.

And so for all of those reasons, this court should uphold the convictions in this case.

And unless there are no further questions, I'll rest on my brief.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Attorney Swenson.

Thank you.

The state is arguing that because defense counsel could have discerned this issue before, it should have filed it sooner.

I don't think that's the issue here.

The issue here is, is there any reason why the court should hear it, even if counsel spots it late?

Because it wasn't too late.

Within plenty of time, more than 15 days after the last dispositional hearing and 80 some days before trial, that it could have been heard.

Just because counsel may have been prioritizing other things, and after the first trial, there was mediation, for example, and there was clearly further negotiations.

There was a mediation scheduled.

Attorney, respond to the argument that the state was prejudiced in the fact that the witnesses were overseas?

So the state Sitesuit officer commander, however, he was not the officer that was in the wire room.

Certainly not the day, the crucial day when there was the surveillance down in Haverhill and the vehicle driving up to Manchester.

That was commander, I believe, that was in the vehicle and in Haverhill and then driving up to Manchester.

So he would not have been the witness that would have been able to testify who was in the wire room in Bedford, New Hampshire at the time.

I think Officer Johnson was one of the officers who said he was in and out of the wire room or somebody else.

It would have to have been some evidence and obviously the trial court would be able to determine what sort of evidence the state would be able to rely on to establish that.

But I don't think it would have been terribly burdensome for the state to produce witnesses.

Under something as important as this, was the wire tap order executed strictly under the order as issued by the New Hampshire court?

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

The court is in recess.
