This is case 2020-03-098, Pheasant Lane Realty Trust versus the City of Nashua.

Good morning, Council. Attorney Leonard, I understand you reserve one minute for your thought.

I did. Thank you. Good morning. May it please the Court.

I'm Attorney Celia Leonard, Deputy Corporation Council for the City of Nashua.

With me is Steve Bolton, Corporation Council for the City of Nashua.

The matter before the Court today is Pheasant Lane Mall's Municipal Tax Payment Appeal

for tax years 2018, 2019, and 2020.

And also how the City followed the statutory framework for proportionality.

Pursued to RSA 75-A, which requires revaluation to complete and full value at least as often as once every five years,

the City completed a statistical revaluation for tax year 2018.

And at point here, despite the taxpayers' claim to the contrary, the use of the term revaluation for a statistical revaluation

is in fact proper and not misleading under the DRA's own rules, DRA revs 601.40,

which defines both a full measure and list valuation and a statistical revaluation as quote a revaluation.

With this appeal we're asking that the case law that holds that the only way that the City can meet its constitutional burden

and achieve the required proportionality is to use a ratio be overturned.

We're also asking that the case law that requires the City to declare a ratio,

even when it doesn't use one generally to set assessments, be overturned.

These holdings do not comport with the reality of the DRA's certified use of CAMA,

which is Computer Assisted Mass Appraisal, RSA 75-A, and RSA 75-A-A.

RSA 75-A is the when changes are allowed to assessments,

and of course 75-A-A is requiring the full and complete value at least as often as every five years.

So essentially I can boil this down, I think.

You're arguing that as long as you do a CAMA valuation every five years,

the only adjustments made between those five-year periods are under the provisions of 75-A-A,

IESA or a change in the property.

Correct.

And so there is no, I'll just get to the, there is no annual adjustment

for perhaps market changes during that five-year.

You just carry the same number through unless it is there is a change to the property itself.

That is correct.

And particularly in the years in question before the legislature,

after you're holding in Merrimack premium outlets added back in to correct any errors in existing appraisals,

we are operating under the 75-A as in effect from September 2001 to 2022.

So are you essentially saying that there's already an equalization ratio in the CAMA approach?

No, but it is proportional because it is done the same.

At the revaluation, every property is looked at and the goal again is the full and complete value of that property

and they're all looked at in the same manner.

So there's no equalization ratio applied because it should be ideally, the ideal,

the fair market value becomes the revaluation assessment.

So how do you deal with the trial, with the trial court identified,

which is perhaps in a house, in a hot housing market, residential property goes up?

So there's no obligation to account for that between the five-year timeframes.

There isn't under the current law because the housing market doing its thing outside of there being a physical change to the property

in alteration of fire, destruction, or in the case of utilities which are distinct,

poles going in, wires coming down, everything like that.

If the law were different, you'd have to, but the compromise has been at least as often as every five years set it.

Everything gets revalued, there you go, and with the CAMA additionally going back to the prior question,

if a change is to the property, if there is as the testimony showed,

there's no equalization ratio. If there's an addition or a demo,

it gets plugged into the statistical tables and then a new value is created,

but it's based on the tables that were created off of the 2018 revaluation.

So it's equal or proportional because everyone's carried with the 2018,

even if there's a change to the property because the 2018 values are still applied

until the CAMA table is updated at the next revaluation.

If there were to be a sale at a much higher number that wouldn't get taken into account

and the DRA calculated equalization ratio wouldn't take it into account,

if you'd valued something at three million and then two years later it sold for five,

are you saying that that sale for five would just be completely immaterial irrelevant?

I think you're conflating a couple issues here.

How the DRA does its ratio, they will look at sales, right?

I mean of course our position is we did not use the DRA ratio to set assessments.

It is not permitted to sales chase.

The fact that the market is strictly forbidden when you're doing assessing.

So you can't just change, even though you can look to see if there's been things

that were overlooked with sales, you can't go in.

The municipality cannot go in and just change the assessment based on a recent sale.

I mean although it's listed, it's really more nuanced.

It's more did we miss a bedroom?

I often, you know, there's been a bathroom at it.

I mean sometimes it goes like that much.

I thought you had said earlier that you did take into account subsequent sales,

but you're saying no.

The statute says that, I believe the statute says that sales, but it's not.

Again, it's a nuanced way of doing it.

You should cannot go in and just change it based on a sale.

Can you just clarify for me, by my reading of the record, 2018 is no longer an issue here.

There's no claim that there was an abatement that was improperly granted in regard to 2018

because the number came in higher than the assessment, right?

2018 is not a claim before us, right?

It is a claim in that, yes, the city got it right.

We got it right in the reevaluation year.

We were prohibited by statute from making any changes,

because there was no physical changes to the property under 75-8.

So that you should have carried forward, so we think there should be no issue at all.

Right, once we've established that 2018 was right and it's not being challenged here,

that should be the end of the discussion from your perspective.

Absolutely, yes.

Because of the five-year carry forward.

Correct, correct.

And so that got me to my next thing.

As this Court has discussed in the Marriott Premium Outlets,

the proportionality is achieved by the five-year townwide reappraisal under 75-8,

and that proportionality can only be modified with the change to the property within the express terms.

And as we just discussed, the market value in the reevaluation year becomes the assessed value.

And also, there's no need to apply a ratio in the reevaluation year.

The market value should become the assessed value.

So the only reason you want to apply if you're going to use a ratio

is from fair market value to assessed,

but where it's already supposed to be 100%, then you wouldn't do that.

Would the ratios come up in an abatement proceeding?

They may come up, but abatements and settlement of abatement appeals, there's litigation involved.

There was testimony that the fair market value might not always be used.

Sometimes it's used.

There was evidence of two settlement agreements that had a ratio applied.

There was evidence of more settlement agreements, I think five or six, that did not.

And were those settlement agreements admissible in this proceeding?

They were admitted to simply show what they said,

but not for the proof that the city used a ratio in setting the assessments, which is the standard.

Why should the settlements be relevant in any way?

I don't think they should be.

I don't think settling litigation should be relevant to how the city sets assessments

in the statutory scheme of at least once every five years.

I had to respond to the appellee's argument that the city really didn't do a reevaluation in 2018.

There was a limited statistical exercise.

In court, the BTLA found that the city hadn't done that as well, right?

Well, I'll go back to the DRA allows in their rules and their definition of a reevaluation over 601.40.

That's just rev 601.40.

Statistical reevaluation is a legitimate way to reevalue property.

The only other thing is a full measure and list of property, which the city did undertake after that.

The DRA did not invalidate the 2018 numbers, in my view.

It said do it better, and the city had already planned on doing it actually in four years.

So quickly to the DRA ratios, the assessed value going back to the 2018, the court found an assessed value.

We found a market value for 18, but then becomes the assessed value with 100%, I'll call it.

And that is required under 761-C to carry forward, again, absent a change or until there's a reevaluation.

And going back, even though the abatement appeals allow to go every year,

where here the city got it right in 2018, no further appeal should take.

It doesn't matter.

Like no other property got a value anew in 2019 or in 2020.

Just this one, that's not proportional.

That's not fair.

Everybody else, unless their property changed, was riding the 2018 camera.

Was there an objection below to even engaging in that enterprise?

I tend to agree with you that once 2018 is established, 2019 and 2020 don't matter,

but certainly there was a lot of energy devoted to that here.

And I'm wondering whether there was any objection to even going there.

Right.

I mean, the city's expert conducted that exercise?

Yes.

And I think here, when you're challenging law that you want to overturn,

it would be better to have the facts in the record for the additional years if we needed them.

And everybody was there, and so we had the expert reports.

But to answer your question, we did not, the city did not file anything to say,

no, we should not go forward on these other years.

So an applicant, a taxpayer in Nashua, confronted with the BTLA form,

should just ignore the section where it's asking for the municipality's equalization ratio?

Should ignore it.

I mean, what is the taxpayer put in under this regime?

I think that, yeah, it would not be applicable.

The BTLA form is forced upon the city.

It is not something that they agree, and it does not take into account the fact that there is a computer-assisted mass appraisal,

that the ratio itself is not meant for this purpose.

It's under 21J3.

It's for the state to apportion public taxes among municipalities.

It's not meant for this, also applying Berlin.

But to that point, if it's meant to maintain proportionality among different communities,

how can one community not utilize it?

It's a different statutory scheme.

And it simply was not shown that there was a ratio that set the majority of the assessments for the 2018 CAMA.

There is, there was testimony about current use.

That's by statute.

By statute of dairy, you know, and we don't have that statute applicable to this property.

So the CAMA overrides that need to maintain proportionality among communities?

Overrides.

The CAMA is specific to Nashua and maintains proportionality within Nashua,

which is the assessment.

And it might maintain proportionality among other CAMA municipalities.

Correct.

And we just don't have any control over those and how the state decides to do it is how the state decides to do it.

But even applying Berlin, even if the city has used a ratio, it could not have been the actual 2018 for 2018.

We didn't know it.

The city did not know it.

Same with 2019, you couldn't know it.

So it's our position that even if a ratio were to be applied, which we argue it should not be because it was not used,

it would be 2018, no ratio, and then applying 2019 and 2020 ratios to the 2018 value, which must carry forward

because there's been no change in the property.

I see my time is up.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

I'm Briano.

Good afternoon.

May it please the court, Anthony Ambariano, on behalf of Pheasant Lane Realty Trust.

With me, Attorney Olga Goldberg, my co-counsel on this matter from Pierce Outwood,

I will waive the no-question period.

So I think the city comes here today and asks this court to overrule its presence, the Nashua case,

the Andrews case, and to a certain extent even the Berlin case.

What really the city is asking this court to do is change the constitutional requirement as to proportionality.

That is what it's alleged can hear.

Under the Constitution, assessments must be proportional and reasonable.

The Constitution does not say once every five years is okay.

And that really is the crux of the usual here.

So do you dispute the fact that the assessment was proportional in 2018?

There is no evidence of proportionality in 2018 among classes of properties.

And I think that is very important, and there is in the record.

No evidence of proportionality or disproportionality?

There is no evidence of proportionality.

What we do know is the city never challenged the DRA ratios.

We know that.

We know that as the trial court pointed out in its order.

The city in its interest interrogatories in this case said,

No, we don't have a ratio other than the DRA ratios.

The testimony of the witnesses from the city was that

the DRA ratios are the general level of assessment in the city.

That is not controverted.

And the court has asked the city questions today about the abatement application

and the city saying, not us.

Well, how does the city then explain posting on its website what the median ratios are?

But the DRA ratios are created for another reason,

which is the statewide utility tax and figure out how towns are,

how up-to-date towns are vis-a-vis each other in relation to fair market value.

That's why that number gets generated.

I respectfully disagree in that the DRA that's in the record states

that the median level of the equalizations is what is to be used for abatements.

It is not merely, one of the functions is, of course,

to balance any apportioned taxes among municipalities.

But the other function is to make sure that all taxpayers are treated equally.

And that is not what we have here.

What is the evidence of disproportionality in 2019 or 2020?

That your client is paying a disproportionate share of the taxes in the community

in the absence of evidence about what's happened to other commercial properties

or other properties in the community.

First, to your last point, Justice Bassett, there is evidence of the city abating

granting abatements to other retail properties that are even part of the general physical language.

But we all know that abatements' deals get cut on abatement cases for a lot of reasons.

I don't know why is that relevant to the analysis of proportionality.

Because the uncontradicted evidence is that the growth in residential values

during this time period was explosive.

And the trial court found, as to the city's own expert,

found that the property at issue here had decreased in value substantially,

almost 30% over the three years at issue.

That was not the case with residential properties.

As a result, the city is urging on this court to essentially, of course,

overrule Andrews and Nashua and allow a multi-tier system of taxation,

whereas some properties are assessed at 80% of their value

and some are assessed at 130% of their value.

That is not permissible result under the New Hampshire Constitution.

So if the property had gone up 30% in value in 2020,

are you saying that the city had the right to reassess and increase the valuation?

I don't think that's so.

The city has tools.

The city has tools to deal with this.

It's not the Merrimack statute which we'll be revisiting again next week.

But the city has tools that can do a statistical revaluation.

And the Department of Revenue Administration says to the municipalities,

all properties will not increase or decrease at the same rate.

You can deal with this.

You can actually do, if you wanted to, a full municipal revaluation every year.

Or you can do trending to capture these disparities in appreciation

or depreciation in types of properties.

So that is always out there.

They can do it but they're not required to unless somebody brings a challenge.

Well, I think when someone brings a challenge in an abatement case,

they are looking out after themselves.

There are other mechanisms where a group of taxpayers can challenge broader issues in assessments.

That isn't what we have here.

We have a particular property acknowledged by the city, city's expert, I should say,

to have been overvalued.

And it is interesting to note that the city brought this issue up years into the proceedings

when it looked like the appraisal value plot wasn't going to work.

Well, it wasn't overvalued in 2018.

In fact, it was undervalued.

So the trial court so found that it was nothing that we have appealed.

Do you feel it was proper for the trial court to set a different value for 19 or 18, 19, 20?

I think it's imperative.

I think that's what the constitution requires.

And that's what the whole abatement procedure is based on.

It's a year by year process.

Did the assessors get it right this year or did they get it wrong?

And sometimes you win and sometimes you lose.

Well, but it's not fair market value, it's proportionality.

Your burden is to prove that you're paying a disproportionate share of the property taxes in the community.

So fair market value is going to go up and down for every property every year.

And that's why we have 7616 to deal with these issues on a property by property basis.

A couple of words, if I may, with respect to the statistical revaluation that was done by the city.

Just so that there's no doubt, and this is much about this in the record.

The CAMA system, you don't just plug in shopping center and it gives you a number.

There are 20 or 30 variables in that formula.

This particular CAMA system is essentially a cost-based system.

Now both experts at trial testified cost is not a valid way, not a reliable way to value this type of property.

This property has to be valued on an income basis.

And we know where the income was going.

Obviously the income was going down.

I also want to point out, with respect to some of the city's arguments here today,

that when reviewing the payment applications, and again this is in the record,

particularly single-family houses and other types of properties,

the censors in the city are looking at sales.

And I think that partially answers the question that was raised earlier to the city.

They are looking at sales to determine whether or not a property should be abated.

The CAMA system is a mass appraisal system based primarily on cost.

And that particularly in dealing with a large complex retail property

that is not a way that anyone in the real world would ever appraise that property.

It's a valid system. It's been accepted.

And to the extent you claim there are flaws with it, that's not enough to meet your burden.

If the system is flawed and the flaws are uniformly applied,

then that doesn't meet your burden to prove disproportionality.

I respectfully, again, disagree.

And I think the term government proof often comes up in these cases.

And here the city essentially ignored Nashua.

Nashua said, because this court said in Nashua, you have to use some method to equalize.

And here the city said, no, we don't have to.

We recognize these trends and values, but we're stuck in 2018.

If you are in the pavement in 2019, you have to show the city

and then according to the city, show the court what the property was worth in 2018.

That has never been...

Well, you have to show that the numbers that were derived from 2018

result in the taxpayer paying a disproportionate share of taxes in 2019 or 2020,

which is a relative analysis, not just focused on one property.

Right?

Well, for present purposes, we are focused on one property.

And we are focused on a property that everyone acknowledges that both the praisers

and the trial court was valued at more than its fair market value.

In that note, please observe that even without the ratios,

the court's values were less than the assessments.

But that's only part of the bargaining.

You cannot stop the discussion there to meet the constitutional requirement

of proportionality among classes by year.

The Merrimack case, which I will jump to when my time is running short here,

has absolutely nothing to do with the issue before this court today.

It was not a pavement case.

It was not a case dealing with disproportionate assessment.

It had to do with the statutory authority of a municipality to take one property

and say, we read something about this property somewhere else

and someone thought it's worth more, so we're going to change it.

It has nothing to do with the values that the Department of Value Administration shows the city.

Yes, you can do yearly.

You can do statistical updates.

You can do partial evaluations.

That's what matters.

And keep in mind, again here, that the statistical evaluation in which the city relies

is based upon false affidavits that were filed.

There's affidavits that were filed and it is in the record to the effect that,

yes, we did inspect the properties.

We measured and listed the properties.

No, you didn't.

The city did not do that.

Hence all the litigation before the BTLA and the city being forced to revisit this issue

in five years after 2018.

So the city's foundation for its argument is more than shaking.

But in 2018, its number was lower than what the court found the fair market value to be, correct?

The assessment, yes.

The assessment was.

That's right.

It was just because it wasn't because it was a flawed technique that the number goes down the next two years.

It's because, according to your experts, the market changed.

The market took a dive.

Well, not according just to the taxpayers' experts, also according to the city's expert.

And that's what the court found is that the market had changed and the value had dropped for this property in those second and third years.

As compared with the residential properties whose growth was, according to the city assessor, explosive.

And there's nothing in any of this court presidents that have ever suggested that getting proportionality right in one year means you're right for five years.

It's simply a truism that not all property goes up and down at the same rate.

So it sounds like there's an obligation, if we were to accept your theory here, there's an obligation for a community to reassess every year.

Well, we assess in the very general sense perhaps of that word, not in any technical sense, but to at least be observant of trends.

What is happening out there?

That's what matters.

And these, for this particular timeframe that's an issue in this case, honestly, you need no more, do any more than read the newspapers to know what was going on in the market.

And the city chose not to do so.

But it continued to use the DRA ratios for open space.

It continued to use the DRA ratios for utility property.

And the city's statement of the issue is in this case.

They said there's two issues in this case.

What is the value that take that value and apply the DRA equalization ratio to it?

You're right, Lysonna.

Thank you.

Thank you.

I'll be on it, turning it later.

Quickly, 75-8, as in effect during the relevant period and now, does not allow the city to, quote, taking a consideration newspaper articles in setting assessments.

That's not allowed, statutorily not allowed.

Merrimack Premium Outlets is about setting assessments and how that is done under the statutory scheme, which is constitutional.

And the current statutory scheme seeks to ensure proportionality through municipal-wide pre-appraisals at least every five years and annual adjustments to the properties that have changed in value.

This scheme may not be perfect and indeed goes on, that there might be some practical inequalities.

That's Merrimack Premium Outlet that is this case.

Here, the city got it right.

And the 2018 revaluation, the city had actually, factually, if you read everything within the BTLA record, had already, of its own accord, hired on to do a full measure on list for 2022.

In a statistical revaluation, you do not measure on list every property, only those if you want that are sold or had a change.

This property didn't have a change.

My time's up.

Thank you very much.

Thank you.

We'll see you in a minute.

See you in recess.
