Dave Yadavoo, all over again.

This is case number 2230213, State of New Hampshire, versus Kenneth J. Lewis, Jr.

Good morning, Your Honor, and may it please the court. I drown in Makula for the State of New Hampshire.

I will pick up where I left off before we stopped.

But my point I was making about Bertrand is this court held that, in that case, if the trial court had held a hearing on the defendant's competency,

even though there were two OFE examiners who opined that the defendant was competent,

that hearing and the cross examination that would have happened at that hearing could have fleshed out for the court

facts that it could have found to find he was incompetent.

And the State's argument in this case is that that opinion is just evidence, as the records are.

And that cross examination, that meaningful cross examination, or a meaningful direct examination,

cannot happen at these competency hearings.

Do we know if the State had the records in Bertrand?

We don't know anything about what records anybody had in Bertrand, Your Honor.

So is this something that's, how has it not been litigated before?

The State doesn't know the answer to that.

It could very well be, I know from experience that some defense attorneys do provide the records to the State

in competency cases without their needing to be litigation.

I also know in this case, obviously there had to be a motion to compel to get those records.

And so it's very possible that sometimes records are provided, sometimes they're not.

More importantly, I think the records are evidence that the State could use at a hearing.

And as this competency process continues on without allowing the State to access the records,

where it believes it needs the records, the court is preventing the State from bringing to the trial court

the best evidence of the defendant's competency.

Which this court has held in Cupchen, which is a dangerousness case,

that the trial court needs all of the evidence, as much evidence as it can get,

to make sure it's making the best decision about what to do with the defendant and his mental health.

So why not ask for an in-camera review?

So an in-camera review in this case would be unnecessary

because an in-camera review is meant to find records that are material or relevant to the outcome of the case

or the controversy.

In this case, all of those records are relevant and material

because all of the records were reviewed by the OFE in making their opinion.

So what would be the limits of the role you're asking us to adopt here?

I mean, if the records are produced to the OFE, they get automatically produced to the State?

Essentially, as long as the State could prove essential need in that case to get the record.

So there would still need to be either a motion or maybe there would be an agreement from the defendant

and the State that there was that essential need met, that has happened to in cases.

But if the defendant doesn't agree, the State could file a motion to show the court it has essential need

and meet that compelling justification for disclosure.

Wouldn't the defendant frequently have a Fifth Amendment right to not provide the records

knowing if we agreed with you that they were going to the State ultimately?

Wouldn't they be incriminating in many cases?

Not in this context because in competency,

the records can only be used by everybody, State, defendant and the court for this competency determination.

What would stop the State from making a bail argument or a sentencing argument based on conduct

that is disclosed in those records but not otherwise part of the State's knowledge?

So the trial court's order that it issues when it orders a competency evaluation would prevent that

because the trial court's order specifically says that the report, the opinion

and all of the evidence that is generated to the OFE and then to the court and then to the parties

is used only for this competency determination.

It's in every single one of those form orders.

It has built into it already a protective order that every trial court

because they issue the same order every time is already expecting the parties to follow.

Wouldn't an opinion from the OFE more commonly turn on the interview with the defendant than the records?

It's hard to say because those reports are fact specific and person specific

and they're also from a medical perspective instead of a legal perspective

and Bertrand says competency is a legal determination which is why the court cannot rely solely on the report

but the records can shed light on the defendant's mental health diagnosis

which is required for the competency determination that may not be able to be ascertained in an hour or two hour interview.

I mean diagnoses such as schizophrenia or other long-term mental health diagnoses cannot be done in an hour.

But where do we draw the line?

Wouldn't this open the door to both the state, I mean the defense counsel is present typically at those interviews.

What stops the state from being present and wouldn't this just open the door to the state saying

we're entitled to be there and now it's basically a deposition?

So the state's certainly not asking in this case for it to be present at these competency evaluation hearings.

I don't know what that would look like because I think for the state to have permission to be there

would need to ask permission from the court to attend.

I think the reason the defense attorney can attend is because he's the agent of the defendant.

But isn't the reasoning that you're asking us to apply to your request for the records the same

as would apply to a request to attend the interview?

So the records here that we're looking for evidence and I understand that the

interview then is used to generate the report but that interview is not recorded

and so that interview is not evidence that's written down or documented in some way

in the same way that the records are.

And so what I mean by that is the report that talks about what happened in that interview

is the evidence from that interview and that is already disclosed to the state

and to the trial court up front when it's completed.

But by that same reasoning wouldn't the report which would contain a synopsis

of the records also be sufficient for the state?

It's not sufficient and that's because the records oftentimes are much more voluminous

than the one paragraph or two paragraph summary that's included in that report

and the records can not only shed light on the OFE's opinion or the summary

that's included in the report but can also help inform the state

whether the report itself is reliable, is credible

and it also allows the state to use those records to put forth other pieces of evidence

to the trial court that it may use in finding those specific facts.

And so it's not as if the state's only reason for wanting these records

is to be able to go cross-examine the OFE at the hearing.

Those records are also used to determine up front if there's enough information

in the report to support the OFE's opinion.

Those records could also be used to prepare meaningful direct examination of that OFE examiner

and it can also be used to see is the summary that's in this report accurate

or did the OFE by mistake or by whatever act of just reviewing something

in a shorter amount of time miss a very important record

that sheds light on the defendant's competency or incompetence?

There seems to be a discrepancy or disagreement between the parties here

as to whether anyone other than the OFE ever actually had possession

or access to the records.

My reading of everything is that the defendant,

neither the defendant nor defendant's counsel nor the state,

none of them had access to the records only OFE.

Is that correct?

That's my understanding from looking at the case summary really

because I was on a party and neither was the state down below to that ex parte motion

but my understanding is there was an ex parte motion filed with the trial court

to order the providers to provide the records to the OFE.

Directly.

Directly.

Not through counsel.

It sounds like from reading Attorney Barnard's brief

and looking at the appendix documents

it appears that the defense attorney did never receive those

from that order compelling the providers to provide it to the OFE

but the state's position would be he also is due these records

in the same way that the state is due these records

so that he can prepare a meaningful cross examination of the evaluator

or so that he can determine the veracity and credibility of the report

and decide if he needs to get his own second opinion

of the defendant's competency to stand trial.

Should it affect our analysis here that the defendant refused to sign a release?

No, because the record is really silent as to why the defendant refused to sign that release.

We don't even know that it was a refusal.

It could very well have just been that the defense attorney could not coordinate with the jail

to find a time to meet with him in person to have those releases signed.

Well, Attorney Barnard says that the defendant refused to sign a release.

He asserts that in his brief but the state could find no support for that assertion in the record.

There was no prosapleting filed with the trial court to explain why.

I don't know what's in that ex parte motion.

Maybe there's an explanation in that ex parte motion for why the defendant couldn't get the release.

The defense attorney could not have the release assigned by the defendant.

The state does not know and that ex parte motion was not attached in any appendix.

So given that it's a discovery decision, don't we owe the trial court deference?

You do owe the trial court deference as long as the facts the trial court found are supported by the record

and as long as the legal reasoning is not unreasonable or untenable

and in this case it is unreasonable and untenable to deny the state evidence that it needs

in a proceeding where it has the burden of proof.

If the report and the opinion from the OFE are evidence based on what Bertrand has said,

then they are evidence in the same way that the records are evidence.

Because the state have gotten this information by a warrant?

I don't believe so because competency wells in the middle of a criminal proceeding

is really sort of a quasi-criminal civil proceeding

and to get a warrant for something you have to have probable cause to believe a crime has been committed

and that is not where the state is at when it's in a competency proceeding.

Where the state is at in a competency proceeding frankly is trying to determine

the best information to present to the trial court about the defendant's mental health

and about whether he's competent to stand trial.

What happens when the circuit court orders a separate evaluation after the OFE does their thing?

Does the state get the records in order to prepare its own evaluation from its own expert?

I think historically that hasn't been happening under the same,

even if it's the state's own expert I don't know that the state could get the records

that the court has ordered delivered to the OFE directly.

I believe that the experts for the state would get those records potentially from the OFE

or maybe from an order from the trial court delivering to that expert the records.

But if the trial court as it did in this case is already held that the state cannot receive those records

then I don't believe that the state would be able to get its records

when it has its own expert evaluate the defendant which is also a fatal flaw of this process

because how could the state be expected to put on its own expert without having before it

the records and the evidence that its expert relied on

and in comparing its expert's opinion to the opinion from the OFE evaluator

who is a witness of the court essentially.

And as you noted earlier this is the order in this case is essentially the standard order

and it seems to me that one thing that hasn't been discussed here is the order provides

it provides about getting a release and then if there is no release then

there can be an order directly to the providers.

But then it says if defense council objects to providing any information

provided in paragraphs one through seven council must file an objection within five days of this order.

So it seems to me there's a process in place for the defendant to say wait a minute

these are my concerns about these records going over

and then there would almost inevitably it seems to me be some sort of ex parte

review of the records before they go to the expert.

And why wouldn't such a process adequately protect both the state and the defendant?

So I don't believe in this in a competency context when a defendant objects

there would necessarily be an in-camera or any other review of the records by the trial court.

My understanding of what that triggers would be the defendant filing a motion to the trial court

or defense attorney on his behalf saying he objects to providing these documents to the court

and then the hearing or the pleadings before the court would be about

whether the defendant must provide those to the OFE.

But if the objection is well okay I understand these issues that are related

to my mental competency might come in but I have these other medical conditions

that have been treated at Concord Hospital that have no relevance to my competency

and that no one should know about.

Why wouldn't that be the proper process, some ex parte review

where the records go to the trial court and the trial court looks at them and says

yeah you're right these five admissions have nothing to do with your competency

but these ones will send to the OFE.

Why isn't that a proper way to proceed?

It's a proper way to proceed certainly to decide what records go to the OFE

and the state would not request any of the records that did not make it to the OFE.

It's not as if in these cases or even in this case the state wanted any of the defendant's mental health records

that he generated in his whole life.

We just wanted the records from the last three years that he provided to the OFE

as the court ordered him to do and as eventually occurred.

So this is I mean the principle you're standing on is as any defendant is entitled to

and say a medical malpractice case if documents are given to an expert

and in the expert's file then you're entitled to review them

for possible use for cross examination or impeachment.

Yes but also to evaluate the veracity and credibility of the report

because I know attorney Barnard is arguing the essential need can only be shown

basically if there is definitely going to be a hearing

and I see my red light is on may I just finish this point.

The state's point is the state needs those records up front when the OFE receives them

to evaluate the entire opinion because the state has the burden of proof

in a competency hearing to prove by a preponderance of the evidence

that he's competent to stand trial.

Thank you.

Thank you attorney McCulloch attorney Barnard.

Thank you good morning may it please the court.

My name is Thomas Barnard I represent Kenneth Lewis be happy to take the court's questions.

Why isn't the procedure that I just discussed with counsel adequately protect the

interests on both sides there's an opportunity for the defendant to object in this order

and if the defendant says no you shouldn't get those those records shouldn't go to the OFE

or these are confidential for other reasons why isn't that an ex parte hearing the way to sort that out.

Well there's so there's two issues there's should the records be disclosed to the OFE

and should the records be disclosed to the state

and it's it's easy to imagine a defendant saying look I have I have no objection to the OFE

reviewing these records but I don't want them disclosed to the state.

The state is my adversary the prosecutors alone have the power to

incarcerate me these information these records could be used at a bail hearing

a sentencing hearing to bring.

Well the trial court says no you can't.

The trial court prohibits the use of those records for any other purpose but competency right?

That was that was on the face of the order but that type of order is hard to enforce

if if if the defendant is found competent and testifies a trial and the prosecutors

cross-examining the defendant prosecutor may know in the back of his or her mind

what those records contain and that can influence the cross-examination

even if the records aren't expressly used.

But those types of distinctions are created all the time that you can have information

for a particular purpose and not use it for another purpose.

It might be perhaps a helpful fiction but it's one that operates in the court system.

But the purpose of the privileges is to encourage open communication

with treatment providers and skepticism about the enforceability of that type of order

is going to hinder that communication that openness.

If defendants say it's it's so easy for my adversary the prosecutors to obtain

what I'm telling these these very private this very private information

my secrets my shames then that's going to hinder their their communication

with their treatment providers.

And why isn't that that's argument seems too good because the OFE then shouldn't have them either.

The OFE the OFE is not going to use that information

either explicitly or implicitly in a bail hearing in a sentencing hearing

in bringing new charges and the OFE is not the defendant's adversary

the OFE is the court's expert as the state agrees at paragraph 13 of its reply brief

this is the court's expert so essentially when the OFE gets the records

it's just the court getting the records and and and to submit

confidential records to a court does not waive the privilege at all.

How do you effectively cross-examine an expert who's reviewed

three inches of medical records when you don't have the records to say

well wait a minute there was this admission that you don't even talk about

or that you completely discount how can you effectively do that.

And that's essentially the the core of the state's argument is that there

there might be some discrepancy between the the summary

in the OFE's report and what the act and what the records

actually show and there's a simple solution to that

to that speculation and that's that step one the court

wait until the OFE issue its report which didn't happen here at the time the

court issued its challenged order. Step two

the court obtain that report put it side by side

with the records ordering camera review for the records put the reports side by side with the records

and look for this discrepancy look for this omission

and if there is that discrepancy or omission then disclose

those records that are directly relevant. You're saying the court does that review?

I'm saying the court does that review that's in camera review and it is

it's a tried and true process it's a process

that civil living ins go through it's a process that

criminal defendants go through on a regular basis it's a process that courts are accustomed

to and what's tried and true what civil litigant in a medical malpractice

case where the medical records have been provided to an

expert and there's an expert report

the next step is not here's the expert report

and oh judge here the three pounds of paper that go with it

now look through it we rely on the adversary system to make that work

we do because in that circumstance we're talking about

a litigant voluntarily providing their privileged information

to their own retained expert who they then intend to call it trial to

testify and at that point we're talking about an ad issue waiver

because that litigant is making some claim

that places those privileged records

at issue. So what happens when the court orders a separate evaluation the state wants

an evaluation of the defendant don't they get the records in that instance?

So the OFE is issued an evaluation and the state

has retained its own expert to conduct

now in that circumstance the state wouldn't automatically get the records

there should be an in-camera review I don't think it should be

essentially any different than

then it's simply the OFE offering the opinion

Should it matter if the issue of competency is raised by the defendant

versus the state versus the court?

It shouldn't if the issue of competency is raised it simply means that somebody has

a concern a bona fide doubt about whether the defendant is competent

it doesn't amount to a claim of incompetence

that could happen

there could be in addition to somebody raising a concern about the defendant's

competence and there being a competency hearing

one of the part or the defendant for instance could say

and I'm taking a position that I am incompetent

well that's going to change things because now the defendant is making a claim

and the defendant hires an expert and gives privileged information

to that expert well now the defendant is making an at issue waiver

and those records may very well be discoverable by the state

but none of that happened here the only thing that happened here is the defendant's lawyer

said I have a concern it's not a claim at all

just a concern and the court issued a competency evaluation

I don't understand Justice Donovan gave you a hypothetical

the state retains an expert to evaluate competency

and then you say well there should be an ex parte review

of what and when the records

what's the judge going to review ex parte

and when in your response

if the OFE issues an evaluation

and the OFE reviews the defendant's privileged records

then the OFE will issue a report that summarizes those records

and if the state believes that there might be

some discrepancy or omission then the court should conduct an in-camera review

to determine whether that discrepancy or omission exists

while we're retaining an expert well that's fine that doesn't change things

the court is still conducting an in-camera review to determine whether there's some discrepancy or omission

between the privileged records and the summary

of those records in the OFE's report how often does that actually happen

the state retaining its own expert no that the court engaged

in an ex parte review of the records but after the opinions been

issued not often because

they recently have prosecutors began demanding access to the privileged

records of defendants and it's really I think it's just one or two prosecutors

that are making these requests historically

the state hasn't sought the privileged records of defendants

when competency has been raised and even when

the OFE opines that the defendant is incompetent

so even if the defendant refuses to sign a release the court issues an order

requiring the providers to provide those records to the OFE

that's what happened here

and what if there is a signed release then it can only flow to one

expert and one party

it doesn't flow to any party it goes to the OFE

the court's expert alright so only one expert gets the benefit of that

and then I mean the court ultimately has the responsibility

it's legal determination of competency

and the scenario you're positing is there's one expert

that has the OFE that's got all this information

and then nobody else has the information

no other expert no other evaluator no other party

and that is the best way to

come to the right conclusion and ascertain the truth

that neither party has the records automatically

I'm not saying those records can't be disclosed to the parties

I'm saying the records can only be disclosed to the parties if

the court, after in-camera review identifies a compelling

justification and there is no alternative source for that information

how is a signed release not an anti-issue waiver

a signed release for disclosure to the

OFE because that's the court the OFE is the court's expert

so disclosing the records to the OFE is just like disclosing the records to the court

and that is not a waiver of the privilege if it were courts would never conduct in-camera reviews

because the mere fact that the court had the records would mean that somebody

had waived the privileges

so the only ad issue waiver in this

context would be when the defendant comes forward

themselves and raises the issue of competency

is that what you're saying? Would there be an ad issue waiver?

Well there's a difference between raising the issue of competency and a claim of

incompetency. So

yeah there could be an ad issue waiver if the defendant

claims incompetence. If the defense attorney says

I am taking the affirmative position that the defendant is incompetent

and at that point we might be talking about an ad issue waiver because at that point the defendant

has made a claim about his competence. So where is the evidence that Mr. Lewis

refused to sign the release? The evidence is

in the defense counsel splitting where defense counsel said I was

unable to obtain a signed release. Now the state

doesn't mean you refuse necessarily. The state says there is some ambiguity there

that doesn't mean he refused but this just goes to show that the state

did not preserve its waiver argument. The state

did not argue in its motion to compel these records

that

Lewis waived the privileges by

agreeing to provide the records to the OFE or by failing

to object to the court's order that he provided the records to the OFE. The state

and its original motion argued that a waiver

only on the basis that Austin

Lewis' lawyer said notify the court that he had a concern

about Lewis' competency. It was only in the state's motion

to reconsider that the state argued that Lewis waived the privileges by

not objecting to the court's order. So

I think the record is sufficient

for us to infer that Lewis refused to sign

a waiver but to the extent there is ambiguity in the record

it's only because the state failed to raise this argument until it filed its motion to read.

Does Lewis' counsel have the ability to

use the records for the

purpose of cross-examination or otherwise during the

competency hearing? If

Lewis' counsel takes the position that Lewis is

incompetent, say the evaluator opends that he's competent, Lewis says

no, I think he's incompetent, I'm going to cross-examine the OFE and uses the records

to cross-examine the OFE. At that point we're talking about an ad issue waiver.

Right, and really is there an essential need for the records

if there is a no dispute about a defendant's competency?

No, and that's one of the reasons that the court should wait to see what the OFE's

opinion is and wait to see what the party's positions are. Just because

the defense counsel says I have a concern about my client's competence doesn't mean

that defense counsel is going to argue incompetence.

The defense counsel may review the OFE's report and says okay, my concerns are addressed,

I attended the evaluation, I had concerns but they've been

assaged. So I'm not taking the position that my client

is incompetent. If we were to conceive

a process where the records were not

given to the state when they're given to the OFE

or given to the state and to defense counsel when they're given to the OFE

but once the OFE report comes out

there were a process for either the defendant or

the state to say wait a minute

we need to have a

hearing with the court about the availability of the records

that's a different sequence than the state's advocating for

in a different sequence than you're arguing against. Why wouldn't that be

an adequate way to balance the interests here?

I'm not sure it is a different sequence than I'm arguing against. I'm

proposing that the court conduct a camera review and that the court

wait to conduct a camera review to see what the OFE says

and to see what position the parties will take on the defendant's

competence. And at that point the court should conduct an

camera review, compare this summary of the records in the OFE's report to

the records themselves and determine whether there's some discrepancy

or some omission or a very important record that the OFE

missed as the state mentioned. But we're deciding that in a vacuum

it's a little premature to weigh in on that at this point, isn't it?

In a sense, yeah, I think that's true.

I mean, I think the narrow question in this case is

did the court air in declining the state's request for the whole

sale disclosure of three years of Lewis's records

before it even had the OFE's report? And the answer to that

question is no, the court did not air. Thank you.

Gary, thank you. I have two brief points.

As you pointed out, Justice Bassett, the stakes are high in these proceedings. The court

is tasked with protecting the defendant's constitutional right to be competent to stand

trial. And the court has held, this court has held that the way to protect that

right is for the court to find these specific facts following a hearing where the parties

are acting as the adversaries. Asking the court or requiring the trial

court to review in camera the records in comparison with the report,

look at what's in the report, look at what's in the records and make decisions about

this would be good cross-examination fodder or this would be good direct. You're asking the court

to be an adversary in that instance. You're asking the court to act as a party in the case

when the court's job is to act as the neutral fact-finder, the neutral

arbiter of is there enough evidence to find the defendant competent?

Well, for that reason, shouldn't the court wait to find out if there is in fact a dispute

about the defendant's competency before getting

into any of this? It should not, Your Honor, because there may not, the state needs

to have the records to determine if it is going to dispute the opinion at

all. The state needs the records to determine if that report is

reliable, incredible, and can be presented to the court as sufficient evidence of

the defendant's competency. I see my red light. What was your second point?

I rolled them two into one. Let me just ask, would the

state agree that the restrictions in the court order would

apply such, I mean the state does agree that

those records would not be used for any other purpose other than the

competency hearing? That is correct, and if the trial court felt in a specific case

it needed a stronger protective order, it could certainly issue one, and

as you pointed out, Justice Bassett, the state does that all the time. All the time the state knows

evidence about a defendant or a victim or a witness that it is not allowed to

admit at trial based on a court's order, based on some sort of rule of evidence,

and every single day prosecutors and defense attorneys do that at a trial.

Thank you. Thank you very much, counsel. Case submitted.

Both counsel's patience with our technical issues. Thank you.
