This is case 2023-0498, state of New Hampshire versus Randy Owen.

May it please the court. My name is Richard Sam Perrell. I represent Randy Owen, and I've reserved two minutes.

This case presents the question of what a threat means as used in the harassment statute,

and whether the evidence in this case was sufficient for a jury to find beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant uttered a threat

with a purpose to alarm or annoy others. Given the evidence, I submit that it was not sufficient.

The facts here that Mr. Owen was woken in the middle of the night by a group of people approaching his home

on an island residence without lights, without electricity, in an area that had been roped off

and had been the subject of target shooting and vandalism in the past.

His reaction, as he stood there in his underwear that night, was to yell at the people and to let them know somebody was there

and to tell them to get off of his property. The next act he took was to call local police without success.

He left a message. And his third action was to leave a voicemail message at the camp

that owned the other part of the island and where the people had come from.

That voicemail message is the subject of what the state alleges is the harassment,

because the defendant's statement that kids were in his backyard, close to his house, and that he would shoot them,

they are alleging is a threat. It is important to understand here in the unique context of the facts of this case

that that message that was left was left as a voicemail, not communicated directly and in person.

It was not when the defendant was brandishing a weapon or some other physical threat was made.

And he didn't pursue the people from his home onto the other property.

And as he later testified, he was scared.

And so this case really presents to this court the question of whether there should be some limiting principle

when we talk about what a threat can be in the context of a harassment charge.

And here a statement by a person surprised in their own home at night,

who first tried calling the police and asking for their assistance

and who did not physically confront anyone with a firearm or make other physical threats should not be sufficient

for the state to be able to prove beyond a reasonable doubt a specific purposeful intent to annoy or alarm another.

How do you address the defendant's statement at trial that the camp should have been alarmed

and in weighing what his mental state was when he made that call?

Is it relevant at all? Is it probative?

Well, first it is not relevant at the point of state resting because at that point he had not testified.

But I think that statement that is made in response to questions on cross-examination

notes an alarm in the context of that everyone should have been concerned about the situation

and about what could develop from it.

So in other words, this is happening at night in the dark.

There was some sort of ordinance of other town rule that says don't go there after 10 p.m. at night.

That was being violated.

Right, but the defendant put a case on it.

So we're entitled to consider that evidence with regard to your sufficiency claim, correct?

Yes.

And all I'm saying is that in terms of the way alarm I think was used in response to the question on cross-examination

notes a general concern for the situation, not a articulation of the defendant's intent to cause alarm.

So I appreciate that question and I think that relates to the facts in the case here because while there may be

certainly situations where the message is intended to create some sort of annoyance or alarm,

the specific circumstances here do not support that conclusion.

And again, the court should craft a limiting principle here to how threat is used.

This is, in fact, I think what the jury struggled with.

And while the state in its brief claims that the evidence was overwhelming, it certainly was not for the jury

which sent out two different questions about how it should interpret the law with respect to the evidence.

They struggled with it and the trial court's evidentiary ruling about how the camp reacted off-island

where this event didn't take place in the surrounding waters and on the mainland was improper for evaluating

whether the statement was made as a threat with the requisite intent.

And the court's response to the jury's question about whether a conditional statement is a threat

was in this context incomplete and an inaccurate statement on the law.

Again, the court should hold that in the context of these facts there was insufficient evidence to prove

that there was a threat made with a purpose to annoy or alarm another

as opposed to a statement made on a voicemail that might be certainly poorly chosen language,

might be reckless, may even rise to the level of mental state of knowingly,

but is not purposeful intent to annoy or alarm another.

I will tell you that in this language, in this statute,

the image that immediately comes to my mind when I think about the phone call that's intended to cause alarm

is the teenage horror movies where the other person is in the house and they're answering the phone

and somebody else is there. Clearly communication in that kind of context, right,

that's why it's part of the movie, it's to create alarm and terror.

That's not at all what we have going on here. This is not even as someone who actually owned any weapons.

It's someone who's woken up in the middle of the night that is communicating a real concern about events taking place

and things that could happen, whether intentional or not, that could cause real harm to somebody.

And that is the context in which we're talking about this.

With that sort of...

Council, before you move on, in what circumstance would a statement,

I will shoot them, not cause alarm?

Well, in this...

For the intended to, I understand that it's not the receiver's interpretation of that statement,

but the intent of the defendant.

I'm trying to think of a circumstance in which that statement would not cause alarm.

I think there are statements that, frankly, we all make that are an expression of frustration or fear

that are not actually intended to communicate a genuine threat.

You know, if a child makes a mess on the floor and their parent says,

you know, I'm going to kill you for making that mess yet again.

That's not in any concrete way an actual expression of intent.

And there are plenty of, I think, factual circumstances on the continuum between that

and standing with a weapon in front of somebody in making that statement.

So here, I think two of the cases that are sort of discussed,

at least in the defendant's brief, are the Hurley case, which is a protective order case,

where we have somebody, an ex-husband, saying, I hope he died in a fiery crash.

Well, that's really not a true expression.

It's not a true threat, because it's not really something that the person was communicating

as an intent of a purposefulness that that happened.

Versus the California case that the court here looked to in crafting its instruction

about an apprehension of fear, where you had two separate instances

of a gun being placed first in the victim's mouth and then to her head

about what caused apprehension.

So what evidence was submitted regarding whether or not the call was made

with no legitimate communicative purpose?

Was that something that was the defense that was raised by your client at trial,

or was there any evidence that the state presented that proved that the call was made

with no legitimate communicative purpose?

It seems to me that there was a purpose to that phone call.

My recollection, Your Honor, of the record was that there was a specific purpose

to the phone call that was not only testified to by my client,

but was evident from the message itself that these kids should not be on this property

and that that's a risk and please don't send them.

Alerting them to a trespass, which is legitimate.

Yes, and I don't believe that that was my recollection of the record

raised by the state in terms of proving its case,

but I also don't believe that it was necessarily argued specifically by the defense.

Did the jury instructions include that as an element?

Your Honor, I don't know the answer to that question.

Could you address the state's harmless error argument with respect to the testimony

in your second issue of both security measures that were taken after the call?

Yes, so I don't believe it's harmless error and the reason for that

is this is actually a unique case where there's a geographical boundary

to the alleged sort of impact of the conduct and you have this island

and the testimony that was allowed in wasn't just,

hey, we didn't let kids go to that part of the island that summer,

they couldn't go to that part of the island,

they couldn't use the water surrounding the island.

We took steps here on the mainland to increase security measures

and that goes beyond the scope of what was being communicated

in the voicemail message and for that reason,

I don't think that was harmless at all.

I see that I am almost out of time,

so unless there are further questions, I will reserve my order.

Thank you very much.

May I please the Court,

Robert Volger for State of New Hampshire.

If they would like to first address the argument about the sufficiency of the evidence

and then turn to the testimony about the security measures

that came took after receiving the voicemail

and then addressing the complaints about the trial court's answer

to the jury's instruction.

Regarding the sufficiency of the evidence,

it's important to note that this voicemail was not left

in the midst of an ongoing trespass.

The evidence that the jury heard

was that some campers came onto the defendant's property

or across the boundary line

and he yelled at them

and they did it and they acted the way you'd hoped they would.

They turned around and they left

and they made a phone call to the police department.

It could have ended there.

Instead he left a voicemail

and out of the words,

you better get them the F out of here or I will shoot them.

Council, it's my recollection of the record

that Mr. Owen did identify himself in that phone call.

Is that right?

Yes, he began with, this is Randy Owen.

So that element is not in play

with respect to this particular case.

The identity is not at issue.

So whether or not the call was made

for a legitimate communicated purpose.

Is that something that the state needed to prove?

No, that is a 641A.

The state acted on their Part E,

which involves a threat.

Okay.

Life or safety.

So under A I regret any statement

were you just nothing other than to annoy or alarm someone.

I think it qualifies harassment.

But once you make a threat to someone's life,

if the attendants didn't wear alarms

and whether you had some communicated purpose

isn't a defense.

So how do we factor in the fact

that Mr. Owen called the police before?

He called the alleged victims here.

Is that factor into his intent?

No, Justice Donovan

or the jury could have waited a course regarding to this court

and I think it's important to note that

at the time the phone call was made

any trespass that would have occurred

had already been terminated.

The defendant's own testimony was I saw lights

and I saw him turn away

when he yelled at them.

And it wasn't just the voicemail.

Other context for evidence is important.

He made more discouraging comments

about the campers or the counselors

during the phone call

and then he ended it with a statement

that he was going to appeal to you tomorrow.

They're in a subsequent phone call with the police.

He said he wanted the camp director how to countable.

He did express the alleged on the witness stand

that he was afraid.

But that was evidence that came out only after

a police officer told them that voicemail

might be, might have been the criminal liability.

He stated plainly during a golf examination,

they asked him can you understand

or you think this would be alarming to receive

his exact word what they should have been alarmed?

And Jerry could have inferred

that you already had animosity

to the camp or the camp director

because there was ongoing litigation.

This is Evans of a defendant

who has a poor relationship with his neighbors.

He's angry some kids came onto his property.

He thinks the camp director is responsible.

So he purposely used words

that he knows will cause annoyance or alarm.

You tell the camp

those kids come here I will shoot them.

In regards to what is a classic threat

or how it would be understood of this threat

the statement I will shoot you always a threat

whether the tent can depend.

But if I was responsible for children

the line I will shoot them

would certainly cause annoyance or alarm

and that was certainly a fact that the jury could consider.

So why was the camp's reaction to that phone call?

Why is that admissible?

Stay before this court did acknowledge

that the victim's reaction

can provide circumstantial evidence

of the defendant's intent.

That precedent hasn't been attacked

and is settled.

Intent is almost always proven by circumstantial evidence.

Circumstantial evidence by nature should look at the totality of circumstances

and the victim's reaction to the defendant's statements

is just part of that circumstances.

That is important because the jury did not hear any evidence

that the receiver of this message

reacted with any type of alarm.

They could have inferred that there was something

about the relationship with Mr. Owen

in which it would have been understood

this language was unattended seriously

would have been known to be hyperbolic

or they had some aspect of the relationship

and these are two people involved

in litigation against each other

and just if it's a threatening language

it's often not used...

it's often used figuratively

so more information about the relationship

and how they remarked does have some relevance

to what the defendant's intent was.

Let me ask you this.

Mr. Cassel's tip was a lot to testify

over objection that after hearing the voicemail

he was, quote, alarmed, shaken and scared

and shocked by the tone and accusations.

If you needed circumstantial evidence

that the defendant's statements actually caused alarm

and it was taken as alarming

that seems to me to have covered that base.

Then he goes on again over objection

to testify about all of the steps

that the camp had to take in his view

to respond to this including

we use farm island for camping out

so we send our kids out there multiple times a week

to sleep out there in the 2021 summer

we were still dealing with COVID

so camping out was one of our strategies

of mitigation and they couldn't do that.

Why wasn't that more prejudicial

than provident?

The state had already established

that there was some alarm.

Why was this additional information

necessary and why wasn't it more prejudicial than provident?

Well it was actual actions after the fact

supports his claim that he was alarmed.

Had he just testified during trial to an element

that would have been less convincing.

I do think it's important for that testimony

to note the state just asked how did the state respond?

He did provide a little bit more detail

than what's probably expected when you say like no.

We had just got out of COVID so we had planned to do this and that

and that specific testimony wasn't objected to.

It was not objected to.

It was not objected to but there's something along the line

that's beyond the scope of the question

or question along those lines.

But it was still it was important for the jury to

or at least relevant which was a low bar

to know that the actual people who received the message

actually did show actual alarm after receiving it.

Well why isn't it prejudicial,

far more prejudicial than provident to say that this action

actually hurt the children's camping experience?

Why isn't that just inflammatory?

Well inflammatory it wouldn't

burden inflammatory or unduly prejudicial

because as the jury would have known

these are people responsible for the well-being of children.

The fact that they took some extra measures including

closing down the entire island would have

unlikely would have either been surprising

let alone inflammatory or unduly prejudicial.

And there was also conflicting testimony

about how far these campers actually came

to Mr. Edwards property.

It was 10 feet at the beginning of the voicemail

and 15 to 20.

He suddenly sent an email to the police officer

and the doctor said it was around 60 feet.

So it was unclear about how close they could go to his property

or Mr. Owen to get angry and feel like

the camp's not taking appropriate measures.

I don't think any jury would be finding

unduly prejudicial if the camp has decided

the whole island is closed.

The purpose to annoy or alarm,

that's an objective standard isn't it?

It's not subjective, it's not really,

is it an objective standard so that

the threat would alarm or annoy

a reasonable person or is it just the person

that received the message?

Well it's the defendants of 10.

So I'm not sure if it's objective or objective plays in

but the victim reaction does shed some light

in some circumstances of evidence of how he intended

because it's just shed a light more on the relationship

and the entirety of the circumstances

of one relationship does play into

one's intent in making a certain statement.

Can you address the jury instruction

and conditional threat?

Yes, the court has already held

that a conditional threat can be a threat,

or a threat can be conditional.

That was based on an actual dictionary language.

They would contend that it consists of a common sense.

Most threats are conditional.

Your money or your life is a conditional statement.

Regarding the additional instruction

that yes, it has a reasonable tendency

to create apprehension,

a speaker might act according to his terms.

The defendant actually didn't object

to that portion of the definition.

It was simply just you can't have an additional threat

in New Hampshire so any objection

beyond that would not be preserved.

Do you know the source of reasonable tendency

to create apprehension?

It does dovetail with some language

in federal secret courts about what constitutes

a true threat and the California New Brooks case

that was an issue in that case.

Facts are much different,

so it doesn't seem a judgeatory

with the extra mile and just made sure

it had to be a true threat.

I know the defendant argues

that reasonable apprehension is not enough.

It has to be a threat that's imminent

and likely to be carried out.

I don't want to misconstrue his argument.

The issue with that argument

is probably not preserved.

It often adds language to the statute

which requires an attempt to annoy or alarm.

A person can be annoyed or alarmed

by a threat even if they don't think

it's likely to be serious or likely carried out.

This argument, the judgeatory definition

was underly prejudicial

because the alleged threat didn't have to be imminent.

It's not based on any statutory definition

or dictionary definition

based off the state is aware of.

And it does tend to conflate harassment

with criminal threatening

which already covers situations

where you put the person in fear of imminent bodily injury

or when you intend to terrorize

which would be more like a longer situation

of what you want a threat to be understood as imminent.

I see my light is on.

If there's no further question, I'll rest on the roof.

Thank you.

So I just want to very briefly address

the reference to civil litigation.

That came up twice

during the whole course of trial.

It was not, in my recollection,

argued as some sort of escalation of events

or that it was relevant in any way.

And it isn't relevant in any way.

So I don't think that should be part of this analysis.

I don't think it was part of the jury's analysis in any way.

And just lastly,

with respect to your point, Justice Donovan,

about the language in the other portion of the statute,

I think that does get to some of the constitutional dynamics

of an expression of this kind,

of a message of this kind,

that this is not, you know,

something that is being communicated,

at least clearly for animus,

but, you know, it's being communicated

in the context of,

I have a property right here

and I don't want people coming on my property

and I think that does go to sort of the intent analysis

and whether or not it was done with a purpose

to annoy or alarm or some other legitimate purpose.

Thank you.

Thank you very much, counsel.
