This is case 2023, 0532, State of New Hampshire versus George Moses.

Good morning, I understand you reserved two minutes.

Yes, thank you.

Good morning, I'm Pamela Phelan and I'm here on behalf of Mr. Moses.

I've divided my argument into three parts.

First, I want to address that the July 2020 evidence was not probative of an issue actually in dispute.

Second, that the October 20 phone call and violation of a restraining order was not admissible for

a legitimate 404 B reason.

And lastly, that the evidence was substantially unfairly prejudicial to Mr. Moses and

its admission was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.

With 404 B evidence, this court has made clear that it's to be admitted only when there's an issue actually in dispute without

relying on forbidden inferences of predisposition, propensity, or character.

In State versus Hickey, which is cited in my brief, the court talked about the fact that the trial court should consider

whether the evidence is being offered to prove an issue that's actually in dispute.

And that's because, and if so, how serious the dispute is.

And that's because even when a matter isn't conceded,

there is still a practical degree to which the issue really is in dispute.

And that degree of dispute will vary depending on the case.

And that the practical degree of variance matters to the decision about whether to admit it.

And that's because the less there is a dispute about the issue,

the less probative the evidence is for a legitimate purpose.

This was a pretrial ruling, right?

Correct.

So how is it that the court's supposed to assess the seriousness of the dispute at that time?

Well, the two motions of the state filed to admit the evidence clearly outline what the evidence was going to be about the August 5th incident.

And just talking about the July 2020 evidence that came in,

the trial court ruled that that evidence of a prior assault and threat a couple weeks before the charged incident

was probative of the defendant's intent when he uttered threatening words to the complainant on August 5th.

But when you look at the two motions that the court had before it prior to trial when it issued its ruling,

it was clear that on August 5th the claimant was contending

that Mr. Moses was making those threats to her after he had already assaulted her,

thrown her on a bed, was straddling her, and choking her.

Contrary to what the trial court found, there can be no serious dispute when those words were uttered under those circumstances

as to whether there was a purpose to terrorize.

And that's how this case is different from the state v. Brewster case which is cited by the state.

But nothing would have prohibited the state from charging your client with this conduct in July and making that part of the trial if they were joined, right?

If they were joined, but the state had chosen not to charge the incident and so there was no argument or analysis and there was no issue before the court.

So perhaps the state believed that they didn't have probable cause to charge your client with that assault?

I'm sorry?

Can we infer there from that that the state believed that there was no reasonable, that there was no probable cause supporting those charges with respect to the July incident?

And therefore, is probable cause a lower or higher standard than clear proof?

I don't know whether that's a fair inference to make and I don't know if that's a fair inference to make.

But if clear proof is the equivalent of probable cause and that's a fair inference to make, then we have an issue with respect to whether there was clear proof of that prior incident.

But here the court didn't make its, the court here found with respect to clear proof that the statements of the complainant about what allegedly happened in the July incident was sufficient to meet that standard.

Can you respond to the federal cases the state has cited with respect to?

Yes, actually with respect to, I want to particularly talk about state versus Figueroa, which is the second circuit case.

And I found that interesting because not for the section that was cited by the state, but early on in that decision, the circuit court takes the trial court judge to task because there had been there.

And I don't know whether it still is in the second circuit, but at that time that the decision was issued.

And there was a procedure that the second circuit wanted to be followed when 404B evidence is being offered to prove intent of a defendant.

And that procedure is that this court should not rule on that issue and

make that final decision admitting the evidence until after the defendant has closed his case.

And I think that makes sense because with intent, you don't know or

the trial court cannot fairly know fully how the defense is really going to develop

throughout the course particularly of responding to the state's case at trial.

And so making a preliminary decision about the admission of evidence to prove a defendant's

intent without that specific knowledge is prone to error.

And that is the error that happened here.

Here I would say that the trial court, as I responded to Justice Bassett,

the trial court did know that this was not words that could reasonably be construed as being said just in anger.

Given the circumstances of the evidence that the court knew was going to come in about what happened on August 5.

And that was in Brewster, that case dealt with a situation

where there were just words exchanged over the phone to a third party, and that's what the charged incident involved.

And so a prior incident where the defendant had made a similar threat to harm or

to shoot the complainant in that case came in to prove the defendant's intent when he'd utter those words over the phone.

There, there could be a serious doubt as to what the defendant's intent was.

Whether the words were uttered in anger or whether they truly were uttered with the purpose to terrorize.

But I don't think there was that issue here.

Can you address the phone call?

Yes, so the phone call, the court admitted the phone call,

which happened over two and a half months after the alleged incident.

The court said it was admissible to prove or to, yeah, to prove the complainant's credibility about,

and the nature of the relationship between Mr. Moses and the complainant.

There was no, and to tell the whole story.

And to tell the whole story, I'm sorry.

And I think the crowd court used whole story.

Right, and frankly, that's all we, I don't know.

How this phone call, this attempted phone call made once after the incident,

somehow addresses a credibility issue with a complainant who had not yet been attacked,

because this is pre-trial, and why it was necessary for her credibility to use this call to explain the nature of their relationship,

which now has long past been terminated.

Was there any dispute that the phone call was made?

No.

And so lastly, I want to address, and I think these are sort of related issues.

The disputed evidence had substantial unfair prejudice to Mr. Moses.

It painted him as a serial abuser, and a person who has threatened and abused her before and after the incident.

It also served to support the state's argument as well to the jury that Mr., excuse me,

that the complainant was in a domestic violence like cycle with Mr. Moses.

You know, I will also just point for a minute, it's important to look how the state used the disputed evidence at trial,

and the state used it more for propensity than for proving intent, Mr. Moses' intent,

or to establish the whole story of the relationship between the parties when we're talking about the phone call.

In closing, the state doesn't even talk about the phone call at all in any way.

But with respect to the July incident, the state argues to the jury that that demonstrated how Mr. Moses would react,

that he would react violently when a financial issue arose, and it also demonstrated what Mr. Moses was capable of.

Those are propensity uses, not uses to prove Mr. Moses' intent on the day in question.

And with respect to the harmlessness beyond reasonable doubt, I don't think that standard can be met here.

The only direct evidence of what happened on August 5 was the complainant's credibility, which was attacked.

The defense brought out evidence to demonstrate that she made some inconsistent statements about what allegedly had happened.

She lacked some visible physical injuries that corroborated her claims.

I thought there were bruises on her neck that were seen by medical personnel.

There was different testimony from the EMT, the police officer, and the hospital personnel about whether they saw marks on her neck.

I don't think anyone saw bruises. I think at most someone in the ER saw a mark.

Did Defense Council request a limiting instruction?

No.

But again, the state used this evidence in a propensity-like way.

This evidence was not inconsequential or cumulative.

And when you say this evidence, you had said earlier that the second, that the call wasn't even referenced by counsel in closing.

Not in closing.

So you're focusing on the earlier incident?

Yes, yeah.

But I think the fact that the evidence of the call was in there, the jury was left to speculate about how to use that.

And I think the only real probative value it offered was to paint a picture about Mr.

Moses to persuade them to credit the complainant's testimony about what happened on August 5th.

Not necessarily because they believed her about everything that happened on August 5th.

But because of this other evidence that came in that tended to characterize him as someone who had a predisposition for

assaultive and threatening behavior.

Thank you.

Dr. Nganye.

Joining your honor's may please the court, Sam Nganye for the state of New Hampshire.

I will pick up where Attorney Phelan started with the July 24th assault incident.

It's the state's position that that evidence under 404B was clearly admissible to prove intent under this court's cases in state versus Brewster and state versus Richardson.

This case is very similar to those cases.

In Brewster, the prior conduct was the defendant saying no wonder people like you get shot to the victim.

And then two years later he says again to a receptionist, I want to shoot her.

Speaking of the victim, the charges criminal threatening, at least one of the charges I believe the other was harassment.

And the court held that that earlier incident, two years earlier of saying I want to shoot you,

that was relevant to show that that defendant had the same intent on the later occasion and also to show the victim's state of mind.

And in state versus Richardson, the earlier conduct, I think in Richardson the earlier conduct is arguably more prejudicial than the charge conduct.

The earlier conduct was the defendant engaging in all manner of erratic and

violent activities, throwing bikes down stairs and slashing tires.

And then also standing in the doorway of the victim's bedroom, holding a knife and

saying to her and her friend that he was going to stab them.

And then cutting himself with glass and saying I like blood.

The charged conduct was at the homeless shelter after an argument between the defendant and

the victim over materials that were in a pack for lack of a better term that the defendant had.

He punched the victim and as she stumbled backward he approached her and said I'm going to kill you.

And even still that earlier conduct of standing in the doorway with a knife saying I'm going to stab you and I like blood.

That was admissible to show the defendant's intent and

the victim's state of mind with regard to the charge conduct which again involved criminal threatening, just like this case.

So it's the state's position that under Brewster and Richardson,

the 404B evidence, at least the July 24th incident, was admissible consistent with this court's case law.

At the very least, this court's case law makes it so that the trial court's ruling was not clearly unreasonable and untenable.

Are you saying that the victim's state of mind was relevant in this case?

I think under Brewster and Richardson, I think it would at least be relevant.

It doesn't speak as directly to the elements of the crime as intent does, of course.

But I think the victim's state of mind is relevant.

Why is it relevant?

So I think how people are understanding a situation in a case is always relevant,

even if it doesn't speak directly to one of the legal issues.

But here, the element is that the defendant had to place the victim in a state of terror.

And I do understand that that is not a wholly subjective inquiry.

I do think understanding how the victim would have been perceiving what was going on in her state of mind is helpful to that inquiry.

I think all of us in the law kind of recognize that when we talk about this odious, reasonable person,

things don't really just happen in the vacuum.

So we kind of need the context in how people are understanding things to fully evaluate them.

As far as intent not being an element actually in dispute,

the court could not have known that at the pre-trial stage.

There was nothing in the defendant's pleadings.

There was nothing that he said during the motion hearing that would have communicated even ambiguously,

let alone unequivocally, that the defendant had no intent to dispute the intent elements.

As soon as a defendant pleads not guilty to a criminal charge,

I think it is fair to assume that they're going to dispute the entire case

until things start to get communicated.

Otherwise, it's fair for the court to assume the same.

Well, wouldn't it have been better for the court to wait until trial to make that determination?

I think the court could have reserved ruling, but just the same.

The defendant could have re-raised this.

Could have filed a motion to reconsider and said, oh, you misunderstood me.

This is the defense I plan to go for, and that's why intent's not relevant.

Or maybe the defense council didn't know at the time what defense they were going to go for.

But as trial started to unfold, it became clear, and the defendant could have stood up and said,

I want to revisit that pretrial ruling.

We're now going this way for defense.

There was no objection at trial when this evidence came in.

Is that right?

That's my recollection of the record, Your Honor.

And if there was an objection, it was not on the ground that we want to re-raise this,

because intent is not in dispute for these reasons.

I think the First Circuit has a good rule for how you take an element off the table.

You have to unequivocally express to the court such that the court would be justified in foreclosing arguments or

questions on that issue and instructing the jury that if they find all other elements beyond a reasonable doubt,

they can resolve mens rea in favor of the state.

But that would seem to be in conflict with RK's law about whether something's seriously in dispute.

That seems like a different standard.

I don't think that it is a different standard, Your Honor,

because I think like this court's case law, the First Circuit is clear that a formal stipulation is not necessary.

And there are no magic words.

There's no magic procedure.

But it has to be that clear to everybody that's involved in the case that that element is off the table.

Otherwise, everybody else is playing at a disadvantage.

We have to try and read Defense Council's mind as to what they're going to keep on the table or pull off.

That really isn't fair to the court, the state, or the justice process more broadly.

And I think the First Circuits rule, even if it were to be modified a little bit, could fit neatly within this court's jurisprudence.

I don't think there was anything in the motion hearing or

the pleading that would have communicated to the court that my defense is going to be, she's lying.

We finally get that enclosing argument, Defense Council admits, yep, there was an argument that night.

It did happen in that apartment, it was about finances.

But it's not clear at any time really before then that the argument's never going to be, I wasn't trying to terrorize you.

I was just trying to get you to stop badgering me about looking for a job.

The state just did not know what the defense would be, and neither did the court.

In regard to the phone call, it seems like the state makes a rather half hearted defense of the trial court's decision there.

What is your best argument about that?

The state's best argument, Your Honor, was the one that the state put forth in the trial court.

That that was also relevant to intent.

The trial court in the state's view erroneously rejected that argument.

The state has not cross appealed that.

But the state, it was relevant to a continuing intent.

It continued to show an intent to terrorize the victim.

And I think that's especially true when it's viewed through the lens of earlier evidence about how the defendant communicated to the victim about what a restraining order is worth.

She had communicated to him twice that she was going to get one and on one occasion.

He said, no, you're not.

He crumpled up a piece of paper and threw it at her.

That's what your restraining order is worth.

He continued to show her that a couple of months later.

I also know, and I don't know what can or cannot be inferred from this, but on October 15th, the defendant's indictments were forthcoming.

I don't know why the defendant chose to call in October and not three days after the assault.

But I think it can be, it maybe can be inferred that he was continuing to intend to intimidate her,

to maybe tamper with her as the indictment was forthcoming to get her to walk away from these charges.

The context justification I certainly struggle with.

I thought your best argument was going to be that any error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.

That was another argument, but before I go to, there is an error.

I'd rather say this court can affirm on an alternative ground saying this was relevant to a continuing intent and it can come in that way.

An easier path forward for this court, and certainly at least as strong if not stronger, it is harmless error.

Starting with the phone call, there really was nothing to the phone call outside of the fact that it happened.

It wasn't answered, it wasn't disputed that it happened.

There's nothing prejudicial in and of itself that you call somebody.

It only becomes prejudicial to any extent when you say, oh, but you did it in violation of a restraining order.

Which was part of the evidence, right? That it was in violation of the restraining order.

That's correct, and so the risk there, like all 404B evidences, the jury's going to take that evidence

and they're going to say this guy violates restraining orders willingly.

This is a bad person who probably committed these other crimes and he should be punished.

But that's not what the jury did here.

The jury acquitted the defendant of simple assault for throwing the victim on the bed.

And if this court goes back through the record, it will find there is not a shred of evidence for that charge.

And the jury recognized that.

And they didn't convict him anyway because he's just some bad guy that violates restraining orders.

They went over the evidence, they found that the victim didn't say once that she was thrown on the bed.

And therefore he was acquitted.

This was not a jury that blindly convicted people based on propensity and inflamed passions.

This was a jury who poured over the evidence carefully and returned verdicts based on what the evidence was.

But there were two elements to that evidence, right?

One was that the defendant or the victim obtained a restraining order from a court.

So there was a finding by court of law that the defendant posed a danger to this individual and that he violated it.

So that's doubling up, isn't it?

I don't know, Your Honor.

I don't know that an average lay person knows what the standard is to receive a restraining order.

Right.

The jury could have believed that it's beyond reasonable doubt.

The jury could have also believed that it's simply just filed a piece of paper with the court and they'll issue it.

We don't know.

And the state did not bring out that this is what was required to get this restraining order.

This is why this restraining order happened.

I think the jury likely could have put together that it happened just after the incident.

And so that's probably where it came from.

But things about the standard, what that trial court found to issue that.

I don't think that got the jury to the jury and I don't think this court should speculate about how the jury may have used that information if they did have it.

And further on the harmless error argument to all pieces.

The state's position is that the state's case was strong here.

The victim gave detailed testimony but it was well corroborated.

First by her downstairs neighbor Drew who was wearing a headset playing a video game and still heard this argument.

Heard screams that he thought was the victim's voice.

Heard somebody running downstairs out of the apartment just as the victim said that it happened.

And it was loud enough and concerned him enough that he said,

I'm going to call the police just to make sure everything is all right.

And then when emergency personnel shows up at the train station the victim is hysterical and crying such that she can barely answer questions.

Medical personnel observe injuries on her and as Justice Dunovan pointed out the physician in the emergency room saw marks on her neck.

Attorney Finland was correct. I don't recall bruising but marks on the front of her neck.

Red marks.

Defense council corroborates the victim in his closing argument by saying,

yeah there was an argument that night. It was about finances just like the victim says.

And then finally the defendant, the state does not necessarily agree with this but the defendant points out on page 21 of his brief

that even absent the evidence of the July assault the state's evidence of intent was quote more than sufficient to support a conviction.

This evidence only went to intent the July 24th and the phone call and the defendant appears to take the position that even absent that evidence

there was more than sufficient support to find intent.

Well if that's the case then even absent this evidence the jury still would have found intent.

The jury's verdict would be no different on the other elements because this evidence didn't go to those elements and the jury's

acquittal on the simple assault charge shows that the jury was not blindly convicting this person based on propensity.

They were pouring over the evidence and taking it where it led them.

And for all of those reasons we ask this court to affirm the decisions of the trial court.

Thank you.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Just briefly in my opening remarks I talked about the State v. Brewster case.

I also think that State v. Richardson is distinguishable as well.

If the court would when the court reads that case you'll see that the prior incident evidence that was admitted was admitted

when this court reviewed it decided that the admission was okay because at trial the defendant had put in serious dispute.

One set of charges from the charged incident which had to do with theft and whether he had an intent to deprive the

complainant in that case of her property.

He was charged with some theft charges as well as some criminal threatening charges.

The court, it's my recollection the court did not decide and noted that the defense was not contesting

the defense on the assault charge in Richardson was that the assault did not happen.

Not that he didn't have intent or excuse me the criminal threatening did not happen.

Not that he did not have an intent to criminally threat and the court did not decide whether if his defense

on that charge whether that was a basis given his defense for admitting the prior act evidence.

My recollection is this court only admitted it because the defendant had contested the intent to deprive.

So I think it's distinguishable for that reason.

Thank you.

Thank you.

That's all the cases submitted.
