This is case 23-0436, David E. LeFave et al. versus Tiffany Lee Hogan et al.

Good morning. You will notice for the record that Chief Justice McDonald and Justice Bassett are disqualified from this case. And you may begin.

Thank you, Your Honor. May it please the Court, David LeFever, appearing on my own behalf, and behalf of my wife, Annie LeFever.

I welcome the Court's questions at any time. I would like to start by talking about something where I think there was some agreement.

And when I say agreement, I'm referring to agreement between the two trial judges. We had Judge Niccolosi on a preliminary hearing.

And then we had Judge Horan who decided the motion for summary judgment.

And for all intents and purposes, the evidence that they had, which is the title records and whatnot, was identical for purposes of the issues presented to this Court.

And something that both judges agreed upon is that the confirmatory deed that came from Dr. Sprague to Castle Land and Timber,

both of the judges agreed that that deed did not operate as a conveyance of an easement.

And I bring that to the Court's attention at the very beginning because there's a reason why both judges agreed on that.

And that's because it is Black Letter Law in New Hampshire that a grantor cannot retain an easement for themselves and then subsequently transfer that to a third party.

And that is what the subsequent confirmatory deed purported to do.

And when we go then back, we relate back now, to the deed between Dr. Sprague and Lynn McEwen, Dr. Sprague attempts to do what is the identical functional equivalent,

which is to reserve an easement in favor of a third party.

So the fact that the judges agreed that in the confirmatory deed that was not permissible, that did not have the effect of valid conveyance,

is irreconcilable that is entirely inconsistent with the finding by Judge Horan that nonetheless that same type of transaction,

the mechanically the same type of transaction could create a valid easement in the deed between Dr. Sprague and Lynn McEwen.

How do you square that with the end of the deed language that specifically grants to Christopher Paul Sprague his successors and assigns the right to use said reserved right of way?

I go into some length in my brief on this very, very point and I appreciate the question.

The critical analysis here is that a reservation is a thing, right? An exception is a thing. This is not overly formalistic, this is not hyper technical.

And I'm going to stray a field, a briefly a field here, Your Honor, but just to give you an illustration, if I conveyed four acres of land,

and the deed describes four acres of land, and then at the bottom of the deed I say accepting one acre of land that I previously conveyed to somebody else.

You're conveying three acres. An exception is a very real thing in the world of land transactions. Likewise, a reservation is very much a thing.

I can convey a title or an estate, and then the grantor can reserve a right in that estate. And so you ask yourself the question, how do you articulate that in a deed?

And it's easy. We have this very established body of law in New Hampshire about what an exception is, what a reservation is.

We use it all the time. Those words are, they have significant legal meaning. And so when you look at that deed, and you focused on the last sentence,

but the first sentence says accepted and reserved, it then refers to the reserved right away, and then it says in that introductory clause,

by this reservation I'm granting, so you have to understand the mechanics. And as a side note, in that same confirmatory deed, Dr. Sprague says I intended to reserve, right?

So the mechanical, you've got two parties to the deed, the grantor, the grantee, Dr. Sprague, Lynn McEwen. Title interests are only going to vest in one of those two parties.

So the mechanics of the transaction, contemplated by the deed, which is expressly contemplated by the deed based on very clear language,

Dr. Sprague intended to reserve.

To herself, which you say she can't do.

She can.

She can, okay.

And then convey, and therein lies the problem. It is Black Letter law in New Hampshire that the grantor can reserve an easement in the estate that's conveyed, right?

Except that's a personal right, and it's non-transferable.

The only exception to that rule is when the grantor owns both the dominant estate and the Serbian estate, if the grantor then conveys one, the grantor can reserve that easement.

That's not what we have here. Let's be very clear about that. Dr. Sprague did not own both the dominant estate and the Serbian estate.

And so the answer to your question, Your Honor, is the easement, the language, the operative language in this deed is that of a reservation in the first instance and an effort to convey in the second instance.

And that is squarely the question that is presented to the court in this case, which is can you do that?

Our position, plaintiff's position is that does not operate as a valid conveyance.

What if somebody executed a deed and reserved to the state or the public a right of access?

I'm trying to, would it be possible for you to give me some additional fact within that fact?

Sure. So I own a farm and I am transferring it to Farmer Jones and I reserve in that transfer a right of access to the public to use a railroad bed.

I think the analysis, and so this is important, I think the analysis has to be the same in this case as it would be in all cases.

You know, the notion of an easement, whether we're talking about an easement or a fee title or some other lesser interest in real estate, all the rules, the rules need to be the same across all categories.

And I would say in that case, if it's the same exact analysis, you have the grantor reserving an easement for themselves and then attempting to convey it.

And quite frankly, I would say that doesn't operate as a legal conveyance because it doesn't meet traditional conveyancing requirements.

And your argument is based on the fact that the grantor can't transfer this personal reserved right, not necessarily on the Stranger to the Deed doctrine.

They're two different things, are they not?

The answer is not really, okay? And my response is this, the doctrine of the Stranger to the Deed is administratively very easy.

And it's important because you've got lawyers, you have title abstractors, title insurance companies, mortgage letters, everybody in the world who's involved in a real estate transaction.

We all need to be able to look at these titles and we need to, with a very high degree of certainty, understand what the title interests are.

Right, but here, and not to get you off your game here, but here, your interest or the fact that your property was burdened

would be very clear to a title examiner.

No, so now you're asking me a second question, so I'm going to get back to what I was saying here, which is, so the doctrine is sort of administratively very easy.

It's convenient, but underlying the doctrine are the reasons why we have the rule, right?

And so I would say under traditional notions of New Hampshire law, you have to have delivery and acceptance, right?

And you can't have delivery and acceptance when the stranger, the party to the deed is a stranger to that transaction because they're wholly unaware of it, right?

You have to have, you know, using the example that I used at the beginning, which is when the grantor reserves an easement that's a personal right, it's not transferable.

Right, established law in New Hampshire, that's the case.

And so the Stranger to the Deed doctrine is consistent with that.

Also the fact that when you record land titles, which is critically important, that they get indexed in the grantee indexes and the grantor indexes.

And in this case, which was a nice segue to your second question, you are, is these reservations do not get properly indexed, right?

So the doctrine of the Stranger to the Deed is in a sense administratively a very easy rule to implement,

but underlying that rule are all of these other principles of law that are fairly well established in New Hampshire.

So the argument that I was trying to make before the trial court is exactly that, which is, look it, we can look at New Hampshire law and we can very, very rightfully conclude that there was no valid conveyance here.

And that's exactly what the Stranger to the Deed doctrine does is it reaches that same result.

Now to answer your second question, which is the notice question, okay.

And the notice question is, I'll rephrase essentially the question, but to give you my executive summary and then a little bit more detail.

The fact that you are aware of a invalid conveyance in the first instance does not somehow breathe the life of validity into what would otherwise be an invalid conveyance.

It's invalid from the get-go, it is void, ab initio.

So the notice requires a requirement and I'll get into the facts of my case, which is you have this paragraph, it identifies Christopher Paul Sprague.

It turns out that's wrong, his name is Christopher Paul, so there's a typo there, or an editorial clerical error, but that's confusing.

It makes reference to a book and page reference, which when you look at that book and page reference, you go back to a deed between Howard Sprague,

when he transferred all of his real estate to himself and his wife, Dr. James Sprague, jointly, right.

So then you look at that, there's no easement here to anybody named Christopher Paul, there's no easement here on the property.

And then of course you look at the paragraph itself, which is expressly a reservation in favor of this third party.

So just to elaborate on the notice issue, you would say, well I'm on actual notice of something here, but it's terribly confusing and I'm not sure what it means.

So now I look at the record notice, which the record notice is obviously I'm charged with knowledge of whatever's properly on record,

so properly indexed, properly reported, I do my title search of the LeFever Law, and there is no easement in existence, right.

So all prior easements were extinguished by operation of law, and then there was an easement that Howard Sprague had given to the church,

which was quick claimed back to Howard Sprague, so that easement no longer existed.

So now I go, okay, actual notice of this very confusing paragraph, record notice, there's no easement, we'll go to the third point, inquiry notice.

If I'm on inquiry notice, then now I have to research potentially outside of my chain of title, and I come across this confirmatory deed from Dr. Sprague to Castle Land in Timber,

which happens after the fact, and I go, wait a minute, what's happening here.

And if I'm going to bring all of that back to the point of beginning, I would say therein lies the value of the doctrine of the stranger to the deed,

which is if people have to go through that exercise every time they buy real estate, when this back pattern is presented,

it becomes terribly uncertain what is being conveyed, what is not being conveyed, and that's part of the purpose of the doctrine of the stranger to the deed,

which is that certainty of land time.

So the stranger to the deed, we have not spoken one way or the other, allegedly.

Does it depend on whether there was your first example?

So whether you had previously, the grantor had previously deeded out the one acre that you're reserving from the transfer,

that would be, that person would be a stranger to the deed, to that deed.

So is there any implication when there's a prior transfer that then is recognized, I would say, in the deed?

So what you're talking about, I would characterize as the doctrine, stranger to the deed, would not implicate a prior lawful conveyance.

Because when you research that chain of title, grantor, I mean I don't know if your honors have ever done this,

but you have a grantor index, you have a grantee index, you go up, you go back, you find out what's in that chain of title.

And if there had been that prior conveyance, then that would be picked up in the chain of title.

And it would be in the chain of title, not just in the survey of the state, but also in the dominant state.

So when you attempt to do this in the first instance, as a reservation in the deed in favor of a third party, it is outside the chain of title.

And I do want to say so, I can see my time is limited here, and I want to make a point, which is there is this very, very strong public policy that supports the stranger to the deed doctrine.

It's the majority rule, it's a majority rule for a reason, our local New England states all follow the same rule.

It's consistent with a variety of things as I've mentioned, but there's this public policy of integrity of land title.

That is critically important to transactions in real estate.

And then you have the contrary argument to the doctrine is the notion that it can frustrate the grantor's intent.

And my time is up, but may I finish?

Please.

You can frustrate the grantor's intent.

And I would submit to the court that balancing this public interest, which is significant, against the individual interest in one case,

that frustration of potential grantor's intent does not outweigh the public policy.

And to the extent you're doing a balancing test, you're 50-50 on this, to do it correctly is extraordinarily easy.

For Dr. Sprague to have conveyed an easement from A to B, from Dr. Sprague to Christopher Paul in a separate deed,

put it on record and then transfer title to McEwen, it is so incredibly easy to do it properly

that any burden of frustrating the grantor's intent is terribly outweighed by the public benefit of getting it right.

And if the court adopts a doctrine, really what you're saying is people, we need you to do this properly

for the benefit of everybody who's involved in real estate transactions.

Thank you very much.

Thank you.

Council.

May it please the court, Lisa Snow-Wade, and I represent Tiffany and James Hogan.

And like my brother, I welcome your questions at any time.

The Hogan's are asking this court to affirm the trial court's granting of summary judgment in their favor.

And that relief is appropriate here because the trial court applied the appropriate standard of review

and came to a correct legal conclusion.

There's no dispute about the material facts that apply to whether the 2002 deed at issue in this case

was a valid conveyance of an easement.

The most important of those undisputed facts is the trial court's determination that Jane Spragg

intended to grant an easement to her son-in-law, Christopher Park.

So how do you get around the procedural hurdle that she could not reserve a transferable interest?

Because she granted an easement.

You picked up on it, Your Honor, in the wording of the deed which the trial court relied on,

which is, by this reservation the grantor specifically grants to said Christopher Paul Spragg

his successors and assigns the right to use said reserve right of way.

Except Mr. Paul would not be noted anywhere in the chain of title.

But he was in the chain of title for both lots.

If you look at the LeFever's lot, this language is expressly included in Lin McEwen's deed to the LeFever's,

just as it's in the deed from Jane Spragg to Lin McEwen.

It's in their chain of title.

Well, it's in their deed.

And it's in the Hogan's deed as well, word for word.

This same language is in the Hogan's deed.

There is no fear that anyone researching either party's lots is going to miss the fact that this easement was granted.

And to the extent that the fact that Jane Spragg used both words of reservation and grant in the same paragraph,

the confirmatory warranty deed in 2003 makes it undisputably clear that she intended to grant and convey an easement through the 2002 deed.

We only get to the confirmatory deed if we find this particular, the first deed to be ambiguous in some way.

Correct.

Correct.

And I'm just saying that to the extent you say, as was suggested, all this is confusing.

I, you know, Dave LeFever, look at my deed.

I don't know what this is supposed to mean.

Well, if you find the 2003 deed, you know what it means.

Is it really an issue of the clerk at the registry of deeds choosing to index the grantees based on who's bolded in the first paragraph instead of reading through the entire document to the end and seeing, oh wait, there's another grantee at the bottom.

Is that really the issue?

That is not the issue here.

That would only be the issue if the LeFever's were before you here today saying we had no record or constructive or inquiry notice that someone was claiming an easement over our property, and that is not the facts of this case.

And easements that are granted, for example, to Eversource or some utility, they are not indexed.

They, sometimes they are, sometimes they aren't.

Would you, how would you respond to my question that if somebody is transferring a property to a third party in reserving to the state or to the public, would that be a sufficient reservation to create a public right of way, for example?

I would say yes, Your Honor, because the manifest rule of construction in this jurisdiction is to first look to the manifest intent of the parties unless there is a contrary statute or public policy that would override the intent of the grantor.

And here, there's neither.

Neither RSA 477 nor public policy would prohibit Jane Sprague's intent.

And that's because if you look at 477, which governs convincing, it does not specify that the name of the grantee has to be in any particular place in the deed.

And specific to this case, the word grant is used, and the statute confirms that the use of the word grant shall be sufficient words of conveyancing.

Shall as a command, as you all well know, it has to be upheld.

So that is the law of this jurisdiction, without needing to get to feudal law, which was never incorporated into our law.

And even if it were, even if you said, maybe we should consider a stranger to the deed doctrine, this isn't the case for it, because Christopher Paul isn't a stranger to this deed.

He's an express party because there is a grant to him of an interest in real estate.

How would you have a stranger to the deed?

A stranger to the deed would be only if it's a reservation in favor of a third party, kind of like Justice Countway's hypothetical.

But even the states that still follow feudal law, and are now changing as we point out in our brief and abolishing it,

but even if you still follow that, there is an exception that if you can determine the express intent of the grantor, that will be upheld despite the stranger to the deed doctrine.

So an exception to stranger to the deed is actually the minority view is our law, as it is already.

And here, there's no dispute that the intent of the grantor is found.

But if in Justice Countway's example, if it's clear from the terms of the deed that the grantor wants the state or the public to have a right of way,

that should override a formalistic, mechanical application of a outdated, conveyancing standard.

How do you respond to the argument from your opponent that the knowledge or awareness of the grantee should be factored in?

In other words, what would happen if I grant a parcel of land to counsel but he never knows and I record the deed? Does his knowledge impact?

It can't or that will completely upend the validity of deeds as we know it because you'd have to go back and prove that every grantee of a recorded deed knew that they were being granted

because there's no obligation, as we know, for a grantee to sign a deed. So every single deed in the registry is signed.

But don't they have to accept it?

If there's a question about acceptance and when that typically arises is in situations where a third party is holding a deed with a right of recall.

So my grandfather is going to deed me the whole place but gives it to his attorney and says only record this after I die.

That's where you get into delivery and acceptance questions. Otherwise there is a presumption in our law that if there is a deed that has been signed by the grantor

and it's something that would benefit the grantee, you can presume delivery and if the actions of the grantee are consistent with having accepted the rights,

then you can presume acceptance and that's what the trial court found.

The deed out referenced the easement.

Absolutely. Absolutely. The deed's out referenced an easement. He sells his property to a developer that would need that 30 foot right of way spelled out in detail like it is here

in order to get their subdivision approval given the wetlands on the property that are seen from the plans that were before the trial court record.

There's a reason why Christopher Paul needed that right of way clearly spelled out from his mother-in-law and it's all the circumstances that the trial judge was considering support that he accepted the deed.

So there's no reason by statute that there should be an exception to upholding this grantor's intent.

And public policy doesn't support it because there is knowledge and notice in both chains of title of the granting of the easement.

This issue did not come up during the subdivision of the larger parcel.

The subdivision of the larger parcel, this issue did not come up the way I see this diagram and I will just note that the diagrams didn't upload.

But they're in the brief but they are in the appendix so that's all good.

But there's one lot that relies on this easement for access but this did not come up during the subdivision process to your knowledge.

To my knowledge it was presented to the planning board because it's noted on the subdivision plan as we point out in our brief.

So I'm presuming that the town of Deering considered that aspect when granting approval for that law 9 which is the law that my clients hold.

Because they're only viable over access into that law.

I'll give this right of way.

But that's not really the central issue here for determining the validity based on the 2002 deed.

I think that we've covered the primary issues on this appeal and I'll rest on my brief unless you have further questions.

Thank you.

Can I provide a call with actual heart copies of those images?

You may.

You may.

These are speaking from my view.

I was able to figure it out from the appendix so thank you very much.

In case a minute.
