These are case numbers 2023, 0690, and 2024, 0183, State of New Hampshire versus Donald Levier, Jr.

Good morning, Attorney Johnson. I understand you're zero at one minute.

Yes, Your Honor. May it please the Court, Christopher Johnson on behalf of Donald Levier.

The two cases raise a common issue of statutory interpretation, starting the burden of proof on the effect of defendants incompetence on the proceedings.

For shorthand, I plan to refer to that as the incompetence effect.

My plan this morning is to address first the question of whether the statute imposes a burden of proof at all, and secondly the question of who bears it.

I'm happy to take the Court's questions. I have a quick one. Yes.

Would an affirm an either case be just positive?

Well, we're at the point of the SVP proceedings, and so the case would continue. I think if that answers the question, I'm not sure I have, though.

Okay. So it seems to me if there's an affirm an either case, he's being committed.

Well, so what then goes on, then there's a jury trial about whether he's a sexually violent predator.

So this appeal comes in the midpoint of the SVP proceedings.

And it's actually important to, I think, pause on this, is that this part of the proceedings exists to replicate what in most SVP proceedings has already been established by a criminal conviction.

And so, because Mr. Levier has not been convicted of a crime because he's incompetent, this whole part of the SVP procedure arises in a circumstance like this.

And so we're not actually, we're sort of more at the beginning point of the larger SVP process.

So it seems to me we need to address both cases?

Yes. I think that's right. And because there's an important dispute about whether this midpoint procedure was handled correctly.

So first, the first issue is whether the statute poses a burden of proof.

I think any fact can have one of three possible relationships with a legated dispute.

First, the fact can be irrelevant and so it's something not to be considered much less proved.

Secondly, there are facts that are relevant but not elemental.

Those can be considered but don't have to be proved.

And third, there's elemental facts.

Facts, the outcome of the dispute depends in part at least on that fact.

Elemental facts must be proved.

If a fact must be proved, there must be a burden of proof to allocate the risk of error and to help the fact finder address the potential problem of equipoise.

We know it's elemental because the trial court needs to make a finding.

That's right.

The statute tells us that it's elemental.

The statute says the court can't find that the defendant committed the requisite criminal act unless it makes certain specified findings on the incompetence effect.

So for example, the statute says if the defendant's incompetence substantially interferes with his ability to assist counsel,

the court shall not find that he committed the requisite criminal act.

And so it sort of functions as an additional element.

And so in that sense, because the statute prohibits this essential finding to the further progression of the SVP proceedings,

prohibits further progression without a finding on this fact it's elemental.

Because it's elemental, there has to be a burden of proof.

And so the trial court was wrong when it said there was no burden of proof.

The next question is, who bears it?

And here again, this statute gives us an answer.

We are not making a constitutional argument.

This is different from Ploof and Dioli, where the claim was the Constitution commands the legislature to structure this process in a certain way.

Not saying that.

The legislature could pay any burden of proof it wanted.

It could assign it to whoever it wanted.

So how would the state be able to prove, if it's burden, that the person's ability to assist the hearing,

including assisting and identifying witnesses, testifying on his or her own, or providing other relevant information,

how would the state possibly be able to meet that burden?

So I take a couple of things.

And so one is, and again, this is what I think it's important to recognize.

We are not saying that the evidence here was necessarily insufficient.

So the evidence here might be enough.

The state has a lot of important information that bears on that.

It has the competency evaluation.

So it has a lot of information about Mr. Levier's manifestations and the consequences of his incompetence.

It also has a lot of information about the underlying criminal act,

and it has a lot of information about how it plans to prove that act.

Those facts are enough.

And I want to emphasize also, this is not a unique or unusual kind of burden to impose on the state.

In many men's REA cases, in criminal cases, the state has to prove men's REA.

That's putting on the state the obligation to prove a fact about the defendant's mental operations.

And indeed, in criminal cases, the state has the burden of proving the defendant's competent.

So this essentially same inquiry, the burden is on the state.

Why isn't this similar to a trial court's substantive responsibility or obligation to raise a bona fide question of competency

if the trial judge sees that that's a possibility?

Isn't this really the same type of analysis that the legislature is asking the trial court to do?

I don't think so.

I think if the statute were written differently, it could have made this not an elemental fact,

but a fact that the judge has to consider.

It could have been nearly a rule of relevance, and you shall consider the defendant's incompetence.

And if the statute were written that way, I wouldn't be here with this argument.

But that's not how the statute was written.

It was made an elemental fact through the language of the statute.

This is something that the court has to find if it's going to find that the defendant did the underlying criminal act.

I'm assuming we agree with you that it's elemental.

But I think that the basis for that argument is the statutory language,

where it says if the defendant's incompetence substantially interferes with his ability to assist counsel,

the court shall not find that the defendant committed the act.

Can you pick on your suggestion?

I think I heard that the legislature could sign any burden it wished.

For present purposes, we are not making a constitutional argument.

I might be back here with one if they did some things extravagant or really wild with signing the burden of proof.

But they didn't, and I'm prepared to concede they could have signed a lower burden of proof if they wanted to.

But they didn't.

The only burden of proof that appears in this statute is beyond a reasonable doubt.

The legislature could amend the statute tomorrow to say, we're going to lower that.

And indeed, for the later part of this SVP process, when there's a jury trial on whether, in fact, he's actually a violent predator,

the burden of proof is clear and convincing evidence.

The legislature can use different burdens of proof as it sees fit.

But as to this fact in your view, it's beyond a reasonable doubt.

That's right. And because that's what the legislature happened to choose.

And it makes sense.

I mean, this is an extraordinary procedural circumstance.

We're talking about trying to use adversary process to answer a question that couldn't be answered in criminal court because of the defense incompetence.

And it's because incompetence renders the adversary process unreliable.

The legislature is, you know, understandably and is putting this position of trying to use a process to reach a reliable outcome that couldn't happen in criminal court.

This is also an extraordinary circumstance in that it's civil commitment and what we're looking at is potentially indefinite confinement.

And also, as in other forms of civil commitment, it's about future dangerousness.

And so it's a procedurally, you know, it's a common parlance, a kind of a scary process.

And this elemental, picking up on that line of reasoning, this elemental fact is an essential fact along the way to restricting this person's liberty.

Precisely, precisely.

And the legislature has chosen, because, you know, again, in the typical SVP case, we don't have to do any of this because there's a finding of criminal guilt beyond a reasonable doubt in a criminal court.

And we're past that.

But in the case of incompetent defendants like Mr. Levier, we're backfilling.

We're trying to make sure that before we incarcerate somebody as sort of dangerous in the future, we're very sure they did a particular instance of this kind of crime.

I'd like you to address the sentence.

It's in the middle of paragraph two that essentially it says if the person's incompetence substantially interferes, the court shall, et cetera.

And then it goes on to say, unless the court can conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that the acts occurred, and then it goes into the strength of the state's case, isn't that essentially what Judge Will did in his analysis?

I mean, and then I guess part two, which I will add to the questioning, is could we assume that the defendant was of such a state and then still look to the strength of the state's case and sort of punt?

So there's one more in the statute I want to begin to answer your question by highlighting, and that is, I don't know if you have the paper, it's replicated in my brief.

It's the third line down on page six.

They used the word and instead of or.

And so the structure of this statute is the legislature says before we're going to make this finding that an incompetent person did the criminal act,

we're going to ask the fact finder to determine whether the incompetence substantially interfered, and if it did, you can't make the finding.

And then there's this unless, so sort of an exception.

So now we're thinking, all right, maybe you can make the finding, even if incompetence substantially affects.

And then the unless clause has two conditions, both of which are required by the word and and unless is back, you can find they did that criminal act beyond a reasonable about fine.

And then it's but and that the strength of the state's case is such that the person's limitations could not have had a substantial impact.

So we have the incompetency effect sort of back in under the unless clause.

And so one could ask, like, what are they doing?

What is the legislature doing here?

It sort of seems to a lot of words that are packaging two fundamental ideas together in different ways.

One fundamental idea is, did he do the criminal act beyond a reasonable doubt?

And the second idea is, is the incompetence effect, does the incompetence, the effect of his incompetence undermine our confidence.

And the legislature both times before and after the unless clause wants the fact finder to make findings about both.

And so I think that reframing, let me say this, sometimes statutes present a list of factors.

And sometimes when court looks at lists of factors, it uses a candidate of interpretation that each word might mean something different.

And you look at this and you try to find like what, how are these two tests different?

But sometimes when the legislature uses multiple factors, the court says these are, it's using many words to get at the expression of a single idea.

And I think that's what's happening here.

Before and after the word.

I guess if we're looking at the strength of the state's case, suppose you had evidence via video of the defendant committing the charged act.

And you had a defendant who was essentially a rock, could offer no assistance whatsoever.

In that scenario where you have direct conclusive evidence, does the court, does the trial court have to engage in the analysis of the defendant's capabilities?

Yes. And I think in, in such cases maybe, so the court would do is first, you'd look at the video, can I find beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant did the act?

You know, pretty good, probably yes. But I am commanded by this statute also to consider the effect of the defendant's incompetence.

Given the nature of the state's evidence, what effect could that incompetence have had?

And a court might reasonably, if it applies the right burden of proof, conclude it couldn't have had any effect at all.

Done. You know, I'd make the requisite findings.

But what this court didn't do is apply the right burden of proof to that second part of the inquiry.

Is, is this a case like that where it doesn't matter, I mean, he could be completely non-communicative and, you know, unable to do anything in his defense and it wouldn't matter.

Or maybe it would, and the court has to do, has to apply the right burden of proof to address that question.

And so we're asking for, as a remand, to apply the right burden of proof.

Thank you, Attorney Johnson. Attorney Gagnier.

Good morning, Your Honours. May it please the court, Sam Gagnier for the State of New Hampshire.

I'm going to try to direct my presentation much down the same path that Attorney Johnson's just went.

And I'd like to begin with, this is not an element.

This is not an element. This is a consideration that the trial court has to make that can preclude a finding.

Justice Donovan was absolutely right that this is very much like the trial court's role when we're starting the criminal process,

to be watching out to ensure that people, excuse me, the defendant is competent.

In the criminal process, competency is not an element of a charged crime.

The state can have enough evidence to easily meet all of those elements,

but a finding can be made of incompetence that can preclude that finding.

Because then the defendant can't stand trial. That's the same thing here.

This is not an element to be proven.

The trial court is to be on guard for the defendant's, excuse me, the respondent's competence and to assess it.

And if the trial court, just like in the criminal process, concludes

that this respondent is not competent to assist his counsel in this 135E2 hearing,

then just like in the criminal process, the court says I need to preclude the possibility of even making that finding.

Why couldn't the state have just provided an expert witness that did an analysis under this statute?

I'm sorry, I didn't hear the beginning of the question.

Why couldn't the state simply have provided an expert witness who had previously evaluated the defendant on this point?

Is there any barrier to that?

I don't know that the state could not have presented a witness on this.

The trial court did offer both parties the opportunity to submit evidence on the issue,

but the state was not required to bring an expert in to testify to that.

Well, that was the position that the state took,

but I'm just wondering if there's any barrier to the state, just like in the competency context.

So I understand Justice Donovan's point that the court has to be on the lookout,

but that's just the beginning of a process where the state ultimately bears the burden of proof.

That's right, Your Honor, but even in that context, I think we need to be very careful.

The state does bear the burden of proof, but first, a bona fide doubt has to be found as to competence.

So when they're bearing that burden of proof, something has already been established, a bona fide doubt.

So they have something to try to undercut, something affirmative has been established that can be disproven.

That's the same as...

Isn't the analogy limited? I mean, this is a different context.

This is a procedure that's leading to civil commitment.

It's different.

Yes, Your Honor, that is correct. This is different.

And this process is part of a broader process where someone's liberty is going to be taken away.

And that's... there is a very limited analogy to the criminal context.

I mean, this is sort of a self-contained process that's a proxy for what would have otherwise happened.

Yes, Your Honor, I agree. I absolutely agree.

And is it your position that the trial court doesn't need to make a finding as to whether the person's limitations had a substantial impact on the proceedings?

No, Your Honor, I think the trial court does need to make a finding.

So if a finding needs to be made, doesn't one of the parties have the burden to establish the evidence to lead the trial court to make that finding?

No, Your Honor. I'm trying to unpack that. I was trying to unpack that a little bit in what I was doing there.

This is a bit complicated in here, splitting a little bit.

In that initial... in the criminal process, as I was saying, that bona fide doubt is established, so the state has a burden to come undercut that.

Sort of similar to if a defendant puts on a scintilla of evidence, there's a defense to go with disprove.

Here, we are entering the process in which what the court is considering is the extent to which the person's incompetence or developmental disability impacted the outcome of the proceeding.

So we're coming in with the defendant. There is already some level of incompetence here. It's built in.

The state cannot disprove that. If the state could disprove that level of incompetence, we'd be in the criminal process. We wouldn't be here.

So because that level of incompetence is already built in, what the state is then being asked to prove is the defendant was not that incompetent.

He was not so incompetent that he couldn't go through this proceeding.

Well, that's not something that's already been established, that he was incompetent to this degree that he couldn't assist counsel in this setting.

Because the standard is different in the civil commitment context from the criminal context in terms of the level of incompetence.

Or what he is incompetent to do under the statute. There are specific things under the statute that the court has to consider as to whether that defendant is competent to do the enumerated things in the statute.

That is correct, Your Honor. My ultimate point at the end of this, and I know this is a little bit convoluted, is that what the state is being asked to do here is really proven negative.

Prove something that has not been established. They are not being asked to disprove something that has been established, that can be done.

Or you can affirmatively prove something that has never been established, that can be done too.

But proving a negative is being asked to prove, disprove something that has never been even preliminarily established in the first place.

That's what we would be asking the state to do in this statute if the burden is placed with the state, assuming there's a burden at all.

So is that your argument that there's not a burden of proof applicable to either party?

Yes, Your Honor. Our primary argument is that there is not a burden of proof. This is an evaluation for the trial court to undertake.

The trial court does have to make a finding, but if it makes the finding, it's not an elemental finding.

It's a finding that would preclude you even getting to the evidence upon which you could assess the elements to make the finding.

The findings have to be proven beyond a reasonable doubt, or what's the standard?

So the trial court must find, determine whether or not the person's incompetence substantially interferes with their ability to assist counsel.

If the answer to that question is yes, the trial, nobody should assess whether anything was proven beyond a reasonable doubt,

because even if it was proven beyond a reasonable doubt, the trial court cannot find that the person committed the act

unless we get into that fifth part of the sentence with the unless language.

But you're not, unless the trial court can make that second part of that finding,

that the evidence is so overwhelming that it just couldn't have had an impact,

then the trial court doesn't even need to assess whether the element of has the act been committed was met

if it finds that preliminary finding that this respondent was so incompetent that he just couldn't even assist his attorney.

How do you reconcile that with the notation in your brief on page 14 that the superior court issued a decision finding,

quote, the state proved beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant committed the act's charge and that the defendant's incompetence

did not substantially interfere with his ability to assist his counsel in preparation of his defense?

What basis could the court conclude the latter of those two?

Is that in case 2023, Justice Gould?

I believe so. Yes.

I don't think that, if that's the language the court used, I don't think the court needed to find that the state had proven

that the state had proven that the defendant was able to assist his counsel.

If the court used that language, I think it's earlier or where it said there is no burden of proof here,

kind of establishes that the court was just somewhat loose with language there.

And the state actually presented no evidence on the effect of incompetence on his ability to, for example,

assist his counsel in preparation of his defense, correct?

That is correct, Your Honor. The state used the evidence that was ultimately submitted to make arguments.

The state did not admit that evidence. So the state really didn't marshal evidence itself.

There was evidence in this record that was sufficient for the court to make that finding, but it wasn't marshaled by the state.

So you're saying that the court has to make a finding?

If a trial court is making a finding, doesn't there have to be some burden of proof,

whether it's beyond a reasonable doubt or preponderance or clear and convincing,

doesn't there have to be a burden associated with a court making a finding?

Your Honor, I don't know that I am prepared to say yes or no to that one way or the other.

In the area of law I'm most used to in the criminal realm, that certainly is the case.

But I think the defendant's arguments very much rises and falls on the premise that it begins with,

that this process just seeks to replicate the criminal process.

If you embrace that first premise, you start talking about things like material elements,

facts that need to be proven to show certain elements.

What this statute really is, is an assurance to society that people are not being committed

as sexually violent predators without us being sure that they committed the act.

Not as a criminal matter.

As the state argued and dialed and this court noted, this statute's not at all concerned with something like mens rea.

But in the criminal world, if it's a material element, then it has to be concerned with mens rea.

This statute in the part that's asking about incompetence, what I really see going on here,

is the legislature does not want people committed as sexually violent predators.

When they were incompetent to stand trial and then when they get to this hearing,

they're unable to assist in defending themselves, but it's a close case.

And that's why they put that last sentence, that the court still can go forward here

and the person can't be committed even if their incompetence makes such that they can't help in this hearing

if sort of the hypothetical arises the justice count way, I said.

We have such strong evidence in your hypothetical.

It's video evidence in the 2024 docket here.

It is very strong witness testimony and DNA evidence.

In those circumstances, where it's not a close case, we need to protect the public.

We need to go forward with the sexually violent predator proceeding.

But where it is a close case, and we couldn't do the criminal process,

we couldn't get assurance that way that the person really did commit the act.

And here we can't really be sure either because the person can't quite help in the state's evidence isn't strong enough.

The legislature wanted to stop that person from being committed.

But they did not design-

So how is the trial court just hearing, sitting and hearing facts about the crime that occurred?

How is the trial court supposed to make that determination?

Just observing how the defendant looks and interacts with their attorney.

How can we be sure that a trial court has proper evidence to properly make that determination?

Well, Your Honor, I think much the way kind of they can conduct competency evaluations,

they can consider the competency evaluation itself as well as the factors that are listed in the statute here.

But the defense could have said, I'm not providing the competency evaluation.

It's private to my client.

He's not in a position to waive his confidential rights to this competency evaluation.

I'm going to sit back and not submit that, which I think is a defensible position.

Sure, Your Honor.

So I think catch all at the bottom here is or providing other relevant information or assistance to counsel or the court.

I think the court can make this determination by the means that are available to it.

Similarly in the competency setting, while I think we do go right to the Office of Forensic Examiner,

we do a medical evaluation, I don't think that would necessarily always be the case.

I think competency, a lot about competency can be gleaned from a judge's observation of a person.

The way their counsel is able to put on a presentation in a setting like this,

counsel could certainly bring to the court's attention that, Your Honor, my client really wants,

he thinks he wants to testify, I don't think he does.

This is why he thinks he does explain to the court the difficulty they're having in advising their client.

And one would think that a defense counsel would have really an obligation to do that.

If defense counsel believes that their client doesn't understand what's going on in this proceeding,

such that they can't help at all and the attorney can't help them,

I think that they would want to raise that with the court and try to address that issue.

And I think the court has many tools at its disposal to assess competency

and without putting it on the state as a burden.

And if the burden were with the state, as Justice Donovan observed,

for reasons that have been discussed here, it would be incredibly difficult to prove.

In this setting, the state didn't...

Counsel, didn't Judge Will rely on the competency evaluations in making his decision

that the defendants in confidence didn't adversely affect his ability to assist in his defense?

Yes, Your Honor.

So what would have prevented the state from getting an expert opinion

that given the deficits that the defendant has,

they should not interfere with his ability to assist counsel in the manner contemplated by the statute?

The state certainly could have done that, Your Honor.

And indeed, in one of the criminal cases here,

there was a second evaluation performed at the request of the state.

And that is one of the competency evaluations that ultimately came in at the hearing.

See that my light is on. Thank you, Your Honors.

Attorney Johnson.

Thank you very much, Counsel. The case is submitted.
