Just to be slow today.

This is case 2230400, state of New Hampshire,

versus Ray DeJesus.

Good morning, Attorney Johnson.

I understand you reserved.

Yes.

One minute.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Yes.

May it please the court.

Christopher Johnson on behalf of Ray DeJesus, Jr.

The issue in this appeal is ineffective assistance of counsel

and two missed objections.

The Delgado hearsay objection and the PEC expert opinion

both matter to CD's credibility.

On the deficient performance prong,

there was no adverse ruling in the Motion for New Trial Court.

Instead, indeed the court found deficient performances

to the hearsay.

The Motion for New Trial Court rather relied

on the prejudice prong as a basis for its ruling,

and therefore that will be my focus this morning.

So I plan first to address the Delgado hearsay

and then second the PEC expert opinion.

I'm happy to take the court's questions.

Beginning with the Delgado hearsay,

the trial court said no prejudice because cumulative.

I disagree with that.

That the unique prejudice of this statement

was not in its content, but in the identity of the person

to whom the statement was addressed, Delgado.

The defense theory could readily explain

why CD would make a false accusation to her mother,

to her boyfriend, to her nurse,

the nurse at the hospital and the boyfriend

is sitting in the room, but not to the friend Delgado.

And because CD's credibility was thus bolstered

by the Delgado hearsay, her trial testimony

on the assaults doesn't stand alone,

and one can't say, well, she testified

about the assaults at trial,

therefore this is cumulative.

Can you just clarify for me,

it wasn't clear to me how long after the incident

that that text was sent?

I, so my understanding of that is that it was sent

that night before she went to the hospital.

So, prompt, relatively prompt.

Delgado woke up the next day.

Right, Delgado woke up the next morning

and it was already there.

Exactly when in the course of the night,

I'm not sure it's clear.

But within hours, presumably.

Yes, presumably, yes.

So, but why is Delgado different?

So Delgado's different because the defense theory

was that this was a consensual sexual encounter

and then that she sort of caught

kind of in flagrante by her mother.

And so you could explain why,

saying to her mother in that moment I was raped,

that could be a false accusation

because the mother is gonna view a consensual encounter

with DeHase's highly negatively.

His age, he's married, he's this old family friend.

You could explain why she would make

a false accusation to her boyfriend

even though it was a consensual encounter

because he's the one betrayed by the consensual encounter.

But that's still part of the argument

that you're not giving up on the...

No, I am.

I think that the trial lawyer had a reasonable strategy

for why you would bring in the statement to the boyfriend

because that's the whole point

of making this false accusation

after a consensual encounter is to persuade him.

Wouldn't it take to Delgado just bolster

the consensual sex explanation?

Well, but see, she's not, only if it's true,

I think only if the allegation of rape is true

because she, again, she's not somebody...

So in the scenario that the defense is urging the jury,

it's a false accusation.

When you're making a false accusation,

why are you making it so promptly to your friend

who's not even present and not betrayed

and isn't gonna view a consensual sexual encounter

that you regret in the same way that your mother

is gonna view a consensual sexual encounter

that you regret?

She's different in that way.

And so the thought is that it's a lot harder

to explain why she's making this up

in the moment to correct a judgment error

about sexual activity.

She has to go to the friend to back it up,

especially so quickly.

So that's the thought.

And so a jury in the deliberations

of the state talks about speculation.

I mean, ineffective assistance of counsel,

prejudice analysis are inevitably speculative

because the question is if the thing hadn't happened

at the trial, is there a reasonable likelihood

of a different result?

We're speculating by definition,

but that's a theory and because we don't know,

our system is such that we don't have

a transcript of jury deliberations,

we can't say for sure whether they talked about this,

here's say to Delgado a lot or not at all in this context.

What about the failure to inquire at defense counsel?

They did inquire.

And so the question, defense lawyers testified

at the motion from trial about this failure to object

and he said he should have.

I think it's page 59 and 60

at the motion from your trial transcript.

And it's in my brief that the page number in any event,

he's asked why didn't you object,

he's asked words to the effect of should you objected

and in retrospect he says yes.

If he had a reason not to object, he would have said,

why didn't object because I kind of wanted this in.

And so we do know he doesn't have a strategic reason

because he would have given it when he's asked

why didn't you object, he would have given it

instead of saying I should have objected.

So when he asked the question

and what did one of the messages say,

what answer was he looking for?

So I don't recall exactly what you're referring to.

So is this trial testimony?

This is the cross examination of Delgado.

That was the question that brought up, I got raped.

Right, right.

So it had already come out that I think at that point

the ship had sort of was out

because CD had said without objection I told Delgado.

And then I think on direct of,

which is when he should have objected on direct.

And so by the time he gets to cross

it's his opportunity to object is passed

and maybe he's trying to prepare the damage.

Where does the concept of excited utterance come in here

because that seems like a plausible way

that this could have gotten before the jury.

So a couple of things on that.

And so I think there was some suggestion at the earth

to talk at the Motion for Neutral hearing about that.

And the defense lawyer testified again when he said

I didn't have a reason to object.

He said if they had said excited utterance

I would have pushed back.

And then the further point,

and I think this is crucial

in the motion of a new trial court's findings.

He said he found deficient performance.

He said an objection I think exactly have his quote here

but he found deficient performance

as to the fair object to hearsay

which implies that we have a finding from the judge

that a excited utterance argument

would not have been sustained.

And also I don't think it's raised on appeal

by the state at that.

So I think that's not before this court.

I'm turning to Peck.

So here the court said no prejudice

because the opinions that were given on cross

were implied by what Peck had already said on direct.

To which I'd say that's not true

with one exception which granted.

So for present purposes analysis

I think of the direct as having two features.

There was an examination on direct

about an examination of her mouth and face

when Peck said sometimes you see

particular after strangulation.

So it's like apparently an indirect effect

sometimes of strangulation is these signs of injuries

on parts of the body that are not directly touched.

But also on direct the doctor testified

at examination of CD's neck

and there the defense lawyer elicited

these absence of signs, marks or wounds.

There's nothing on the neck.

So on cross when the prosecutor asks

about the examination of the neck

and elicits these opinions that it's common

or not unusual or not inconsistent

to have these missing signs or marks

that's when he should have objected.

And that's when what came out on cross

did not duplicate what came out on direct.

And the prejudice of this is that

that cross minimized the exculpatory value

of the direct in a significant way.

Direct we have in the place that strangulation is,

it directly happens the neck on direct examination

we have no signs, no marks, no wounds.

Then on cross we get well it's not uncommon,

not unexpected, not unusual, not inconsistent.

If Dr. Peck had been certified as an expert

would the analysis be any different?

I think then if there had been

this expert disclosure process,

yes it would be different.

But the trial court here found,

the motion for new trial court here found

the defense called Peck as a fact witness

and they treated Peck as a fact witness.

And so had the defense called Peck as an expert witness

I think this would be a very different situation.

Because I would agree if you call somebody

as an expert witness and then the other side

gets on cross some other opinions fine

but when you call somebody as a fact witness

that's when there's a problem went on cross

expert opinions are elicited.

And this mattered to CD's credibility

because her account of the strangulation

that she had suffered doesn't match the physical evidence.

And if that's true even though she's not charged

or he's not charged with strangulation

it cast out more generally on the entirety of her account.

And it's worth remembering and it emphasized

this was a close case.

He was acquitted of six of the 10 charges

covering three of the five allegations.

And indeed he was acquitted on one

for which there was DNA evidence.

And for that matter convicted on one

for which there wasn't DNA evidence.

And so in this context where we have

in these two different ways

things that Finsler could have done

that would have attacked her credibility more

that's where we have the prejudice

sufficient to create a reasonable likelihood

of a different result.

And this is the court has questions.

Thank you.

Thank you attorney Johnson.

Good morning and May it please the court

Adriana McCoola for the state of New Hampshire.

I'd like to first start by addressing your question

Chief Justice McDonald.

No one asked attorney Olson at the motion

for new trial hearing why he did not object

to this text message about Delgado.

It's not on page 59 in the transcript.

It's not anywhere in the transcript.

What the defendant tried to do in his brief

on appeal was argue that when attorney Olson

was asked questions about Gonzalez's

hearsay testimony about the phone call they had

he tried to relate that same argument

to this text message about Delgado.

But the attorney down below never asked Carl Olson

on direct and the state never crossed him

on why he did not object to this text message.

Before Delgado even testified the victim

had testified that she did send this text message

and said exactly what the text message said.

And so when the state argues in its brief

on appeal that it's speculative

whether this was deficient performance

because it's speculative whether this would

have been admissible or not it's

because it was already admitted a trial

and no one objected to it when the victim testified about it.

And so when Delgado is testifying about this text message

the jury has already heard from the victim that it occurred

and the jury had already heard from the victim

and her mother that she had reported immediately

after the sexual assaults occurred

that she had been sexually assaulted.

Would the actual text messages provided to the jury?

They were not.

And I don't know why.

Just the testimony of the victim

and then it's corroborated by her friend.

It is corroborated by her friend.

But attorney Olson does explain at the hearing

that his strategy with Delgado in general

was to discredit her by cross-examining

her general credibility about her feelings

about the defendant.

She had said at trial that he was creepy

and he had cross-examined her at trial about,

well, you were posting Snapchat videos of him

singing and dancing with you.

So he did other things in the trial to discredit Delgado.

So therefore his lack of objection to this text message

could have been a strategy to not draw more attention to it.

It could have been a strategy.

He could have thought that it would have been admissible

given that the victim testified to it.

It's unclear because no one asked.

And so on appeal, the defendant

cannot meet his burden to prove to this court

that that was deficient performance

and not a strategic decision.

And even if this court finds that it was deficient

performance, it did not prejudice the case.

As I already started getting into,

almost all of the other witnesses testified

that the victim reported to them she was sexually assaulted.

And almost all of those reports were generally consistent,

even though some of those reports did not go

into great detail.

But what she told the jury at trial

was very consistent with what she reported

to the intake nurse at the hospital

and what she reported to the same.

And there was no cross-examination

with any inconsistent testimonies she made

about the charge.

But isn't it more powerful if that's a communication

that happened shortly after the incident?

It is more powerful.

And in fact, this court has held in state

bewittered that when a victim discloses to a witness who

is not a police officer before they

disclose to a police officer, that disclosure

is admissible, not as non-hear say,

just admissible as evidence if the claim at trial

is that the victim is lying about the assault.

And that was not brought up anywhere down below.

That was not argued on appeal.

But these statements that she makes immediately

after the sexual assault to all these other witnesses

are outcry statements about the assault

that she makes before she reports to the police.

And so they are important, but they are important

because they are admissible on their own separate

from a hearsay analysis.

I know that Attorney Johnson has

argued that Delgado is different in some way

from these other witnesses, but that

does not create actual prejudice in this case.

The nurses frankly are different than these other witnesses.

And I say that because when she, I know her mother brings her

to the hospital with a boyfriend,

but when she speaks to the both nurses,

she's essentially agreeing to a very invasive saying exam.

And the jury could infer from that

that there's no reason she would go through that very long

and invasive process if this were all a lie.

And when she went through that long and invasive process,

they did find DNA evidence that once the lab tested

confirmed that his semen was inside her vagina

and her saliva was on her left breast.

So the DNA evidence alone really makes

the prejudice of this text message to Delgado minimal,

if any at all, given that this DNA evidence corroborated

the victim and did not corroborate the defendant's

statement to the police, which was that she

wanted him to perform cunnilingus on her

and she came on to him, but he never touched her,

or he never inserted his penis in her vagina

and there would never be any DNA anywhere on her,

which obviously was not corroborated.

If there are no further questions on that point,

I will move to Dr. Peck.

In this argument, the state has argued in its brief

that even if Attorney Olsen had objected

to this cross-examination, it would have been admissible.

And in the brief, the state points to Rule 701.

Do we have to agree with your argument

and its lay opinion testimony?

You don't, you do not.

And I say that because frankly there are many ways

that this evidence was admissible.

The state in the motion for new trial

in the objection argued that it was fair cross-examination

because this idea of patikia and explaining injuries

of strangulation in general was all brought out

on direct examination and all of the state's

cross-examination fell squarely

within the scope of the direct.

And so whether the doctor was testifying as a lay witness

or had somehow transformed into an expert witness

given the questions that were asked on direct,

the testimony fell on cross, fell squarely

within the scope of direct,

and did not elicit any new information

that the jury hadn't already heard something

about in the direct examination.

So it's your argument that the defense basically

made Dr. Peck an expert in its direct examination

and the state took the opportunity

to clarify the record?

Yes, exactly.

And as attorney Olson testified at the hearing,

nothing that the doctor testified to

was medically inaccurate.

In fact, he said in his, he had testified earlier

that he had 31 years of defense experience.

And in all that time, he did not think

he could find an expert that would testify inconsistently

with Dr. Peck on injuries of strangulation.

And so whether he was transformed,

she was transformed into an expert,

whether it was all lay opinion testimony under 701,

whether it was he opened the door

to this explanation on direct

of what Patikia is in injuries of strangulation.

Either way, the court looks at it,

it was not deficient performance

to not object to this testimony

that was very likely admissible at trial.

Even if it was deficient performance,

there is no prejudice because again,

as attorney Olson pointed out,

this was medically accurate information.

And there were other ways that attorney Olson

had discredited the victim at trial.

He had cross examined her with her different

description of how the mother opened the door.

Mother says she used a lollipop stick to open it.

Victim says she opened it.

He also crossed her with injuries that she had,

that she testified she had that were not corroborated

by other witnesses who saw her or any pictures

or the nurses' testimonies at trial.

He also cross examined her with

hearing the defendants fly on zip on his pants

even though he was wearing sweatpants.

And then he also crossed her with,

or the witnesses in general,

rather did not see any injuries externally on her neck

when she returned home.

Delgado testified she saw nothing in her mother

and her boyfriend who were there with her

did not see any injuries on her neck.

Despite all of that, however,

her credibility was also supported at trial

in other ways.

One by the DNA evidence that was admitted in the case.

She also testified in detail about the sexual assaults.

And as I said earlier,

she was not crossed with any inconsistent statements

about those charged sexual assaults.

And so given all of that, Your Honors,

if there are no further questions,

I will rest on my brief.

Thank you very much.

Thank you.

Thank you, Johnston.

Thank you.

Briefly, three quick points.

The trial court in,

the most of a new trial court found

that the failure to object on Delgado here

say was deficient performance.

The trial court understood the linkage

between the Gonzales and the Delgado.

And the state on appeal,

again, has to this point still not offered any reason

why could possibly help the defense theory

to let the Delgado here say in.

With respect to some of the other arguments on PEC,

I think the state is making arguments

that it didn't make in the trial court

and therefore not properly before this court.

And with that, I'd ask the court to reverse.

Thank you.

Thank you very much, Councilor.

Please submit.
