This is case number 2023-0755, Barrington Oaks Cooperative, Inc. versus Frank Blackington.

Good morning, Tony Tower. I understand you reserved two minutes for rebuttal.

Yes, sir.

Please proceed.

Thank you, and may it please the court. I'm attorney Steve Tower with New Hampshire legal

assistance representing Frank Blackington, and I have reserved two minutes.

The first issue in this case for review touches on one of the bedrock rights of New

Hampshire's landlord and tenant law, the right of a tenant facing an eviction for

nonpayment to cure that nonpayment and preserve their housing. The issue is

whether or not the trial court aired and failing to consider a defense that had

been raised by Mr. Blackington that he made an unconditional offer of payment of

the arrears that plaintiff alleged at the hearing was owed and that plaintiff had

refused to accept it. This core right of tenants to cure nonpayments and

preserve their housing would evaporate should plaintiff's proposed interpretation

of the statute prevail. I see this as a two-part inquiry. First, whether the

trial court may choose to not consider a defense that has been adequately raised

by a defendant. And second, whether or not Mr. Blackington did, in fact,

properly raise a defense under RSA 540-9. Whether or not Mr. Blackington

properly raised a defense under the statute is a different consideration from

whether or not he had proved his defense by a preponderance of the evidence.

Opposing counsel's brief focuses on the words in the statute pays to the

landlord, including RSA 540-9 as the basis to state that Mr. Blackington's

testimony that he unconditionally offered to pay the alleged arrears to

the plaintiff over the telephone and that offer was refused does not create

a defense under RSA 540-9. Do you interpret the trial court's order to

suggest that your client was in fact the tenant? Yes, I do, Your Honor.

If you look at the trial court landlord tenant judgment form that was

completed by the trial court, they noted in their form that the defendant

did appear and identified Mr. Blackington as the defendant. So I do believe

that the trial court's order states that Mr. Blackington appeared. The

trial court allowed Mr. Blackington to testify on behalf of the defendant

and therefore I believe that it was the trial court's finding of fact that

he was the proper defendant in the case. Moreover, the plaintiff did

not object to Mr. Blackington presenting the defense case at the hearing

engineering and did not preserve any objection to that in any

post-judgment motions either. So the property ownership isn't really

before us then? I don't believe it is, Your Honor. So it's your position that

an offer to pay is the legal equivalent of payment? An offer to pay

which is unconditional and would satisfy the debt is, I believe, the same

as a payment. This court in Perkins v. Public School Company held that

where a party puts into the power of a creditor to receive full payment of

the whole debt, that debt is extinguished whether or not the creditor

accepts that payment. What is the debt in this case? Is it the demand amount

or is it the full amount due at the time of the hearing? The amount of the

debt that needed to be satisfied at the time of the offer was the

amount that was owed, the arrears, plus the $15 liquidated damages, and

any filing or service charges incurred by the landlord at that time in any

other lawful charges. That's the language in RSA 540-9. Right, but is that

what is put in the demand for rent that served at the beginning of the

case or is it the amount that is due as of the date of the hearing,

which is two or three months later? For the purposes of curing under

RSA 540-9, the amount that needs to be paid is the amount that is

owed at the time that the payment is made. Including any late fees?

If there were late fees, those would have to be included. However, at the

trial there was no evidence prevented to the trial court of any late fees

or attorney's fees that were owed at that time. The only evidence

before the trial court in this case was plaintiffs off of proof and

the only evidence about the amount owed in that plaintiff's offer of proof

was the statements by plaintiff's counsel that the rent has not been paid

for, I believe, well, the rent has not been paid under the eviction notice

that we submitted. And then a second statement later on in the hearing

that the rent has not been paid for the amount in dates shown by the

demand for rent in the eviction notice. But that's not all the

rent due in owing at the time that the statement was made. I mean,

the hearing was in November. In November 29th, the eviction notice

was in August. So obviously there had been several

months in between where rent hasn't been paid.

So the statement, I mean, I think your position is

as long as the offer is to fully pay the

to pay the full debt, don't you fall short

because the full debt was actually over $2,000

at the time he made the offer to pay $900

or $1,000? Well, Your Honor, I disagree that it is

obvious that at the time at the hearing there was $2,000

that was owed. It is entirely possible that Mr. Blackington may have paid

the rent subsequent to the eviction notice but not cured of that 855

that was alleged to be owed. Well, I guess I could

assume that the landlord wouldn't accept those payments.

It is possible that the landlord would not have accepted those payments

but it is possible that the landlord would have accepted those payments

and to focus again on the

evidence that was presented at the trial court. The trial camp court cannot assume

money that is owed if there is not any evidence to the effect that

that money is owed and there was no evidence presented to the trial court of any amount

of rent being owed except for that 855 that was

alleged in the eviction notice. Nor, obviously, any evidence that it

had been paid on September 1st, October 1st, November 1st.

Correct, Your Honor. But wouldn't it have been your client's burden

if it's an affirmative defense to demonstrate compliance?

In other words, the landlord would only have

to demonstrate as an element of its case the amount

due that was listed in the demand. So they wouldn't have

the burden of proof to indicate anything beyond that.

Correct, Your Honor. For the purposes of proving the defense

certainly Mr. Blackington would have the burden to demonstrate by a preponderance

of evidence that the amount that he alleged that was offered was in fact

the amount that was owed at the time. He, to raise a defense

for consideration by the court, it is our position that

alleging that he paid the amount that was

owed at that time which he did was sufficient to raise the defense

for consideration by the court. The landlord and tenant judgment form reflects

that these are separate considerations for the trial court. There is a section

in the landlord and tenant judgment form for identifying defenses

which are raised by the defense and

identifying whether or not those defenses have been proved by a preponderance of

evidence. And although... So we can interpret the trial court's order to

mean that he didn't find your client's representations

credible? The credibility

of Mr. Blackington's representations would go

to whether or not the defense had been proven, not whether or not he raised it.

If the trial court found Mr. Blackington's

statements to be non-credible what the trial court should have done is

identified that they were considering that a defense

had been raised but that Mr. Blackington did not establish

by preponderance of evidence that he had in fact

made the payment or offer of payment as required by... So shouldn't the remedy be

then that we remand to the trial court to consider these defenses and

articulate whether or not he found these defenses to be credible?

I believe that would be a proper remedy, Your Honor.

What is the state of the record I take it this was by offers of proof

by Mr. Blackington? Is that right? Did he make

offers of proof or just the plaintiff? Mr. Blackington was sworn in

and testified under oath. Plaintiff's Council

made offers of proof on behalf of Plaintiff which goes to the second

issue for consideration by this court. So what is the state of the record

I have written down here that it's not disputed that there were two

verbal offers to pay? I think everybody agrees with that.

What's the state of the record as to when

those offers were made and

for how much? The testimony of Mr. Blackington

was that more than two weeks prior to the hearing on the

merits he made the offer to pay $1,000

to Plaintiff. Which would have been after the September 1 payment was

due, the October 1 payment was due, and the November 1 payment was

due. Is that right? That is correct, Your Honor. However,

there is again no evidence in the record that those payments were not made by Mr. Blackington.

The record

further reflects that the

service fee would not have been incurred on the date that Mr. Blackington

alleged that payment had been made. The return of service

was dated exactly two weeks prior to the hearing on the merits on November

15, 2023. And if Mr. Blackington's statement of

having made the offer of $1,000 was

in fact more than two weeks as he testified, the Plaintiff

would not have incurred that service fee yet. So even if the landlord

based on the record of the filing

fee having been incurred by the landlord in this case, the total amount that was

in the record that the trial court could consider

as owed based on the record was the $8.55 plus the $15 liquidated

damages plus the $125 of the filing fee, which comes

to $9.95, less than the $1,000 that was offered.

Is your client still living in the property? He is

residing in the property most of the time.

He is not there every day. So the trial court

gave him a discretionary stay? The trial court did issue a discretionary stay. And he's making his payments?

He has been making his payments. If I may pivot to the second

issue briefly, the other issue is whether or not the trial court

erred in failing to advise Mr. Blackington of his

right to cross-examine Plaintiff's witness, even though Plaintiff's witness was not

testifying, their counsel was making offers of proof on behalf of Plaintiff's witness.

This court has recognized that although there is a requirement

that pro se litigants are generally held at the same standard as any other

litigant, there is a balancing test that

the court has a duty of impartiality to the parties, but also

a duty to ensure that a pro se litigant is able to adequately and fully present their case.

In the Brian V. Wiley and State v. Bradrausky

cases, this court recognized that a

pro se litigant

is excused from the contemporaneous objection requirement where they

are only receiving a partial explanation of the law, an incomplete explanation of the

law, and the trial court's repeated statements that you will have a chance to respond to Attorney

Springer did not also inform Mr. Blackington of his chance to

cross-examine the silent witness, which had a

harm to his case. Furthermore, Mr. Blackington could not have

prepared for this procedure by offer of proof and know about how

that would proceed because the district court,

the district division rules do not have a court rule in which he would

be able to read about offers of proof. It is notable that

the family division and the probate division have court rules allowing for hearings to

proceed by offer of proof, but the district division does not.

Did he object to that format? He did not, but as I argue

under this court's prior case law, he would

be excused from that contemporaneous objection because he relied

on the court's representation that he would have a chance to respond

and had no reason to believe that the court was misleading him that he would also have a chance

to cross-examine the silent witness. I noted the same

thing about officer proof in the sort of court rules, but

is there a standing order that applies to the district division on

officer proof, do you know? I do not know, Your Honor.

At this time

I think I've covered most of the issues I wanted to bring before you today.

Do you have any further questions for me? I have one. Yes.

So it seems to me that as to the requirements

of 540-9, 1A,

the statute was amended in 2021 to take out the tender

language, and it seems to me that

the legislature has affirmatively

taken out tender as a way to satisfy the requirement

there and put in payment, and it seems to me that

you are asking us to, in essence, nullify

that change that the legislature made in 2021. Why isn't

that the way to think about this?

Your Honor, I see my red light has come on. May I answer your question? Yes.

In 2021,

despite of the COVID-19 pandemic, this statute was amended to lengthen

the amount of time that a tenant may cure a non-payment

by making payment to the landlord. That was done

in response to allow that rental assistance money that was available

to make it into landlord's hands, the processing of that

substantially more than seven days. That was the intent

of the statute change. It was not

intended specifically to remove the language of tender. I'll note that

the Apartment Association of New Hampshire included in their written testimony

to the legislature and as the major lobbying organization for landlords

in the state, that it was their understanding that the change in the statute

would eliminate their right to

refuse to accept payment and go forward with the

eviction after the eviction notice expired. And lastly

this change to the statute does not

affect whether or not a tender is

included under the statute because of the prior case law

here in New Hampshire that the effect of a tender is

effectively legally the same as making payment.

I don't believe the removal of the word tender actually changes the effect

of the statute. Thank you, Attorney Terry. We reserve two minutes.

Thank you. Tony Springer. Good morning, your honors.

John Springer from Springer Law of Portsom, New Hampshire. I'm here on behalf of the Plaintiff

of Pellee, Barrington Oaks Cooperative Inc.

The, as I read the standard of review

for this case, there are basically two questions. One, does the evidence

here reasonably support the trial court order? And two, is the order

consistent with the law? And the answer in this case to both those questions

is a resounding yes. And in fact, the facts are quite simple.

It's undisputed that Mr. Blackington never paid July

or August 2023 rent. That's undisputed. He was properly

served the demand for rent and eviction notice, setting out those amounts.

That's undisputed. He was served. That's undisputed.

And he never paid that amount.

That's also undisputed. The

rent was served, the rent is dated

October 31, 2023. The rent was served in mid-November and we had

our hearing at the end of November about 2023.

And I'm going to depart from my outline just a second here because

if this had been, if we had been having this hearing below, I would have been on my feet

10 minutes ago. Because I'm hearing today for the first time, well it's possible

that Mr. Blackington paid the months of September, October, November.

Well, he never did. If we're adding to the record, he never did. And

Justice Countway's question about that is absolutely right.

If he's going to assert that he made those payments, which he hadn't,

which he didn't, it was his burden to tell the court that.

However, the

there are two offers here

in response to Justice Bass's question, although I think this was answered.

The transcript that I read, and I think

he alluded to it a couple times, I went back and checked it. I think he says

he called a couple of weeks before the hearing, end quote. He did not

say more than two weeks before if we're parsing language, but

he called a couple of weeks before the hearing and offered $1,000.

But at that point, I think has been well established,

that doesn't begin to cover what was owed as of the date

of that phone call. And of course, then he's made the second

offer at the hearing. He went down to $900 and it suffered

from the same defect. And I would join Justice

Bass's question about, or pick up his question about

the statute was amended. The statute doesn't allow a tender.

It requires actual payment

in immediately guaranteed or withdrawable funds

in the full amount of the rent through the data payment

plus the court fees and the service fees or the entry fee in the service.

What about the argument that in essence you're arguing that

Landlord can just put his hands in his pocket and turn around and just say

no, I'm not going to take it. Doesn't that defeat the purpose?

No, it doesn't because with all due respect you can go to the court hearing and say

here's the money, Judge, I have the money and stop it that way. And that's quite clear.

And as we say in our brief, I think the bigger risk

to undermining that statute is exactly the situation we have here.

We have somebody calling up offering to pay less than half of what was owed

and saying, well, okay, that means my burden under the

statute so this eviction can't go full. How should a tenant figure

out what the costs and service fees are? A self-represented tenant?

Call the court. I mean, you know, it's on

the return of service is going to show the service fees and the court

clerk's going to know the entry fee. So, you know, I understand

that no one's born with that knowledge, but

you know, it's not, I think this legislature fairly

or clearly felt that it wasn't unfair to put those costs

in there. It's not unfair for a landlord to be

reimbursed for those and a simple phone call to the court

would solve that issue.

I want to address one other point. The issue about

what I said to the court down below about that's the amount of the rent

owed. If you read the transcript,

I was clearly referring to that's the amount owed

as set forth in the demand for rent and eviction notice. I was not saying

that's the total amount owed as of that day and the reason

I said what I said, I.e., this is the amount owed

as shown by the demand for rent and eviction notice is because that's the amount

I have to prove at trial to win the eviction case. I can't come in

and add in subsequent months and say, well, he hasn't paid September, October, November,

or either judge, so that's more reason for you to a victim. That's not going to fly.

I am

stuck with the number in the demand for rent and

eviction notice in order to prove at trial my case to win the eviction.

That's why I said what I said. It's different

than the payment date amount, which is all the subsequent.

So on the other side of that coin, if the tenant comes in

with a check and precisely the amount that's on your eviction

notice together with liquidated damages and service fees, then the tenant

wins. No? If it's a guaranteed check, yes.

I mean, if it's a, you know, it can't be a personal

check. It's got to be immediately. So whether he pays September or October is irrelevant.

No. I'm sorry. Then I misunderstood your question. Yes, you did.

Okay. If he shows up at the hearing

three months later, as this was the case in this case, with the

amount of rent shown by the demand for rent and no subsequent

rent, that's insufficient. I'm sorry. I misunderstood what you were saying.

That was a poor question. I apologize. Oh, no.

It doesn't satisfy 8. It doesn't satisfy

540, 9, 1A.

Done. I've said what I said. We briefed this case, I think, and if you have no

further questions. What about the procedural arguments in terms of the offers of proof

and what the court should have said or did say?

I think the, well, first of all

the issue about did he contemporaneously

object, we're not challenging that. So I think that's a moot point.

The right of cross-examination

with all the respect to the defendant

appellant, they don't have a really say what the cross-examination

was intended to be about. As I said, the amount of the rent that was

owed has never been disputed, etc. In fact, he confirms that he was behind

and rent. The only other point would be whether he made

those offers or not. We didn't dispute that. I'm not quite sure what they were going to be

cross-examining. And by the way, I was there with the property manager.

When I made the offer of proof, the property manager was there with me.

So I was making it on her behalf. But we never disputed

that he made those calls. We never disputed the amount that he said in those calls.

So I'm not quite sure what the prejudice is that he

wasn't allowed to cross-examine. Well, it could have established the fact that your client

was not accepting any payment that was going to give them.

I guess that's one issue that he could approve. To what end though?

I mean, he never

asserted that he was going to pay the full amount owed under 540-9.

He never asserted that. But he did assert that he was willing to pay

$1,000 and your client said, you're not the owner, we're not taking it. Is that disputed?

No. And by the way,

he's not on the deed. He said years to get on the deed. He's not

on the lease. He had years to get on the lease. And he's

not a member of the cooperative. And he had plenty of time to apply for membership to the cooperative.

So they were reluctant to talk to him. There's no question about it.

But if you sue somebody for $100,000

and they call up and say, well, you take $10,000, you don't have to

continue to talk to him, his offer was clearly not sufficient

two weeks before the hearing. I'm happy to sit down and

if you have any other questions, I'll address them. Thank you.

Thank you. A couple points. First of all,

it is not accurate that a tenant can bring cash to

the hearing on the merits and during the hearing on the merits and willing to cure today

and resolve the eviction. The statute very clearly says that prior to the hearing

on the merits, they have to make payment. We have

it is not an unusual circumstance that somebody

at the hearing on the merits says, I can pay now. I can pay now. And unfortunately the trial

court will say, unfortunately it's too late. You needed to do that

prior to today. If he had pulled out cash at the hearing

you don't think the court would have allowed him to make that payment?

I have seen trial courts refuse that offer at the time.

And certainly the tenant, the landlord has the opportunity then to refuse payment at that point in time.

Correct, because they can say it's too late. We're here today.

We don't have to accept. Now the other question about

how could Mr. Blackington's cross examination have helped the case. Yes,

they did not dispute that he made the offers of payment and it was

refused, but there is a substantial difference evidentiary wise

that between not disputing a fact and confirming

it on the stand. If a trial court is free to refuse

to give credibility determination to uncontested testimony

of a witness, but if both parties are agreeing that a fact is the case, that is

a very different implication on Mr. Blackington's defense.

And finally, the

issue about whether or not Mr. Blackington has adequately

paid, has adequately tendered of the amount

that was owed at the time. The burden Mr. Blackington has

at the hearing when raising a defense is first to make an allegation of a defense

and then to separately meet the burden of

proof. If the plaintiff in this case is disputing

the defense that has been alleged by Mr. Blackington, they

can provide an argument that Mr. Blackington

has not presented the offer of the amount

that was owed at the time that he made the offer. And lastly

there is an issue that if Mr. Blackington

tries to make an offer and it is a proper amount that is offered, the amount

that is owed under the statute to cure and it is refused

by the plaintiff, he could thereafter

incur additional late fees, additional attorney's fees,

and additional service and filing fees

that he would not have had to pay if

the money was accepted by the plaintiff at that time. So the argument

that Mr. Blackington can just show up at the hearing

and suffers no harm from the plaintiff refusing to accept payment

prior to the hearing does not consider the fact that there are additional costs

that could be incurred. Thank you very much attorney Taur. This case is submitted.
