This is case 2023 and 0281, Jerrod Goodell versus Wendy Wells Roof.

And you will note that my colleagues Chief Justice McDonald and Justice Bassett are disqualified from this case.

I hope it's not something I said that caused them to leave.

And you may begin.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Attorney Eggleton.

Good afternoon.

And may I please send you've reserved one minute for rebuttal, I believe.

That's correct.

Thank you.

Good afternoon.

And May it please the court?

My name is Jeremy Eggleton with the Law of Orr and Reno, and I'm representing Brandy Roof in this matter.

I have three succinct points I'd like to make, and then I'm happy to take questions.

First, a jury of New Hampshire citizens heard all the evidence in this case and decided that Brandy Roof was entitled to a verdict of $75,000.

That is evidence that the jury intended to award her that sum.

However, the nuances of New Hampshire law might be about enhanced compensatory damages.

Not to get you off your game, but is there a civil equivalent for jury nullification?

Your Honor, I don't know the answer to that off the top of my head.

I think that the answer to this case doesn't even have to go as far as that kind of doctrine.

The answer can be found right in the jury instructions themselves, and I definitely will get to that.

The principle I'd want the court to consider here is that the trial court's legal principle that it used to overturn the jury verdict was never presented to the jury.

You won't find it in the jury instructions or in the special verdict form.

And you won't find it in the Veracina's case cited by the jury for that principle, or excuse me, cited by the court for that principle in its order.

If the jury made a mistake, it didn't know it, and it couldn't have known it.

And third, we have an attorney conduct issue in this case that I think has a bearing on the broader practice of litigation in this state.

It's really a separate and independent issue for the merits of this issue, and I'm happy to take questions at any time.

Was the ADO informed of that?

It's my understanding, Your Honor, that the ADO was informed of that.

The client did submit a grievance with respect to the letter from Attorney Hoppick, and it's my understanding that they're considering it now.

I do know that Attorney Hoppick was found to have violated Rule 4.4 regarding the letter early on the demand letter that was sent to my client on May 20th, 2019,

as well as the statement that she would incur enormous legal fees for having to live again.

That was the ADO complaint?

That was the original ADO complaint and grievance filed by my client.

Was that not before the jury?

No, it was not, Your Honor, because it was just decided last month, and it's my understanding that it's on appeal right now.

So it is not part of this case?

It is not, Your Honor.

But with respect to that, Your Honor, I find it troubling.

Earlier in the case, the court admonished Attorney Hoppick for seeking discovery information that was really outside the veil.

Specifically, he was asking about medical records from my client, which he was entitled to ask for,

but specifically he wanted to know about an HIV test she had received back in 1999, I think,

some 20 years before any of this stuff was going on, and I can't imagine what he wanted to do with that.

So I thought it was dealt with by the trial court.

That's right, Your Honor, with an admonishment that further conduct of that kind would be or could be sanctioned.

Well, that didn't have the intent and effect, because after Attorney Hoppick deposed my expert,

who was Benny Roof's treating provider, an APRN by the name of Teresa Woodside,

he sent a letter to Cheshire Medical Center's CEO,

in which he made a series of allegations really couched in the form of some anodyne observations,

in which he said things like, well, I understand that that expert witness service calls hospital time and resources,

and he goes on to say that the report wasn't on CNC letterhead.

Did that affect the witness's testimony?

I don't know, Your Honor.

Nobody can know that, but that's the problem.

That was the trial court's error in this case, as respecting that issue.

The trial court here tied the sanctionable conduct question,

its duty to govern how we lawyers practice law in this state, to the result in the case.

And the contrary position should be the one adopted by the Eighth Circuit in the Harlem case,

which I cited in my materials, in which the trial court identified this problem

during the pre-litigation process, sanctioned the attorneys with a cash sanction,

and then implemented a series of measures designed to prevent that contact,

that surreptitious contact, from infecting the trial process.

Is that more of an argument for a new trial, or is that an argument to try to support the award of damages here?

Well, the award of damages is separate, as I'm saying.

It's really a separate issue.

I think this court, the trial court, but also this court has a duty to regulate the practice of law in this state,

and the trial court dropped the ball on that by tying it to the outcome of the case

instead of treating it as an example of something that shouldn't happen.

Was that argument made to the trial court?

Yes. We put that argument to the trial court after the trial.

Okay.

I learned about this conduct on Saturday morning, two days before the trial was to take place.

I was on a video call with my expert, and she said,

God, you wouldn't believe what this guy did.

He emailed, or he sent a letter to my boss, the CEO of Cheshire Medical Center,

and I was like, whoa, stop the presses.

And I emailed Attorney Hobbick and said, you've got to send me the letter.

So what do I do with that?

Had it been, had I known about that letter on April 12, 2022,

I could have investigated whether or not it would have an impact on my client.

Could have talked to the CMC people.

Could have talked to my client about these issues.

At the time I learned about it, there was no opportunity to do that.

And so by tying that conduct then to whether or not it influenced my expert's opinion testimony

in the end was true.

It's impossible for any court to know that,

and that's why the court in Harlem took action on that point.

And on that point, I have to say, Attorney Hobbick isn't the only lawyer in this state

who gets demands from their client to go harder, to get into life, to play hardball,

to make the other side pay some price for taking the position that they're taking in a case.

Happens all the time.

I know you folks have probably seen that in your own practices before you became justices.

Well, if that's the standard of conduct, I can't turn around and say to those people,

I'm not going in that direction.

I'm not going to take that step.

I'm going to win your case or defend your case to the best of my ability within the confines

of our rules of professional conduct and the norms of the trial court.

And I can't say that anymore.

So if this court blesses that kind of conduct, then it becomes the new standard of care.

If I'm not messing around with my adverse experts, employee relations,

then I'm not zealously advocating for my client.

What does that really look like?

Does that look like a remand to the trial court in order to consider?

I think this court can consider relief directly in that case.

You could certainly remand it to consider that issue.

But I think that this court, its capacity as overseeing the universal bar in this case,

the unified bar in this case, can issue a sanction.

Is that letter in the record?

It is in the record.

And as Attorney Hoppick said, it speaks for itself.

And I believe it does speak for itself.

Assuming you have no other questions on that, I do want to turn to the issue of the jury trial instructions.

Was there any objection to the instructions?

There wasn't, Your Honor.

And I want to get to that exact point.

There was no objection to the jury trial instructions.

The court drafted them, presented to them, presented us with those instructions

on the first day of the trial before we were to begin our opening statements.

We reviewed them and neither side objected.

Did you see the verdict form?

We did.

The court also drafted the verdict form.

We didn't pick up or make any objection in that case.

And I think that is important because the error, if you will, in this case,

that the jury committed was something that the jury uncovered in the process of doing its job.

If there was an error in these instructions by not talking about the ratsonous case

and the relationship of enhanced compensatory damages to damages and so forth,

then it wasn't anything that was made clear to the jury.

And it only became apparent even to the lawyers and the judge once the jury acted.

This is the law of the case that was given to the jury.

If you find that Ms. Roof suffered actual damages that were caused or substantially caused by Mr. Goodell's conduct,

there are circumstances under which the law permits but doesn't require you to consider a ward of additional damages reflecting aggravating circumstances.

You may have heard of these damages only if you find that Mr. Goodell's conduct was more probably than not wanton, malicious or oppressive.

A jury could read that instruction and say,

Do I find that Ms. Roof suffered actual damages caused or substantially caused by Mr. Goodell's conduct?

Yes, I do. And they did.

And then it could go on to say,

I will award these enhanced damages because Mr. Goodell's conduct was more probably than not wanton, malicious and oppressive as it did in this case.

And in fact, if you look at the special verdict form,

you will find that at the end of questions D,

it states if your answer is no, proceed to question D.

It does not say if your answer is no, stop here.

It does not say if your answer to any of questions A through C was no, then you're done.

So if we conclude that the form was erroneous or the instructions were, what is the remedy?

Well, the remedy is to respect the jury's verdict, Your Honor.

This, the instructions and the jury verdict are compatible with the 70, excuse me,

the jury instructions and the jury verdict form are fully compatible with the $75,000 verdict that the court, that the jury issued in this case.

There's no, the law that the court invoked to set aside that verdict may be correct as a matter of principle,

but it does not say that if you answer question A and A through C in the negative,

that you can't go on to D in the affirmative in this case.

So what was the evidence of $75,000 in damages?

There was ample evidence in the record concerning the disparity between Ms. Roof's earning during the period in which she,

the trade names were being held by Mr. Goodell.

There was very substantial evidence about the impact on her mentally, emotionally, and so forth.

That, Ms. Woodside's support that she was suffering physical manifestations of the stress created by these issues.

Were there medical bills?

There were medical bills as well.

How much were they?

Off the top of my head, I don't remember, Your Honor, but they were part of the record.

And it was the collective testimony of my client regarding her mental,

the impact of physical manifestation of these stresses invoked by Mr. Goodell's conduct that was causing her emotional distress.

So there was plenty of evidence in the record supporting that jury verdict at the end of the day,

and there was nothing in this instruction that told the jury,

hey, you can't do this if you don't find affirmative on A, B, and C.

Everything necessary to find the commitment of a tort and the conclusion of damages is contained in D.

I had an associate trying this case with me,

and when we heard the jury verdict announced by the trial court in chambers,

she said they picked the theory that best fit the facts,

and that's exactly what happened here.

Notwithstanding whatever the law might be in New Hampshire as an abstract principle,

the law of this case permitted that jury verdict to occur.

Part of your appeal includes issues relative to dismissal of other claims or summary judgment.

Those are still issues before us.

That's correct, Your Honor.

And so my position is that if you agree with me that the jury verdict should not have been set aside,

then I would request that you amend the case,

instructing the trial court to enter a judgment the amount of $75,000

and hold further proceedings on the question of attorney's face.

And then with respect to this letter concerning my expert,

I think that's your business to deal with.

I think you can.

You could also remit to the trial court with instruction as to how it should consider that matter,

because I think its consideration of that matter was legally flawed.

It wasn't a discretionary decision.

And then lastly...

These are the fees that you're looking for with respect to the plaintiff's dismissal of his defamation claim.

Is that right?

No.

You're still looking for those, I assume.

I am, Your Honor, but I think that's a question to be taken up by the trial court again

once we, if you agree with me, once you enter judgment or say that the verdict was actually correct

and instruct the court to enter judgment, then we do become the prevailing party.

And I think the court would need to reconsider its attorney's fees decision in light of all of that,

including the fact that with respect to the 340 and 10 claim,

the fact that Mr. Goodell held onto those names for three and a half years of litigation

and then abandoned them just before the trial, about a month and a half, two months before the trial.

So my client advanced significant fees and costs in order to get to that point.

She got her trade names back.

And then the trial court said,

you're not allowed to use attorney's fees that you have accrued pursuing those trade names

as evidence of your damages in that case.

And so that contradicted what the trial court had earlier said with a different judge,

but nevertheless it contradicted what the trial court had earlier said.

So I think if you agree with me on the judgment, then we need to remand for further consideration

in briefing on the attorney's fees issue.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Attorney Hoppick.

May I ask the court, my name is Attorney Joseph Hoppick and I represent Mr. Goodell for you today.

The first thing I want to make a point of is the jury verdict.

The jury's verdict did four things.

It recognized that Ms. Roof did not prove her claim of fraudulent registration,

clear and convincing evidence.

That intent is crystal clear.

It recognized that Ms. Roof did not prove her claim of negligent or intentional infliction

of emotional distress by the preponderance of the evidence.

Those two points are crystal clear.

Now in terms of the instructions, in the Braddy's case,

enhancement compensatory damages are permissible when the acts complained of

the underlying torts are established

and there are damages from which one may enhance them,

which is not the case in this situation.

So we had no fraud, clear and convincing evidence,

no intentional or negligent infliction of the preponderance of the evidence,

but the jury did find by preponderance.

Hang on that.

Question D doesn't use the term enhanced compensatory damages.

No, it doesn't.

So what are we to make of that in terms of translating to the jury

some kind of information so that they would recognize this is a conditional claim,

not a standalone claim.

I think the instructions make that clear

and these enhance compensatory damages.

And the jury, as I recall, had a copy of the instructions in the chambers,

as I recall it so.

But the jury did find by a preponderance of the evidence

that one malicious repressive conduct was established.

It doesn't say for what though,

and we left to speculate not really

because the cases that we've cited in our brief show that

if the jury's verdicts are not reconcilable,

then a remand is justified that only under those conditions.

Here they're reconcilable.

The jury could have found, and this is not irrational speculation,

this is rational, non-spectacular way to construe the verdicts.

What we have here is preponderance of the evidence,

one malicious and oppressive to register trade names.

But no findings that,

by clear convincing evidence that was fraud,

no findings by preponderance of the evidence

that there was any kind of mental distress, negligence, or intentional.

And they're easily reconcilable in that fashion.

The seventh amendment requires the court to respect that.

There's no verdict to set aside.

The damages assessed on question D, the last question,

are not actual damages because enhanced damages are a remedy, not a right.

They are not an independent cause of action.

And we discussed that in our brief as well.

What was your purpose in sending the letter to Dr. Caruso?

I was concerned that my client would double bill it,

because you'll see in the record that there were invoices from Ms. Woodside

that had no identification of who she was associated.

And there was three of them that we received.

One was a fire call personally not dated.

For what, her appearance at a deposition?

Yes.

And if you read the letter, you'll see I mentioned nothing about her testimony,

nothing about her opinions.

I give a background.

She gave a deposition.

We got this bill.

Please don't double bill us.

And you'll see in the materials in the record

that the assistant CEO wrote me back and said,

don't worry, your client will be double billed.

And I said, thank you.

And that was the end of the matter.

And I didn't ask before trial.

And I have to tell you that 110 pages of deposition,

or I expect that, 110 pages of trial transcript,

Mr. Edelton didn't ask her one question about it.

And when I was cross examining her,

she said she felt like she was having a conversation with me.

There was no impact here.

What Ms. Roof wants you to do is ignore impact,

ignore any kind of fact.

It wasn't developed by the trial court or the record.

And they want you to assume, based on her high volume

outrage, that this was inappropriate.

Now this court called it a sharp practice.

It doesn't justify a remand.

What you have here on attorney's fees, your honors,

is that New Hampshire follows the American rule.

Each party has their own attorney's fees,

subject to three exceptions.

If the parties agree otherwise, like in a promissory note,

if a statute authorizes it,

and if a judicially created exception applies that...

Delicious and won conduct.

If you prevail.

There's a prevailing component here.

Now New Hampshire policy and tradition is...

I'm sorry, but she just left because it's a treatise

on five New Hampshire practice, section 52.02.

His treatise lists 47 state statutes

that all authorize an award of attorney's fees

under certain circumstances.

File 7, file 47.

They have one common element,

that attorney's fees are specifically permitted

if the party prevails.

And it's even legitimately entrenched

in the various statutes that I just mentioned.

So if somebody with the browser dismisses a complaint

voluntarily and would prejudice on the eve of trial,

isn't the other party, isn't the other party prevailing part?

Well, I don't think we can answer that question

because the trial judge assumed that they were in her order.

She assumed for the sake of argument that they were

and analyzed it from her.

So I would let that assumption control your analysis

because that's what she did.

But here, Ms. Roof wants you to go down.

There's, as I mentioned before, the attorney's fees piece

that have traditionally created exceptions

require that they prevail.

She did not prevail on the points that Teresa Woodside

was testifying on, the emotional and intentional

inflection of distress claims.

She wants attorney's fees to what extent

she doesn't tell us based on a claim

that a supporter developed in the record.

She says there's evidence of witness intimidation.

There was absolutely no evidence.

We could have had a sidebar hearing.

We could have put the jury on hold and get it back.

Purposely didn't litigate the issue.

We could have done that with the witness president if necessary.

He didn't ask one question in 110 pages of trial transcript

about any impact.

He wants you to report impact.

The fact of the matter is it's pure speculation

and there wasn't an impact.

When you read the transcript, it'll be perfectly clear.

That's the first round of hold I want you to go down,

ignoring the record.

The second round of hold is that

they want you to up and long-establish

New Hampshire law tradition

and that's the prevailing party requirement.

You shouldn't do that and they offer

no alternative rule.

So we think that there's no basis

for a remand on attorney's fees.

There's no basis for even reviewing that again.

The court, this court

need only ask itself one question.

An objective basis that is sufficient

to sustain the discretionary judgment

made by the court on attorney's fees.

That's the law.

The answer to that is overwhelming, yes.

Now under 5-7-15 I mentioned a moment ago,

the court found that under all the circumstances

of the case, the lawsuit wasn't intended

to harass or intimidate.

We survived some judgment.

Mr. Goodell could have testified in a trial

that he never stole any money from an elderly woman

and the fact of the matter is

when Mr. Goodell said that

he stole $80,000 from her

and she lost her home because of it.

Well, she died two years after this case started

and she owned the time of her death.

The same home that Ms. Wells went to

and she claims she went to a garage sale at.

So he couldn't have testified to that.

The case law was cited in our brief.

It's clear that he has a right to withdraw that at trial

even for strategic reasons, which is what he did

and the court is so found.

So you shouldn't be distracted

from well-established principles

by high volume hyperbole that you're getting today

consisting of speculation

and we reject those efforts

to try to influence the law that way.

34910, which is the fraudulent registration statute,

that has a fraud element to it

which required by clear convincing evidence

the proof of fraud the jury didn't buy that.

It also can be divided.

But if you look at the statute, it's got two sentences.

The first sentence talks about fraudulent registration

and creating misdemeanor effects.

And the second sentence

clearly creates a civil cause of action

in terms of injunction of relief

and restoration of, or strike that,

stopping someone from using your registered trade name

but you have to be someone who has adopted

and registered a name

to take the benefit of that statute.

Ms. Roof did neither.

Now, she had at all times

to this lawsuit.

She had a viable, common claim

for naming infringement.

She never utilized that.

34910,

it's hard to find that one of the dismissed

or other claims were judgment

was entered against Ms. Roof.

Actually, if one of those decisions

were in error, would that claim,

would the whole thing go back?

If one of those,

I don't believe any of those decisions were in error

because the judges were very careful about those.

But not only just on that claim.

The jury has spoken on 34910 in our view

and there's no fraud.

What this court hears to know, though,

is that there's no way of action under that.

Her claim should have been a common law infringement claim

just like the common law economic duress claim.

Why is there no civil claim under that statute

when it seems to authorize one?

I don't think the language expressly

or implicitly authorize one.

She's not a person who's adopted or registered a name.

Therefore, she's not in the class protected.

So there can be a civil claim just not hers?

There can be a civil claim under common law infringement.

Yes.

But that was never put forward.

Ms. Roof wants you to strike that section for a brief

but my response to that briefly

is that Cadel raises statutory interpretation arguments

appropriate when this court reviews

statutory interpretation questions to know about.

That statutory language does not authorize attorney's fees

contrary to the other 46 other statutes

I referred to earlier in Chief Justice Gordon's previous.

But the last point I want to make is that,

and I believe she appeals this,

Roof may not prosecute Cadel under 34910

because of the reasons that the trial court found.

She sought to prosecute an unclassified crime

directly in the Superior Court

thereby making it a classist demeanor

because there's a risk of jail time

that precludes private prosecution.

And the trial court did a better job at the night,

I will now, but a little due process rights

that were ignored in the course of the case

if this was to be treated as a prosecution.

So we don't think that's an appropriate way to go.

In sum, the jurisprudence should be respected

because it's reconcilable with the totality

of the facts in this case.

There were no evidence of monetary damages

of $75,000 and you can examine the record

all day long for that.

She had no evidence of that.

I don't recall medical bills being introduced

and I don't think there's any medical bills

prior to this record.

There was evidence presented about her income

which was significantly higher

at the time of trial than it was in 2019.

And the Harlem v. Lewis case,

as my colleague can see,

that's a sanctions case, not an attorney's fees case.

He never asked for sanctions, never once.

He asked for attorney's fees.

And the trial court had been appraised

with the proper question,

addressed that in some fashion,

but he did not.

What I want to say is that

the misrepresent of medical condition

into evidence,

and I saw evidence in that record

that would make that something that happened

20 years ago could have an impact

on her emotional condition.

She brought a notice that was not abusive,

that was not inappropriate,

that was proper and it was necessary

to flush out.

Now, the court made one enlargement.

I can see that.

We want you to think it's 50, 100,

some odd numbers because it refers

to a litany of such enlargements

that never happened.

But she wants to create that litany

that was not justified.

Attorney's fees, again,

the trial court made the proper decision

on the attorney's fees.

It found it tremendously

to try to settle this case at the beginning.

The court took that into account.

The court took into account the strongly worded letters.

The court took a lot of things into account

and was not persuaded

that such attorneys were justified.

She did not prevail.

And that's the point here

that I think should not be lost.

We need to change the rule.

And I think there's no basis for you to do that.

That's a law-selling rule

and we don't think it's necessary for you

to go out on that limb.

So unless you have any questions,

I'll take leave and yield to my colleague

for his last minute.

Thank you.

Thank you.

I definitely agree that the verdict

should be respected.

Justice Dodiman, with respect to your question

about medical records,

I had if we have

medical bills in the records

that the testimony was about

the pain and suffering

and the attendant emotional distress.

With respect to the double billing

question, that is a fig leaf.

Dartmouth-Hitchcock

never sent a double bill.

Dartmouth-Hitchcock never sent me a double bill.

There was never a hint

that there would be a double bill.

Dartmouth-Hitchcock never could have known

that attorney Coppick or his client

didn't matter until they got the letter

accordingly.

It was a fig leaf. It was intended to provide

some kind of justification for the intentional

manipulation of our witness.

We didn't ask about that trial

because I only learned about it two days

before the trial. I had no idea

what to do with it.

And I believe that ultimately

it was a question for the court.

With respect to the intentions of the jury,

it's clear that the jury intended

my client to receive a verdict

while there's not standing whatever the law

of New Hampshire might be in this case.

If there's a remit in this case

it should be for a new trial

if you don't find in our favor

on the verdict issue. Thank you very much.

Thank you. Case submitted.

Court will be in recess.

We rise.
