This is case number 20230092, State of New Hampshire, versus Douglas Collins.

Yes, Your Honor.

Please proceed.

Good morning, may it please the court. My name is Helen Witt. I represent Douglas Collins.

I will address two issues this morning.

The first is that the trial court's reliance on facts that he brought from prior employment into the proceeding

and assumptions that were not based on evidence presented rendered Mr. Collins' probation violation hearing

unfair in fundamental ways and violated his due process rights. Secondly, there was insufficient evidence

with respect to one of the five probation violations charged to support the finding of true

because it was premised entirely on falsehoods and alleged misstatements

and there was no evidence of any misstatements made to the probation officer.

Now with respect to the due process violations, there were a total of five probation violations that Mr. Collins was charged with

and two of them I want to make clear are not contested.

There was evidence of that Mr. Collins admitted those violations.

But with respect to the three most serious charges, there was ample defense to those that was ignored by the trial court.

In particular, there were two charges that related to the claim that Mr. Collins who was prohibited from using

and being around illegal drugs had in fact admitted to the use of marijuana.

But what all the evidence showed at the hearing including the testimony of the probation officer

to whom the alleged admissions had been made was that what Mr. Collins actually admitted to using

was a product called Delta 8 either in gummy form or in the form of a tobacco like product

that he purchased legally in New Hampshire smoke shops.

It was a legal product as a result of federal law adopted by the state of New Hampshire

that effectively eliminated any hemp based products from the definition of marijuana

and therefore took the hemp based products off of the controlled substance list.

But Mr. Collins himself said that that had 8% marijuana in it.

Mr. Collins said that he knew that it had trace amounts that he thought were 8%

and that he said repeatedly he could be wrong and he wasn't sure about the number.

But he repeatedly said 8%.

He repeatedly said 8%, but the 8% number is not consistent with anything.

There's not 8% in even illegal marijuana.

So he was just completely wrong about the percent.

Are you saying the substance should have been tested by a lab?

I'm saying that there should have been evidence the state was required to prove

that the product that he used was in fact an illegal substance

because his admission that he used a product that he brought that he bought legally

was certainly a indication that the claim that he had admitted using an illegal substance

was not sufficient.

And the probation officer acknowledged that what he in fact told her was

I bought these products legally in a smoke shop.

He alleged that he bought them legally.

We don't know that as a fact, do we?

That was his testimony and there was no testimony of the contrary.

And again it was the state's burden to prove that the products that he used

were illegal or that he used something that was illegal.

Can I make an inference that since he was concerned about his urine testing positive

that he in fact had a belief that what he had used contained marijuana

and would show in his urine?

No, because he was correct and he told the probation officer

in both conversations that they had on two different dates

that he was telling her about his use of this product

because he did know that there was a trace amount of THC, the active ingredient.

He was aware that there was some amount and he was concerned that as he put it

he would test dirty that if she asked him to take a urine test

it would show some trace amounts of THC.

And wasn't she clear that any amount of THC would violate probation?

She was not clear about that.

What she told him was my view is that a product that has any amount of THC is marijuana

and therefore you should write marijuana on your form.

But she never amended the terms of probation or directed him in any way

that he couldn't use a product even though it was legal

even though it doesn't fall within the definition of what he was prohibited from using

in the written form that gave him that notice in probation.

She didn't say don't use these products anymore.

She told him her understanding is these were illegal

but his view because he bought them in the smoke shop legally was that they were not illegal.

You're framing your argument about this Delta 8 issue as a due process argument

but it sounds to me more that it's a sufficiency argument.

Well the due process argument relates to the fact that because there was insufficient evidence

based on what was presented by the state

the trial court then assumed certain facts that were not presented

and that really were akin to expert testimony that could have been presented by the state

but was not relating to things like what the percentage of active THC would be in a legal product.

And for another example his view was that because Mr. Collins referred to some of the products he used as addables

the court said was his understanding based on his prior employment

that people use the term edible to refer to a marijuana product.

Why isn't it appropriate for the trial court to bring its learning and experience

to bear here in assessing the facts in the case?

Well two reasons. One because the kinds of factors that he brought

the percentage of THC for instance is not the kind of fact that the court could have if asked

have taken judicial notice of. So the types of things that a court is allowed to bring into the courtroom

that was not part of the record have to be akin to something that could be judicially noticed

because they were generally known or not reasonably susceptible to a different interpretation.

If you have a DUI case and a defendant makes an admission I drank a beer.

Everyone is making that inference or conclusion that a beer contains alcohol

and that can be a factor in determining whether or not the person was impaired is that right?

Could be but if the person instead said I drank a non-alcoholic beer

which does have some trace amount of alcohol but not enough to qualify that beverage

as something that has to be purchased, it can be purchased in a place differently from beer

then it would not be appropriate to say the percentage of beer that is allowed

or of alcohol that is allowed in non-alcoholic beer is this

and what you said was in what you drank is that because there could be differences depending on

and some of this I'm making up because I don't know the manufacturing standards

but it could be dependent on what the type of manufacturing process is,

what the amount of alcohol is.

Why isn't it just simply a credibility determination by the trial court?

I mean it doesn't have to accept what your client testified to

seems to me that the court was just making a credibility determination.

But even everything that Mr. Collins testified to is rejected.

The only evidence with respect to the product that he used comes from the probation officer

and again the charge was not we have evidence that he used marijuana,

the charge was he admitted to using marijuana

but the evidence from the probation officer is,

cross-examination, yes.

What he admitted to using was the Delta 8 product purchased legally.

So there was no other evidence.

If all of the testimony Mr. Collins is rejected as the court certainly could have done

there was nothing left to fill in the hole to prove that he admitted using marijuana

because the probation officer's testimony was that that was not in fact the case.

Is the issue regarding the sex offender sessions, is that still in play?

Are you contesting that?

I'm sorry I didn't hear the beginning.

The charge relating to the representation about him attending sex offender counseling

is that something that you're still contesting?

That is and the charge there again, the charge was not

or the alleged violation was not that he had failed to attempt

because he testified and admitted that he had missed a number of sentences or obsessions.

The violation was that he allegedly lied about attending sex offender training

because he was kicked out of the program

but the date that he was kicked out of the program was two weeks later

than the date of the meeting at which he allegedly lied about being in the program

and again even without his testimony, the testimony of the sex counselor was that

she didn't advise him that he had been kicked out until some two weeks after the meeting

at which he told his probation officer that he was still attending.

She didn't ask him and there was no testimony at the trial

or at the probation hearing about which classes he had missed

and how many he had gone to that was not part of the hearing

and again the charge was based purely on lying to the probation officer

and not the failure to attend

and the evidence simply didn't support that.

Finally with respect to the other reason that even without the accepting any of the testimony

of the defendant as part of this that there isn't enough evidence

is because the record facts were simply insufficient

to prove the violations that were claimed

and the trial court had to fill in those gaps of evidence

in order to conclude that the finding of true was warranted.

What is the burden of proof?

The burden of proof is more likely than not.

It is not beyond a reasonable doubt

that the burden remained on the state in those circumstances

and there simply was no other evidence to support that claim.

What's the remedy you're seeking?

Remand for resettencing on the two charges.

One of the charges that was not disputed was failure to attend

a single meeting with his probation officer

and he acknowledged that he did in fact miss that meeting

and the other one was he had failed to make a restitution payment

although the record evidence was clear that

he had some significant financial problems

during the roughly six months that he made no payment

so we're requesting remand for resettencing

on the two of the five charges that don't include the serious charges.

Can you address the waiver issue with respect to the due process claim?

The waiver issue I would address in two ways.

One, in part, there was no realistic opportunity

to respond to these arguments, to the trial court's inclusion

of these additional facts because it came

as the court was announcing its sentencing determination

so short of interrupting the court

as he described the rationale for his sentences

there wasn't a realistic opportunity

but secondly, even if there was an obligation

to object at the time to the inclusion of these facts

plain error is appropriate here

because the due process violations

weren't just the inclusion of these facts

the due process violations included the fact that

some of the other staple factors couldn't have been met

so the defense had no advance notice

that the issue of what is the amount of THC

that's in legal products could be an issue

could have had an expert for those sorts of issues

had they known that they would be important

or that the terminology in nomenclature used to

talk about these products was going to be an issue

so because the defense had no opportunity

to know those facts in advance

that was a due process violation

and accordingly they had no opportunity

to cross-examine those issues

because they were brought to the proceeding

as a result of the court raising them

after the rest of the evidence

so we, plain error is certainly warranted

in this circumstance

given that the sentence was up to five years

in the state prison which is clearly a significant

interest that the defendant had in the sentence

thank you

Attorney Woodcock

Good morning Your Honours may it please the court

Elizabeth Woodcock for the State of New Hampshire

I just want to make one quick point

and that is that

as I hear the argument here this morning

and read the brief it seems to me that what

the defendant is suggesting is that

he willingly took the witness stand at this hearing

and yet his statements can't be used against him

and that doesn't make any sense

if we look at something like a motion to dismiss

at the close of the state's case

and the defendant doesn't put on any evidence

then this court will consider just what the state

put on but if the defense starts to put on a case

when this court is considering the sufficiency

of the evidence it says and it said over and over again

we can consider all of the evidence

that was presented to the court

now I think that with respect to the counseling issue

the court had ample reason not to believe

what the defendant had said at the hearing

and it also had ample reason to believe

that the defendant had avoided

doing this counseling

he had started out

I gather from the record

with a person named Dr. Strapko

who he referred to as being very difficult

to get along with she had said according to the

determination of the defendant that he was not amenable

to counseling

then he went on and he told

the probation officer that he was working

with a man named Pastor Charles

and she told him well you have to make sure

that he is certified

a month later she still was saying to him

who is this Pastor Charles

is he certified

at that point she tells him that she can

that he can get enrolled in edge counseling

so on June 28th he says

he's enrolled in edge counseling

and then after that

combined with this assertion he's a no show

with the probation officer's

appointment on July 20th

he's a no show again on July 27th

he's a no show again on October 5th

and on October 10th

they get the email from edge counseling saying

that he's being terminated because he hasn't shown up

now since this court can consider his

explanation for why he didn't show up

for these various things I think it's important

to know that he first of all said

that he missed the edge counseling

because he was very sick with COVID

but he added that his phone

kept losing the signal, his phone was damaged

he had a doctor's appointment

he had a long litany of explanations for why

he hadn't attended the counseling and that's something

that I think that the court can take into consideration

the court's reliance on

representation that oh yes I have signed up

for this RIT counseling

and then nine days later when the hearing

resumed he still hadn't done it

that isn't to suggest that

his representations about

RIT are necessarily relevant

for as a factual point

for the failure to show up for the counseling

on other occasions it's

credibility determination that this man

simply always has an excuse

he says he needs counseling but he never goes

now with respect to the marijuana

situation he did admit

that he had used marijuana to the probation officer

and maybe at the close

of the state's case that wouldn't have been enough

but then he took the witness stand and he began

to give the court different explanations

of the kind of marijuana he'd taken

now the court the suggestion is somehow

that the court introduced new evidence

when it said well

I worked as a hearing officer

and I know what the levels are of marijuana

but that's a legal statement

legal limits to what

quantity or percentage of THC

a product can have in New Hampshire

so it's subject to judicial notice

well I think it's subject to judicial notice certainly

but I think also is that the line as the defendant suggests

no I think that

if you look at the Torameo case

this court cited United States

versus Berber-Tinoco which was a

federal case with approval

and the comment is that a resident judge's

background knowledge of an area

may inform the judge's assessment

of the historical facts so I think

that in a certain sense we want judges

who are informed and certainly the judge

in this case did know something about

the legality of marijuana and THC products

so is our delta

a commies illegal in New Hampshire

I don't know the answer to that

I don't know very much about

legal or illegal marijuana for that matter

but what the defendant had said was he had

kept saying that he had not used anything with greater than

80% concentration

and the court responded well

that's beyond the limit in New Hampshire

I know that because I used to preside at these hearings

that's a reference to the law

it's not the judge introducing

new evidence and the fact that

the defendant didn't object

I think it's a little unfair to the court to say well

the court was imposing sentence and

was going on and giving an explanation and therefore

the defendant couldn't object

I think that most courts

even when the court is talking

if a lawyer politely says

Your Honor if I might just stop the court there

I think that you're going off

and you're using information that is not pertinent

to this court's decision or hasn't been introduced

in this hearing I think most courts would be receptive to that

and even if the court were

not receptive I mean

you could make your objection

before the hearing was actually concluded

Do you agree with the defendant's overall position here

that what's at issue are the

representations made and that the only

issue here is really the

admissions and not the

underlying factual dispute about

whether he used

marijuana or not but whether he

admitted and what he admitted to isn't that

what the charge violation is

in each instance his statement

Well he made a statement to the probation officer that he had used marijuana

But then he

explained that during the hearing

He did but he explained it in

inconsistent ways just as fast as it

I mean at one point he's saying well I was using gummies

and one time he's using delta A and then he's saying

I'm not using anything that has greater than 8%

THC content the court

again he chose to introduce that evidence

and the court could consider it

Does it matter that the parole officer seemed to

conflate delta A and marijuana

It might matter

if the defendant hadn't taken the stand

it might matter then

it might matter because then you would only have

what had been presented by the state

and the probation officer's

understanding of the legal

and illegal

options on the market was not very

strong I don't think and then the defense

could certainly stand up and say well it was

the probation officer's

evidence is not strong enough but he

he elected to testify and he

elected to testify in a way that could allow the court to conclude that he was

taking much stronger marijuana than it's lawful

in New Hampshire

So I understand your position is that there was no error

below the trial court but assuming

we disagree with you is this error plain?

If it is error? No

I don't think so because I think first of all

I think plain error is sort of as

the first circuit has called it it's a blockbuster

it's when you look at the court and you say how could you do this

I mean when

you look at the definition of plain error they say well

it's plain error and the error is plain

and that seems to me to be kind of how could you

get this wrong?

Right if Judge St. Heller had simply said I don't find

the defendant credible without actually giving

an explanation why he didn't find him credible we wouldn't be here

Possibly not

I mean I'm not sure that the defense

would concede that the

issue of the counseling

was not still a live issue and I'm not

sure the marijuana

thing that the defendant's testimony

is so much all over the map

that I think that the court was

within its discretion to say

I can't believe everything you're saying

I'm beginning to believe the things that you're saying

that incriminate you because

maybe he said them more with more

convincingly you know that's

part of what's sitting in a hearing as the court is aware

is you're assessing

what the person's credibility actually is

When the trial court says when I hear the word

it means it contains THC

that's not a legal standard

Probably it may not be

and I do confess I don't know

this area of the law that well

but it seems to me what the court is actually saying

in its conclusion is that you've said over and over again

that you took

marijuana products that had 8% potency

and that's not lawful in New Hampshire

and that's simply a statement of the law

I see my yellow light is on

if the court has other questions I'd be happy to try to answer

I mean there seems to be no issue

the defendant's testimony is that

the only

drug with

the only thing that he took was

Delta 8 and so there doesn't seem to be

any evidence other than that

He did talk about some kind of percentage

and I can't tell the court exactly where that was

but I'm pretty sure that he talked about taking

drugs that had 8%

concentration

His statement here is the only thing I took was

just the CBD Delta 8 flower and gummies

and so again we're not

the issue here isn't whether it was credible

whether he was using marijuana

or edibles

but rather the truth of his

statement to the parole officer

Right?

Well and his statement to the court during the hearing

I think

I don't think that you can discount what he said during the hearing

But what he said during the hearing was that I

only used gummies

The court you may be right about that

Justice Bassett I thought that he had said something

about that he had not taken anything that had

greater than 8% concentration but I could be wrong

Thank you

I will yield to my colleague

I have nothing further unless the court has further questions

The case is submitted

Thank you council
