This is case 293-0471, the petition of Randall Burns et al.

All right, so I'm going to stand and reserve two minutes.

Yes, Your Honor.

Please let me know if you can't hear me.

I'm a little smaller than I think the average repellent.

May it please the court.

My name is Callan Sullivan.

I'm a staff attorney for NEA New Hampshire.

And today I'll be presenting oral arguments on behalf of all of the petitioners in this case.

As noted, I've reserved two minutes for rebuttal.

What this case essentially is, is a case about the legal definition of consent.

Petitioners brought a very narrow issue to the retirement system, and that was this.

Did they consent to a delay in their retirement stipend payments past 120 days?

And was that consent their fault?

Their fault.

And the retirement system's decision respectfully was contrary to the law for

the reason that RSA 273A says that petitioners could legally not consent.

It was impossible.

Their union negotiated a contract with the district.

That contract set the date the payment needed to be paid.

And only those two parties to the contract could amend it.

Second, this decision was unreasonable and would result in substantial injustice.

It was unreasonable because there was an uncontroverted record.

This was an entirely stipulated record by the parties that established that the notification

that the petitioners received from the district to delay the payments

contained a patent outright falsity in the first paragraph that it complied with the CVA.

And deceptive language throughout that notification.

And this court has held that consent is void if it's a product of fraud or misrepresentation.

Was it deceptive or mistaken?

I would argue it's deceptive, Your Honor.

And I can address the factors in that letter that I think are deceptive if you'd like

to start with that part of the argument.

So if you look at the letter, and that's on page 18 of our appendix, the reason that

I think the facts established that it was deceptive was, first of all, the first time

I read this letter, it read like these petitioners had won the lottery.

It says, congratulations, Lisa, exclamation point.

You've been approved for early retirement stipend.

And so it starts off, it's a positive letter, right?

The first paragraph says, please remember that your early retirement stipend, your

early retirement will be subject to the terms and conditions specified in article 14 of the

agreement between KEA and the Keen Board of Education.

What that first paragraph says is this notification complies with your CVA.

And we know that that is patently false.

There's a stipulated record that this court in 2022 affirmed an arbitrator's determination

that the contract said it needs to be paid by July 1st.

So when this letter goes on to say, oh, and by the way, we're going to-

But that was their understanding before our decision issued.

I think that their understanding back at that time is irrelevant to the question of whether

this is fraud, right?

So wouldn't that represent whether there was intent to deceive?

I would respectfully say that there was no record set at the retirement system about

the thought process the district had.

It presented no evidence.

It conceded stipulated facts in the record.

The retirement system presented no evidence.

It was an uncontroverted record.

There were four affidavits submitted by the petitioners.

Nothing in response from the district regarding their state of mind at this time.

So what we look at is the plain language of this notice.

What does it say to people?

What is a reading of this?

And I assert that the first paragraph is false based on the district's purported

purpose in changing the date anyhow.

They're saying they changed the date so they could get outside of the 120-day

window so they didn't have to pay earnable compensation contributions.

And so that first paragraph, when it talks about changing that date, that's deceptive.

The second paragraph is false in a number of ways.

First, it talks about your annual stipend is going to be paid in bi-weekly payments

starting on November and going through June.

And it says, this is so that you and the board do not incur additional NHRS wage

deductions from your stipend.

Number one, an employer does not incur a wage deduction.

It makes contributions.

The board of education does not incur a wage deduction.

So that is an inaccurate term.

And the whole letter shows that those words were picked on purpose, right?

It's designed to-

But those would be deductions from the employee's wages.

I agree that it would be technically a deduction from an employee wages.

I think that term is not used appropriately in this letter.

I think an accurate term is contribution with respect to both parties.

Because wage deductions are what we think of like health care deduction.

The term of art in the retirement system,

a contribution is something that goes towards your pension.

It is something that's mandatory.

It's not something that's elected.

But it's taken from your pay.

Understood, yes, Your Honor.

I agree with that.

But in addition to that, the semantics, the incorrect semantics

that they used in order to induce consent,

they also didn't complete that picture.

So they say to these petitioners,

hey, it's a benefit to both of us.

So we're moving the date.

What they don't say is it's actually not a benefit to you.

It's a benefit to us because we avoid a one-time contribution

to your pension that we didn't budget for.

But it's not a benefit to you because you lose out on $100

that we have approximated for the rest of these people's lives.

But isn't it a short-term benefit

because they're not contributing the 7% out of their own pocket

or out of that payment?

I think we're using the term two ways.

I think once they started, once they affirmatively

represented that this was a benefit to folks,

they had an obligation to complete the picture.

So I don't want to rewrite the letter.

But if they had said, we're both

going to not contribute to your pension,

you should be aware this is going to impact your pension

and you should consult someone about that.

Maybe we're in a different case, but that's not this case.

This letter reads as though it is compliant with the CBA.

And it reads as though both parties

are experiencing a benefit when the only person who

experienced a benefit was the district.

And second, this letter is a cover letter

that is attached to the early retirement stipend agreement.

And I encourage you to look at both of these documents

thoroughly because the only document that petitioners were

required to sign is that early retirement stipend agreement.

And in paragraph four, that talks about retirement

begins on July 1.

The stipend shall be paid in periodic payments

consistent with the usual pay schedule of the district.

Withholding shall be accomplished from the stipend

in the usual course of business.

So when they sign this, they think, OK,

it's going to be deducted just as it always would.

Each payment I get, there's a contribution to NHRS

that goes towards a calculation down the road when I arrive.

The second page that you're referring to says withholding.

It doesn't say contributions.

I agree with you, Your Honor.

I think I'm saying the first sentence before that

talks about the usual course of payroll.

And I think that talks about that.

And so if anyone has continuing health insurance,

the deductions would be related to that.

Do we need to find, in order to rule in favor of your clients,

do we need to find that there was fraud or intent

to be fraudulent?

No, Your Honor.

And that goes to our first argument.

Well, let me say this.

I think that the facts in the case,

we don't need to know what the district's motivation was.

We don't need to know that someone was,

we don't have to have direct evidence in the record

that they intended to defraud.

We can look at the notification.

We can look at the letter.

We can look at the stipulated facts

in the record, which all circle around that motivation.

We've got a district that is stipulated in the New Hampshire

retirement system record that it moved the date 120 days

so that it could avoid contributing.

It has stipulated that it did not notify the union, who

was the party that it needed to notify.

It has stipulated that petitioners were not at fault.

It has stipulated that this was a unilateral move.

And so those factors together lead to a conclusion of fraud.

You could also find misrepresentation,

that there were affirmative misrepresentations

in this letter that demonstrate bad faith,

and that consent is born with it.

Well, it seems that they're arguing in some fashion

that your clients were at fault,

because they didn't act like burns and hide.

And I think I would push back on that argument

significantly, Your Honor, because essentially what

that argument says is that if you don't discover

within whatever time period the district says a fraudulent act

and you've slept on your rights, and that's not

what happened here.

First of all, the district circumvented the union,

which was the only party that could

agree to change this date.

That is the only party.

So at the outset, any consent they obtained

is legally unenforceable, period.

Second, the petitioners didn't become aware

that this was an issue because of the deceptive nature

of this notice.

And they didn't become aware until 2020

when Mr. Burns and Mr. Hyde.

But isn't that the point?

They took action.

They grieved.

Why didn't the other petitioners grieve?

And I think, Your Honor, I would say the analogy is

if a builder or a purchase and sale contains

a misrepresentation or a fraud,

it is still a misrepresentation or a fraud

for all 25 people if only to discover it on a date one.

But we don't need to.

The question is whether they were at fault

and whether there was consent, right?

Agreed.

But I think it's sorry.

Anne, don't we need to defer to the board

with respect to its findings, whether there

was fault or consent?

And I think our point, Your Honor,

is that the board's decision was unreasonable based

on the factual record that was developed.

It was uncontroverted as to the fact

that everyone stipulated that the petitioners were not

at fault one.

And two, that there's this deceptive notice that

is what induces the consent.

And so once we unpack that deceptive notice,

it cannot have formed the basis of consent.

That's a basic tenet.

But it's your argument that it's a deceptive notice.

Is there a factual finding that we

can rely on that it is deceptive in fact?

It's an inference, right?

I agree, Your Honor, that that is our argument.

But I think that the uncontroverted record

and the stipulated facts will show you

that essentially every fact except an actual admission

from the district that it committed fraud are present.

There was no competing testimony, nothing.

So our position is that's an unreasonable and arbitrary

decision based on the content of the record.

And I just want to go back to consent is impossible here

because they consulted the wrong party.

And that's not a technical argument.

That is an argument based on the statute, 273A,

that vests the sole authority in contract negotiations

for wages in terms of employment with an association.

And so this is a significant precedent to set

that if a district circumvents the union,

effectively deceives a body of people

to divest themselves of a benefit

that the association bargained for that,

that that is somehow consented.

Is that me?

No, no.

And that's just simply not the case here.

The analogy that I like to use

to help me understand this case coming into it

late in the game was, you know,

if I'm an employer and I contract with Anthem

to be my employee's healthcare administrator,

that's my contract with Anthem.

You can't, Anthem can't then go to my employees

and say, hey, we've got this new program.

If you just sign up, that's all.

It's gonna be a great program.

And then charge our guys $500 on a premium

that we never negotiated.

That's not consent.

And no, no, what would hold that to be consent?

No, that's not valid.

It's my contract.

And this was the association's contract

with the district.

And the district circumvented that.

That's not a technical argument.

It's a statutory argument.

So if I could ask a question,

backing up a little bit.

So did the hearing examiner or the board

hear any witnesses testimony

or was this all a document review

based on stipulated facts and facts that were in dispute?

My red light is on.

That's okay.

I need to guess, may I answer your question?

Please, yes.

There was no live testimony.

It was a stipulated record.

It reviewed the documents.

There was an oral argument that transcript is in the...

So our review would be to know for them, wouldn't it?

With respect to...

We're looking at the same set of facts

that the board looked at.

We're looking at the same set of facts

that the hearing examiner reviewed.

So why do we owe them any difference?

Well, I think we filed a rule 11 petition

which says that the court can say

that this decision would result in substantial injustice

and is arbitrary and capricious.

I can't imagine a fact pattern

that is more resulting in substantial injustice

to these retirees.

Thank you for the solving.

Bring forward before you begin.

Just see if we can do anything about the sound system.

Seems to be coming out of the speaker.

Check, check, check.

Can you hear me now?

Apologize to him, only please proceed.

Good morning.

May it please the court.

I'm Peter Foley, representing Dunes, Hensher,

of the retirement board of trustees.

To be clear, I'm not representing

the teen school district who's not present today.

And I think understanding that they reached a settlement

with the union before the hearing process

was commenced at the retirement system level,

might explain some of the gaps in the case.

But if I could, I'd like to just give a very brief overview

from the board's perspective

and then happy to take any questions.

This case was a fairly complex case

to litigate at the administrative level,

involving 28 NHS member petitioners,

bringing claims arising from four different factual scenarios

that span 15 plus years.

But on appeal, the issue presented

is relatively straightforward.

That's because all of the petitioners appropriately

raised legal arguments, in this case,

are predicated on the acceptance of their alternative

interpretation of the facts,

an interpretation that was expressly rejected by the board

and that is directly contrary to the reasonable factual findings

of the board, findings that have ample support in the record

and are therefore entitled to deference on appeal.

These factual findings were the basis

for the board's legal conclusion

that the petitioners failed to meet their burden of proving

that they qualified for the expressly limited exception

to the statutory 120-day rule as it applies to compensation

received by NHS retirees after the termination

of their employment.

And that limited statutory exception

mandates the recipient of the sevens pay.

Beyond 120-day must be two requirements,

both of which must be satisfied in order

to be eligible for the exception.

The first is that the delay in receipt beyond 120 days

must be without the consent of the member

and secondly, it must also not be through any fault

of the member.

Unlike the seven petitioners in the administrative proceeding

you were determined by the board to qualify

for the limited exception, these petitioners

failed to meet their burden of proving

either of these two requirements.

The central fact determined by the board

is that the school district's early retirement approval

letter accurately provided early retirees

with two key pieces of information.

One, that the start date of the early retirement payments

would be delayed from July until November.

And two, that NHS contributions would not

be made on the payments.

Their successful seven colleagues

at the administrative level, including the lead petitioner

Randall Burns, they all received the same approval

letter as petitioners, but they did not consent

to the proposed November start date.

Instead, they first questioned the NHS

and their employer about this whole 120-day delay.

And after receiving information,

they took reasonable and timely action

to object to the proposed start date

by bringing a labor grievance requesting a July 1 start date

instead.

That grievance was upheld in arbitration

and on appeal to this court.

So if there were a mutual mistake of law,

so now that it's been uncovered in the grievance

process, the arbitration, and here,

why would that clarification, if you will,

of the law not reach back and reach the folks,

the rest of the non-seven people?

They're making it, I like the comments.

Because the legal issue here is that they must

be the terms of the statute.

Keep in mind, the statute prohibits payments

received after 120 days from qualifying

as honorable compensation.

But it does present a very limited exception that

could apply in this case if the petitioners did not

consent to the delay payment and if they were without any fault.

So constant delay payments.

So they've taken an understanding, sort of undercut their consent,

given that both sides, the school and the petitioners

didn't understand that this particular delay was not

a potential option.

Well, but what they did understand, Your Honor,

is that they had a choice as to when the payments would be made.

They chose November 1st.

They did not object.

They also did not object to having the contributions not

taking out of those stipend payments.

That is a benefit to the individual.

There's a lot of case law dealing with retirees

making decisions without retirement counseling.

And it's very clear that the need of the NHS

and obviously the employer is not required

to provide retirement counseling.

If someone had come to the system and asked these questions,

it would have been a very clear and obvious answer.

If you delay that 120 days, it won't count on earnable comp.

You will not have to pay contributions,

but it will not be able to be applied

to your potential benefit.

What about the argument that consent was impossible

because the counterparties to the agreement

are the district and the union,

and therefore an individual employee could not possibly

consent to do something that was contrary to the CBA?

Yeah, two things about that argument.

One, it was never raised before the retirement system.

There's no citation to collective bargaining whatsoever.

I would be aware if there was no authority

to enter into this arrangement by the employee,

there could be no consent.

Okay, but at the time this arrangement was made,

there was a good faith argument

that the school district was making

that the payments could have been delayed till November 1.

It went through the whole arbitration process

and then reviewed by this court.

By virtue of the arbitrator's decision

as upheld by this court,

that as a matter of law the CBA did not permit that.

Chris, therefore how could there possibly be consent?

Because we're talking about these individuals

and what they chose to do or not do

with respect to the receipt of the payments.

They are, I think in the record there's 43 individuals

who did consent to the payments and never repealed.

So we're not going back in time

and fixing all of those cases.

The other aspect of it is we're talking

about a collective bargaining requirement

from the PELRB statute somehow being applied

to a non-party, the NHS,

in a proceeding that doesn't even involve the PELRB.

I don't see any precedent cited in their brief

for an argument first that was never made below.

But also there's no precedent cited in their brief

for applying that type of collective bargaining

unfair labor practice standard

to a case wholly outside of collective bargaining process.

But the letter itself refers

to the collective bargaining agreement.

So it isn't, the collective bargaining agreement

is kind of brought into the letter

by the wording chosen by the district.

So it seems like your argument sort of writes

that clause out of the letter

that this is pursuant to the collective bargaining agreement

which there admittedly was disagreement

and confusion about what that meant.

And we ultimately solved that question.

So it's problematic to me that having invoked the CBA

which took a couple of years to figure out exactly

what it meant that then the plaintiffs here

can't take advantage of the fact

that there's now a clear understanding.

Well, again, keep in mind,

we're dealing with a very limited exception

that the legislature has created.

And there's two elements to that exception,

not just consent but without any fault.

And the actions of Mr. Hyde and Mr. Burns

who again, when they got the letter,

the proposed November 1st date contacted the EHRS

and their employer and objected.

What the system, what the system,

what the board found was that their failure to object

waiting five to 10 years before objecting

there was an element of fault

and the statutory standard is quote unquote

without any fault.

There's not a comparative analysis

directed by the legislature.

And on that basis, as well as the consent issue,

the board found they did not qualify.

Did the board make its,

just my understanding of the timeline may be confused,

but I understand the board made its decision

after this court issued its opinion.

Is that correct?

Yes.

And the board had access to our opinion, presumably.

Correct.

And so the board knew that the CBA

did not provide for the delay

when it made its decision on consent and fault.

We, yes, the board certainly knew that was the standard.

And that was the position of this court and the law.

And the board doesn't disagree with that.

And that's why the board granted the petitions

of the seven who actually took action

did not accept the delay

and filed their grievance

and one in arbitration and one on appeal.

All of these petitioners could have done the same thing.

And instead, they did nothing from five to 10 years

after their retirement.

I would note there is a provision in the NHS rules

that has never yet been addressed by the board

because it deferred based on its decision

on the issue of fraud.

But there's a provision in our retirement 304.03C,

which as of January 2019,

prior to being replaced at that point,

it had a three year limit

on when earnable compensation adjustment petitions

could be filed.

All of these petitioners,

if the board were to look at that rule

and apply to this case,

all of those petitioners would be ineligible on that basis.

Subject to a discovery,

what subject to the discovery rule, perhaps?

It's within three years of discovery

or retirement, whichever is earlier,

is what the rule provides.

Just a, you know, in our opinion,

and I'll grant that this is not the whole thing,

but we did observe that even when Heidi Burns ultimately

became the first teachers to pursue the issue,

the school district did not disclose

that by delaying stipend payments,

it avoided its retirement system contributions

and diminished the retirees' retirement benefits.

And so under these facts and the circumstances,

how could the non-grieving parties be at fault

for not raising this?

Well, I think the actions of the other seven

who did raise it indicate

it was quite possible to raise these issues

and quite reasonable to be concerned about them,

but they chose to accept the delay payment

and also to not pay contributions on those payments.

So accepting that the retirement system

is trying to be true to the statute,

practically speaking, are there impediments

to rolling back the timeline,

having those contributions made?

Well, it's now, after the fact?

It can be done mathematically, sure.

But there's an element to any of these adjustments

where the system does not have the benefit

of the contribution from a new state of time,

from 2012 on,

and though there is a formula for payback,

it doesn't capture the return of investment

that would have been received during that time.

But there could be a mathematical formula

to take from the employee

and the employer sufficient funds

to make the system hold.

The formula does not do that.

The return is less than the,

at least 2% less than the,

I'm sorry, the interest that's paid

is at least 2% less than the return,

and the return is quite commonly far above the interest rate.

But again, I don't think those issues

apply specifically where the legislature

has issued essentially a directive

not to consider these payments after 120 days.

As a statutory change in 2012,

there is no 120-day rule anymore.

If you don't, if the payments,

or there's no exception to the rule,

if the payments are received by that time,

then there's no avenue of appeal.

So is the difference between the group of seven

and the group of eight,

the timing of their petitions?

Yes, I think that would be essentially,

they brought their claims prior to even retiring.

And it took a year or two to litigate that,

but the system was on notice,

everyone was on notice that they were objecting.

What happened is after they won their case,

the door opened and in came another,

well actually another 26 petitioners.

There was the original two, Mr. Burns and Mr. Hyde.

Five more came in who retired after Mr. Burns and Mr. Hyde

because they were aware of the issue

and then the others were attempting

to receive a retroactive payment.

And I guess I would also like to point out,

this case is, I don't think I've ever seen a case

change more from the administrative level

to the Supreme Court level,

this was a case all about an alleged fraud

by the school district.

The school district dropped out of the case,

but before doing so, they expressly stipulated

that they did not stipulate the fraud.

They reserved the right to object

to anyone claiming fraud in the future.

Thank you very much.

I see my light is on.

Thank you very much attorney.

Okay, thank you.

Attorney Sullivan.

The preservation question and the timing of the petition.

So the union did not become aware

that this notification was even sent out

until the arbitration in 2020.

And when the proper party to notify about the delay

was notified in 2020 during this arbitration,

that is when our members exercise their rights

that they were not sleeping on,

they were not aware of

because the proper party was not contacted.

And in terms of preservation,

I understand the preservation argument.

I've addressed that I think it was preserved

in substance at the lower level

and I'll rely on the brief for those arguments.

I think that the CBA has always been a central issue

in this case.

The CBA is contained in the record.

It is very clear who the parties to the CBA are.

And I think this court could even wave

the preservation question

if you find it wasn't preserved

because this is a legal issue.

Who are the parties to this contract?

They are the union and KEA consent means something.

It means something at the retirement system too.

You have to have authority to consent.

They didn't.

Let me just ask,

the early retirement stipend agreement,

page 19 of your brief has signatures

from the retiree and the board,

but not the union.

So there's another contract.

There's another agreement.

That contract is not the issue.

It's the cover letter on top of that.

I understand.

Again, nothing about this case

being at the retirement system

obviates the need for the union

to have been a part of this conversation.

It's just like if we brought this case,

a divorce case to the Supreme Court

and at oral argument, I told you

the parties actually weren't married.

Sorry.

That's a legal issue.

There was no authority to enter

into this arrangement.

No authority to consent.

And that's just positive.

Thank you.

Thank you.
