This is case 2023-0166, state of New Hampshire, versus Christian Cummings.

Good morning, counsel. I understand you've reserved one minute.

Thank you.

Please proceed.

Good morning. May it please the court, Matt McNichol, for Christian Cummings. I want

to make the points today. First, a point about the uncommon, unusual challenges

confronting the state at this particular trial. Second, the jury instruction that

permitted jurors to convict without sufficient evidence. And third, that there

was sufficient evidence, both there was insufficient evidence of both causation

and of negligence. What made this case an unusual challenge for the state was

the type of evidence that was presented here and the number of hurdles that they

had to clear in order to sustain a conviction. They had to establish that

KC suffered from medical ailments. They had to establish causation, proving what

caused those ailments. They had to prove that those ailments caused their death.

They had to prove that the defendant's omissions, not any of his actions,

caused the death. And that those omissions were criminal.

Which highlights the importance of the jury question and the instruction.

There's no evidence a single condition caused KC's death at trial. And the

instruction ignored that. They removed the barriers that the evidence placed

in front of the state, in front of their path to conviction. It allowed them

to rely on a single factor causing death when there was no evidence to

support that conclusion. So were the conditions relevant only because

of the way the indictments were worded? I mean, the state argues that

they didn't even need to prove that any one condition caused the child's

death. They just needed to prove that your client was negligent in causing

death.

I'm sorry for not letting you finish the question. It's less about what

the indictment says and more about what the evidence demanded the jury to

find based on what the expert said, based on how the state presented

their case. The state needed an expert to explain the complex

diagnoses or evaluation of KC here. And the question reflected the

unique nature of the unusual nature of the evidence presented here. If it

was just the indictment taken in a vacuum without how the state proceeded

to try the case and presented the evidence, it's a different question.

What's important here is how the evidence was presented and that the

court permitted the jury to find defendant guilty or convicted defendant

based on evidence that was insufficient or wasn't there on the record.

And by doing that, that was prejudicial to the defendant and the court

can't have any certainty that they can conclude that there would be no

different outcome but for that instruction. I think that the

instruction was proper and correct. There's a very real prospect that

the outcome of the trial would have been different. And for that

reason, that's why it's plain error. The proper answer should have been

based on circumstances of the case and the evidence that the jury

can't rely on a single factor as the sole cause of death.

The state's expert repeatedly said both in cross-examination and

on direct examination, couldn't rely on a single factor causing

death. And the state prompted several times, can you conclude

that a single factor did by naming the different conditions that the

medical examiner, who was the expert, believed that Casey suffered

from. And the answer was in one way or another that there was a

combination of them saying they had to go hand in hand. It was

one thing in coordination or in combination with another. So there

was never any specific condition that a jury would have been able

to rely on to find the defendant guilty.

How do you respond to the state's argument that the trial court

aired in dismissing the indictment for negligent homicide by

your respite alone?

I think it's important that the court dismiss the charge and

consider it because it reflects what the nature of the evidence

was. It reflects that the state had to prove the case based

on establishing what a specific charge was because that

indictment was just on one charge or excuse me, one cause of

death. There wasn't sufficient evidence of that one charge of

death. I think without that indictment, our issue is still

the same. Even if that indictment wasn't brought, even if the

court didn't dismiss it, the instruction for this indictment

that had three different causes of death after a trial in

which no cause of death was sufficient to find guilt that

our answer is the same.

The dismissal of the indictment certainly bolstered your case.

I think it demonstrates that there was an objective

understanding that your sepsis was not sufficient alone to cause

death and the instruction allowed the jury to find a single

cause of death, your sepsis being one of them.

You say the instruction, you mean the answer to the

question? That's correct, yes.

At most, the evidence showed that Casey suffered from medical

ailments that were concurrent to her poor living conditions.

The evidence didn't show that the poor living conditions

caused those ailments. And furthermore, there's insufficient

evidence that any one of those ailments killed her. Casey was

temporarily living in dirty conditions, but there wasn't

evidence that those conditions caused the ailments that

the medical examiner believed she had. And again, there are

still questions about whether those conditions actually were

present in Casey.

You don't think the lice was connected to the living

environment?

I think the lice was connected to the living environment.

It's important to know that there are other children who

are living in the house, I think a 9 and 11-year-old at

the time. It's possible that it was brought home from

school by them. But when it comes to lice, lice actually

was in the indictment. And lice was never presented as a cause

of death. But again, lice could have been a part of the

unidentic conditions of the house, but there was insufficient

evidence connecting the conditions of the house to the

medical ailments that they believed she had or that she

did have in the case of lice. And that those conditions

actually caused her death.

I thought there was a connection between the lice and

then the low levels of iron in the child's system, which was

the anemia.

Am I wrong about that?

There was an allegation that they were connected.

Certainly the state's expert believed that the lice led

to some anemia or the iron deficiency. The defense

expert disagreed with that. And she may have been a

little anemic but didn't believe that it was caused

by the lice and certainly didn't believe that it

contributed to her cause of death. She said that explicitly.

I think the primary focus of the trial really was on the sepsis.

And there was no evidence directly linking the conditions

of the house, which were dirty to her having

urosepsis and that the urosepsis is actually what killed

her. And again, I think it's important to

note that the state's expert, who was a medical examiner,

couldn't conclude definitively that KC had urosepsis.

She did have a UTI, which sometimes is the predicate,

or is a predicate to urosepsis. But the kidney did not have

a kidney infection. And there was a blood culture

taken and the blood culture was negative for urosepsis.

And the explanation by the state's expert was, well,

this is probably a false negative. The defense expert

disagreed with that, so there was no urosepsis present.

It's not something that is a probable diagnosis,

which is how the medical examiner and the expert

framed it. And again, the cause of death itself

was questioned by the defense expert who would have

found the cause of death to be a sudden, unexplained

death in childhood. So even if there's an established link

between the conditions of the house and the ailments

or the ailments in the death that was presented by the state,

which we're saying there's insufficient evidence of,

the defense expert was still disagreeing that those ailments

were present in the first place. And there's evidence

from the defense expert or from the state's expert herself

that those ailments might not have been present.

What are the evidentiary shortcomings on which you

base your argument that the court cared and denying

the motion to dismiss?

The same evidentiary shortcomings

that are present in our argument for why

that your instruction was incorrect goes back

to the lack of evidence for urosepsis existing,

the lack of evidence that urosepsis caused death,

and the lack of evidence that any other of the ailments

that were presented by the state actually caused her death.

So not the individual factors alone were sufficient to cause

death, and the court should have dismissed that charge

for the same reasons that it dismissed the first indictment

that had the single factor of urosepsis.

The other reason why the state, excuse me, why the court

should have granted the motion to dismiss

on the remaining indictment is

because the lack of evidence and insufficient evidence

for negligence.

State had to prove that there was sufficient evidence

that Cummings acted with criminal negligence

and that he caused Casey's death.

The state's theory of trial was that his omissions

weren't killed his daughter.

And related to the first point about the causation,

the theory of omission is only viable

if there are sufficient evidence of causation of death

or wasn't, which means that there

has to be, which makes it very difficult for the state

to have proven that the death was foreseeable.

So for their theory, under the evidence,

they had to prove that the death was foreseeable,

that Cummings should have known that the conditions in the home

posed unjustifiable risk of death to his daughter,

that Cummings failed to recognize that risk,

that failure was a ghost deviation

from what a reasonable person would have known or done,

and in this circumstance for criminal negligence,

the standard is much higher.

It's more than just being unreasonable or being thoughtless.

This is a substantial departure from what a reasonable person

would have done in that situation.

They also had to prove that his omissions directly

resulted in her death.

This is not a case where there are some affirmative actions

like a negligent homicide where somebody gets drunk

and gets into a car.

This is behavior that, you know, behavior by omission,

or there's sort of a.

Wasn't there evidence that DCYF had told the couple

that they were not to be living in that residence?

So there was a stipulation that was made that DCYF did

enter into an agreement with the defendant and the mother

that they could not live in that specific house.

There was not evidence about why that agreement was in place

or what DCYF actually found.

But it did get an important point

that they were living on the same property in a mobile home

where they were allowed to live.

And this was in the dead of winter

when the death happened in February.

And the heat had just gone out in that mobile home.

I think the testimony was several weeks, maybe two weeks

prior.

So that's why they did go into the house.

But to answer your question directly,

there was no evidence of why they could not live in that house.

I think the inference is that it was dirty and uninhabitable

for a child.

But I think, again, it's important to note

there was a 9-year-old and an 11-year-old in there.

Again, without knowing why DCYF made that decision,

we can't say that there was a link between what

underlined that and these ailments.

Was mother charged with any crimes?

She was.

There were lesser crimes, not negligent homicide.

And I can't remember on the top of my head

what she was charged with.

But there were lesser charges.

And I believe she reached a plea agreement with the state

after this trial.

One final point about negligence, what the state would

have to prove is that Casey wouldn't

have died if it weren't for, if Cummings had

behaved any differently, or anybody else

behaved any differently.

There's no evidence that this death could have been avoided.

Again, the defense expert said it was sudden unexplained death

and childhood, which is tragic, hard to prevent,

hard to foresee, impossible to foresee.

The state didn't establish the cause of the illness,

the cause of death, and it wasn't foreseeable.

And there was no evidence that this could have been avoided.

The court has no more questions to set the court to reverse.

Thank you very much, counsel.

Mr. Baldrige.

May it please the court.

Robert Baldrige for State of New Hampshire.

The only error in this case was a trial decision

to dismiss the first negligent homicide indictment.

An error, correctly, did not repeat

after it heard both sides' proof and correctly

instructed the jury consistent with the indictment.

In the argument related to that, the answer

was not objected to, and it's not

suitable for plain error review.

The state would first like to address the deserved argument,

which is that the evidence was insufficient allegedly

to prove that criminal negligence caused the child's death.

From correlation, the state expert, Dr. James,

testified that all the found ailments

stemmed from two things, urinary tract infection, which

led to sepsis and dehydration, which

was tied to the electrolyte imbalance,

and a life infestation that grew extreme and led to anemia.

Both of these conditions can be tied to the defendant's

neglect.

Both were preventable.

Dr. James testified that unsanitary or poor hygiene

can contribute to a UTI, and the evidence of defendant's

neglect of his daughter's hygiene was immense.

State's other expert, Dr. Orrell,

testified that the child's medical record

showed that she had been seen for a life infestation.

After care instructions explained the treatment,

all it was was to provide a particular shampoo

treatment, then reapply it eight days later.

But the last medical visit didn't mention

life infestation, correct?

That is correct.

That could be because the parents did not notice it,

or just it reoccurred and was allowed to grow to stream

a level without any type of medical intervention.

Well, that last visit was about a month before the child's

death?

Yeah, I believe it was in January,

and the death was in February.

And the medical records also showed

that the parents saw their phylogist,

and they were specially instructed to go to a clinic.

They'd notice fever, vomiting, or a change

in the child's urine color.

No medical treatment was sought, even though his own family

testified that the child was vomiting

and breathing rapidly in the day before her death.

And Dr. James testified to me out of the scene

that the child's urine was a dark brown.

If Dr. Orrell explained that would not

have occurred gradually, not suddenly,

in a child with a UTI would cry excessively.

So the test for criminal negligence is ultimately

is whether the carelessness would

be apparent to anyone in the community who

shares the community's interests.

The argument in this appeal essentially

asks this court to agree that New Hampshire's sense

of right and wrong is not valid when a parent neglects

a helpless child's hygiene to the extent

that they're found covered in dirt, covered in lice,

and then failed to provide the simple medical treatments

their doctor recommended, and then failed

to seek medical care, the child has cried excessively,

and shown apparent signs of the very, very conditions

that were warned of by the medical providers

and observed by his own family.

This court should drag that argument

and find that this type of carelessness

is not consistent with this community sense of right and wrong

and affirm the simplicity of the evidence relating

to causation of criminal negligence.

Would you be making the same argument

if the trial court had not dismissed charge 188C?

Regardless of the impact of that dismissal

on the state's argument?

For the cause of criminal negligence,

well, none to any of this argument.

The trial court's dismissal of the first indictment

was just simply incorrect, and if I may explain.

The trial court remembered Dr. James's testifying

as saying that she couldn't just say it was just eurocepsis,

but she never gave that testimony.

She did say on cross that she cannot say it was just

a UTI, but a UTI is different from sepsis.

UTIs is a localized infection,

as she testified to is fairly common in young girls.

Eurocepsis is one that infection spreads to the body,

gets in the blood, and calls the immune response

that actually damages the body itself.

So it's true that prepped UTI alone

could not have caused death.

That's not the allegation in the indictment, it's eurocepsis.

And on cross, she agreed with the defense council's

characterization of sepsis as very deadly.

And also the defendant's own expert, Dr. Andrew,

he explained that in the late stages of sepsis

that person's blood pressure dropped below the level

of transport to human life, and eventually they died.

Did any of the state's experts say that,

more probably than not, the cause of death was eurocepsis?

They did not give that precise testimony.

They testified consistent with the autopsy report,

which is eurocepsis with dehydration.

The with dehydration wasn't a testimony

that the child was survived, eurocepsis,

but for dehydration or left in balance.

It was simply an explanation of the child had multiple ailments

that were interrelated.

And as Dr. Andrew explained in great detail,

the UTI was both the source of the eurocepsis

and the cause of the dehydration,

or contributed to the dehydration

because it increased urination.

The dehydration is what caused the electoral imbalance

because as hydration levels fall,

sodium levels increase and become more concentrated.

But never is there any quote in the transcript

where Dr. Jane provides any type of testimony

along the lines of, she would survive eurocepsis,

abstinence, dehydration, or left in balance,

or eurocepsis alone could not have caused death.

She may have said that regarding the UTI,

but never a eurocepsis.

Was there any testimony that,

but for the defendant's behavior,

the child would have lived?

There was not, I believe that testimony

would have invaded the province of the jury

regarding the essential element.

But isn't that an opinion regarding causation

that the acts or inaction of the defendant

is what caused the death?

Maybe, but Dr. Jane performed the autopsy

and then the other expert had reviewed the medical records

and had some proof of the condition of the home.

And they were able to use evidence to tie the conditions

to the home and neglect to the underlying symptoms

that led to the worth conditions,

likes infestation, and UTI.

And there was explanation how UTI progressed to sepsis.

It also evidence how the parents should have known

that the child needed to further medical attention.

Like Dr. Orrell testified that the child

suffered from medical neglect.

Yeah, she testified medical neglect.

She never went further than that

and essentially gave an opinion

on the element of the offense.

In the brief, when you said cause of death

is not an element of negligent homicide?

It is, the element is that the negligence

caused the victim's death.

The cause of death does not have to be agreed to

beyond a reasonable doubt.

Now had that court left that out,

there maybe could have been an argument

that it was a constructive amendment.

Tests for that would have been

to surprise the defendant

or prevent him from defending his charges.

That type of argument hasn't been made

since this is a plain error argument.

The state didn't have to prove a cause of death

to guarantee the defendant's right to name the verdict.

It's not plain error based on speculation

that they might not agree on what the defendant contends

is the cause of death.

Especially when the evidence showed

that the jury could have found, jury accepted so long.

So do I understand the state's position

that if the jury found that it was Euro sepsis alone

given the answer that the court gave

to the jurors question

that that would be sufficient to sustain the verdict?

Yes, the trial court's answer to the jury was correct.

The evidence would have permitted a finding

that the cause of death could have been

any one or combination of Euro sepsis,

dehydration, and electrolyte.

So the defendant's arguing that this opened the door

for the jury to find that it was only Euro sepsis

and because of the earlier dismissal,

that's not a route that was open to the jury.

That's the fundamental disagreement here, right?

Well, yes, but the argument to it was a correct answer

whether it was consistent with an earlier ruling

isn't an issue.

And if we want to reconcile it,

the court could have perhaps realized

it made an incorrect ruling the first time

or when he made the ruling dismiss,

the trial judge would say,

I'm not going to consider anything Dr. Andrews said.

But Dr. Andrews did later say in the late stages,

a sepsis, a person's blood pressure

would drop below a level of human life.

So the defendant's proof would allow that finding

by itself and it's still a state of contention

that Dr. James's testimony allowed that finding as well.

And regardless of the sufficient evidence,

this avoids all the evidence,

the defendant's own proof can be used

against them regarding the sufficient evidence.

So whether the two rulings were consistent

is not an issue, the court should try to engage in.

It's not in this case.

It's just whether, was that instruction correct?

So that's sort of the first answer correct?

In the state's view, the first dismissal

is completely irrelevant.

That first charge and the fact that it was dismissed

shouldn't affect our analysis at all.

Absolutely, that is absolutely correct.

Now this is a preserved argument.

It's not a challenge to a jury instruction.

It's not a preserved argument to the efficiency

of the your sepsis.

It's in plain territory.

So just one other point, I think it's important

to notice on that.

The defendant's concern is that the jury might have relied

on your sepsis alone as a cell called the death.

Now the evidence would have permitted that finding.

It was the, that would have been correct instruction,

but it would have been very unlikely

that any jury concluded that it was just sepsis

that caused the death and dehydration

and electrical balance played no role

in the final ultimate death.

How can we make that something like that?

Yeah, we can't assume that, can we?

Well, you never know, but when you're gauging

and playing your analysis, it's a higher burden.

And just to explain the answer a little more.

What are the UTI progressed sepsis?

What disputed that trial?

It was the main disputed trial.

The severity of the dehydration and electrolyte balance

was disputed at trial.

No one disputed though, that the child was dehydrated,

had elevated electrolyte levels.

And even if these conditions were not fatal,

would have at least stressed the body

and affected her health.

Dr. Andrews, you can explain that.

Yes, dehydration can be fatal

and electrolyte imbalance can stress the system.

Dr. James also explained how even

not fatal those conditions affect the body.

So for any reason, I think his child is sceptic

compared to state's argument or proof.

But I do not think his child

was dehydrated electrolyte balance.

They would have rejected testimony agreed to

by both sides.

So since there's no reason to think a jury

relied on that based on all the proof presented,

the possibility that the answer to the question

theoretically might have permitted that finding

doesn't arise to plain error.

I'm just a point that was addressed

in the Mr. McNichol's opening.

Every case is a hard one.

Proving evidence of criminal negligence in this case,

what's the matter?

The jury didn't just hear the testimony,

which in itself is pretty graphic.

They actually saw the pictures of the child,

saw the pictures of the home.

They showed filthy conditions.

The extreme number of lice on the child's head.

The dirt or the brown substance that was on her,

her testimony of the license infestation

completely covered the ambulance.

Every first responder had a decontaminate after responding.

No medical treatment was sought

after this very open and apparent conditions.

Child was crying excessively.

This is a type of carelessness that is really apparent.

Regarding criminal negligence, that should not have been

something that's considered borderline or difficult

for the state to get to the jury except.

And again, we will ask the court to make clear

that this type of carelessness does lead

to criminal negligence liability in the state of New Hampshire.

No other question to the state will recognize brief

and that's the court to affirm the defendant's conviction.

Thank you, Mr. Baldrige, Mr. McNichol.

Thank you very much, counsel.

The case is submitted.

The court is in brief recess.
