This is case 2023-0030 state of New Hampshire versus Derek T. Moyer.

Good morning, I'm Gordon. I understand you reserved two minutes.

May it please the court. I'm Joshua Gordon. I represent the Eric Moyer who is here this morning. I reserved two minutes.

Wrecklessness is consciously disregarding a substantial risk, and disregarding a risk means a gross deviation from what a law-abiding citizen would do.

Derek Moyer acted responsibly within the contours of a law-abiding person.

While there may always be additional precautions one can take, Mr. Moyer took substantial and reasonable precautions to avoid the risk of harm.

He was shooting into a 40-foot berm, which 40 feet is like a four-story building.

He used an anti-ricochet device. He shot from a spot 2,000 to 3,000 feet from the nearest dwelling in that direction.

He was shooting in daytime. The area between his range and Gabriel Court where the bullet landed was heavily forested.

Mr. Moyer was aware of his gun's tendency to rise and knew not to shoot in the air.

He even took the precaution of a mid-range rifle and the SKS, so that's not in evidence, is normally not effective beyond 300 or 400 yards.

The distance here is twice or even three times that.

And you can see from the photos that are in evidence that by the time the bullet got to Gabriel Court, it didn't have enough force to even break the second pane of glass.

Recklessness was McCabe, who fired a handgun in an apartment building with children sleeping a few feet away.

Or Farrell, who fired a gun to his friend's face.

Or Haynes, who branched a loaded gun in downtown Manchester, Elm Street.

Or Wilson, who fired a gun in a crowded house party.

Those were reckless. That Mr. Moyer missed his target, does not make it reckless. It makes it an unfortunate accident.

Can we make an inference based on the trajectory that it was shot into the air? Shot up?

Obviously it went above the berm, but it wasn't shot in the air, it went above the berm.

And that's an obvious inference that can be drawn, of course.

It went above the berm and it went above the forest as well.

That's right. It went over the forest.

And the Gabriel Court is roughly the same elevation as where he was shooting from, so it's hard to know.

What do you mean when you said it's not effective beyond three or four hundred yards?

Well, that is not in the record, but generally this gun is not effective beyond three or four hundred yards.

By the time it gets there, it doesn't have the force to do much.

And this distance was much, much greater than that.

The gross deviations from a law abiding citizen, which this was not,

was Lamprey who did swerves with kids in the back seat, excuse me,

in the back of her pickup truck when the children were unrestrained,

or Hull who clipped a cop with his mirror because he was too impatient to wait for a break in traffic,

or Vel Belville who continued texting after he nearly hit another car.

But your client knew that the SKS had a tendency to rise when he fired it, correct?

He did. He did.

And that knowledge was one of the things he took into account when he was firing that gun.

How? I mean, it would be an appropriate precaution for a cop, and he knew that would have a tendency to rise.

To try to control it, I think.

Mr. Moore's conduct in contrast to the gross deviation cases was not any deviation at all.

The safety precautions he took, the berm, the anti-rickish device, the distance,

were those that a law abiding person normally does.

So, if the, and this may or may not, but if the place from which he shot the gun was the same elevation as the apartments to 3,000 feet away,

this 40-foot berm then is in a pit kind of arrangement?

No. No, it's, it's, I went and saw it.

It's, it's higher than, it's higher than, than elevation from which the gun was shot?

Yes.

So, there's the berm, and then here he is and here are the apartments way over here.

Yes, it was like a lot of these in my town. I see target shooters use an activator, push up a berm, and shoot into the berm.

Yep.

To move on, Mr. Moore was not sentenced to five years as the state says in his brief.

He got 30 days in jail with 11 months suspended.

Finally, that Derek took the shot, that Mr. Moyer took the shot, was not proved beyond a reasonable doubt.

His son testified that he didn't know who was shooting the rifle, that rifle, on the Sunday in question.

It could have been him, he testified, or it could have been his father.

That makes it impossible to distinguish who was holding the gun when that particular bullet was fired.

And because there's no direct evidence that it was Derek Moyer, the state has to disprove the reasonable alternative,

which it did not do, and accordingly this court should revert.

I have my notes here, and maybe they're wrong, that Allen denied shooting on Sunday.

He...

Is that wrong?

I think he, he said he didn't know whether, he said he was shooting on Sunday, he denied shooting that gun,

but then he said, when asked directly on cross whether he was shooting the gun, he said,

I don't know, was your father shooting the gun, I don't know.

So, I think, I don't know, there's no direct testimony that puts the gun in Derek Moyer's hands.

And that's my point.

Except that he testified that he had been shooting that gun over the weekend.

Derek Moyer never testified, the son testified.

Excuse me.

The son testified.

That he had been shooting that gun over the weekend.

Including that son, including that day.

Including that, well, no, he said, I don't know to that day.

There's no further questions.

Actually, I have a question.

Did you have an argument in terms of the proof of the risk of serious bodily injury to the two juveniles as alleged in the indictment?

That's not an issue in this case, and it wasn't raised or preserved.

I think it's an assumption that there could have been bodily injury.

Of course, there was none, however, but the law of recklessness does not take injury into account.

Why isn't it a conscious disregard of a substantial and unjustifiable risk to shoot the SKS with a known tendency to rise?

And it did rise, and it did go above the berm, and it did go above the trees, and it did go into someone's home.

Why isn't that?

Well, that happens, but the question is whether it was reckless.

And the precautions he took to address the news of safety risk and took the precautions to avoid that risk.

The lower of the precautions you've identified, what are the ones that are specific to the SKS and its tendency to rise as opposed to any normal precaution for a gun that didn't have that tendency?

Nothing in the record, Your Honor.

Thank you.

Tony Baldrick.

May it please the Court, Robert Baldrick, for the State of New Hampshire.

This case has been presented as if it's one where the defendant was simply taking careful aim at a target on his property, straight around to somehow win through the woods and into his neighbor's window.

That isn't the evidence the trial court heard.

The evidence was that the round went over the tree line and down into the neighbor's window.

And the evidence, the light that was available to the State, is that the defendant fired multiple rounds from a semi-automatic rifle in quick succession.

And he did so knowing it had a natural tendency to rise.

How do we know it was him?

We know it was fired from his SKS because they attained his gun and the fire mark they ever matched it.

He said he was fired every day that weekend.

His son testified that they were firing SKS on a Friday, but not on a Sunday.

But the trialer fact can just believe that testimony.

He could assume it's a lie.

He could assume it's a mis-memory.

There's sufficient evidence that he was firing on the Sunday.

So he initially denied firing the SKS, and then after further questioning, he admitted that he hadn't?

Yes, that's correct, gentlemen.

There's a lot of statements that one can infer that he had to mislead the police, which, of course, inferred to be understood that he was firing this game recklessly.

He initially said I was firing my shotgun.

It was only after confronted with the proof that a round had gone through a window and gave me a court that he...

Well, I may have been firing a semi-magnetic or bold action hunting rifle.

And then upon further questioning, he suddenly remembered that he was firing his SKS every day that weekend.

Why was he given immunity then by the state?

Why the prosecutor elected a lot of Allen to have immunity?

I don't recall.

The attorney general's office gave Allen the juvenile immunity to testify,

concluding that he had a Fifth Amendment right, presumably.

I didn't report to the reason for that, and it doesn't really go to the issue before the court, so, unfortunately, I can't answer that question.

What's the standard then for reckless? Is this sort of a race-Ipsa analog?

What's the standard for reckless conduct?

Just because the bullet went over the trees and fell into the window, ergo, there was something recklessly done.

Right, and the state is not arguing that it's reckless conduct simply because a stray round goes into a neighbor's property.

So, what was the evidence of the reckless conduct?

Firing the SKS, multiple shots in quick succession, no one had a tendency to rise, and awareness of the danger of fire in the theater.

As soon as Mr. Moore was confronted with evidence that a round went through his neighbor's window, his statement was long the lines of,

well, I fired the berm, I just don't fire the air indiscriminately.

That shows the burn is that it's dangerous, that if you actually do fire in the air, there's some risk to that neighborhood.

Right, but how do we know that this particular incident was conducted recklessly?

It sounds to me like the only alternative is not to fire the gun at all.

No, the alternative.

I understand it to be made to fire in quick succession.

The evidence, I'm sorry, the evidence is that it went over the tree line.

The testimony was very dense woods, and if you look at the pictures that interest exhibits both at Eskies House and Mr. Moore's property,

it'd be very difficult to accidentally shoot over the tree line.

Well, if I get in my car, there's no storm, and I drive very, very carefully down the street,

and I break very carefully ahead of the stop sign, and I slide out into the street and run into a school bus.

So is that reckless conduct just because something happened?

No, because in that situation, you're taking the best precautions you can in this circumstance.

And how do we know that Mr. Moore did not take those precautions?

Because around when both over the berm and over the woods, and it had the tendency to recoil, and as you heard multiple shots,

the clear difference was just not one carefully placed shot, an erratic round went through the trees,

but firing such a way that you can't recoil the recoil.

The proper standard of care when you're firing any weapon anywhere is you need to know where that barrel is pointed when you pull the trigger.

What's the significance of the multiple shots?

Multiple shots on itself is not reckless, but it can go to in the way you're firing.

If you've done recoils, then firing multiple shots quickly, you're more likely to be in a situation where you're struggling with the recoil,

and the rounds can be pointed in a position where you're not.

And if we're speculating, was there testimony about this connection between the multiple shots and how it might cause the gun to do uncontrollable things?

Direct testimony about its tendency to rise.

It didn't get so specific that they say if you fired three rounds in a tenth of a second, it would recoil in this way now.

Right, multiple times makes it more likely we didn't have that kind of testimony.

No, but I think a reasonable inference, just the trifat can make.

In your brief, you argue that because the defendant sometimes fired his weapon simply to aggravate his neighbors,

it belies his claim that he was always shooting with a safe and deliberate practice.

Can you explain that to me?

Yes, I have read the defendant's brief as essentially serving the undisputed evidence that he was shooting,

you know, carefully engaged in target practice.

Was there any evidence that he was trying to aggravate his neighbors on this occasion on Sunday morning?

Not on this occasion, but the point I was trying to make is even if you're intending to hit the burn,

it doesn't mean you're taking all your safety precautions.

You could just be trying to unload several rounds at once, perhaps just because you want to annoy your neighbors.

It's not particularly critical to the court's analysis,

but it only goes to the fact that it's not compelling to find that this was a careful target practice.

That evidence, though, made it was before the trial court.

It was, yes, it was, and it was presented by the defendant himself.

In regards to the line about the FKS's effective range is 300 to 400 yards,

that may be true, that sounds accurate, but effective range means that at 400 yards,

you can hit what you're aiming at.

I do not understand the term to mean that it's the range at which the bullet loses so much velocity

that it cannot cause serious bodily injury.

But none of this was before the trial court?

No, it wasn't.

And I like to point out his statement confronted with the proofs as the hole in the Gabriel court window was.

Well, I was shooting at the Burmese, I was shooting at the air indiscriminately.

I showed some awareness how to go, oh, it's dangerous to these people if I'm shooting in the air.

So I don't think we need to know the exact range where the FKS is effective

as a firearm necessarily, whether it was endangered, these people.

So back to the moment, the knowledge that my car can be a dangerous weapon,

I could just not drive it?

No, no.

I'm trying to connect this knowledge that there's a risk, true,

to evidence that Mr. Moyer didn't take appropriate precautions on the risk.

And again, I get back to Ergo because the bullet landed, it's like racips.

We don't need to prove the activity.

Right.

In regards to your driving the snow, the evidence that you were,

that even though the accident took precautions, it was snowing.

That's a difficult environment.

Here it's hard to accidentally shoot over the range.

You probably were not, you wouldn't have been,

there was evidence to show that you weren't being careful when you shot that.

It's simply because the bullet landed where it did.

That's all we know.

Well, we know where the bullet landed, where it was shot.

Right.

What the SKS could do in fire, what he knew about the SKS.

And I guess to just expound your analogy, now if you change it to,

it's you slam into a wall at 100 miles an hour and it's a 30 per mile zone,

it's perfectly straight, it's a rain.

The fact that you're wrecked shows that you're probably not driving carefully.

The circumstances always depend.

And we are, again, the fact that you're in a straight round is not enough to show recklessness.

The state's not making that argument.

And if you're concerned about that, they can clarify that in the opinion.

That is just, it's the narrow holdings on a very specific set of facts.

How do you distinguish the shepherd case where the driver crossed over the yellow line

and that was not reckless?

I can't judge up all the facts on the, as I stand, simply drifted into a lane without more.

You could accidentally drift just driving, firing a weapon.

You need to take the precaution.

You know where that barrel pointed at.

And here where the bullet landed, what we know about it,

what the defendant knows about it can distinguish it from that front.

You're saying that the bullet landed.

Didn't the trial court have to conclude beyond a reasonable doubt

that those girls were at risk of serious bodily injury?

It did.

Well, they were in May, the act did or may have put them in danger.

It did go over their head and it had enough force to break the window

and I would, that's probably why the risk of serious bodily injury

never challenged below.

Okay.

One matter I would just like to point out.

The distance between the Gabriel court and where the defendant was shooting,

the arrest of David doesn't give the estimate of 2,000 to 3,000 feet.

There was really no testimony on that front.

It would have been useful to have.

But I do his statement that he doesn't fire near when confronted with the proof

to show a knowledge that those neighbors could be at risk from a shooting.

Only if he does fire into the air, which he claims not to do.

Well, he claims he could do that, but that's up to the trial to fact determine

if he was actually, if he was just shooting at his target

and it was an air that went through the woods

or it was done in such a way that he was foreseeable that it could go

over the tree line.

There's no further questions.

We'll rest on this brief.

Thank you.

Thank you.

I want to address Judge Countway's question about Shepard.

Shepard drove over the yellow line and that's not reckless.

And contrast that with Bellevue who drove over the yellow line while texting

and didn't look up after hit one car then hit the other car.

And that's the difference between reckless and not reckless.

What Bellevue didn't do was look up after something happened.

He didn't take the reasonable precautions that a law-abiding person would do.

That's the distinction here.

This is like Shepard.

You make a mistake and that's what happens.

The second issue I want to address is the immunity letter

that the son got is in the record, it's in the appendix.

It doesn't say much about why the younger Mr. Moyer had Fifth Amendment problems

but I think that's relatively apparent that he was there

and could have been the one holding the gun as well.

Thirdly, the layout of this land is once upon a time

it's apparent when you stand there and there was a view

that this was once very rural.

And Mr. Moyer's land, there's now suburban development on this side and this side

but there's nothing a long way that way.

And so when he shoots and he shoots all the time

engenders a lot of complaints from the neighbors on this side and over on this side

there's a whole row houses here and whole row houses here

and that's why there are complaints

but he doesn't shoot that direction he shoots

the berm is that direction and he shoots

and that's actually where the bullet went.

Thank you very much.

Case is submitted.

Quotes and resets.
