This is case 2023 is 585 Carol Wagner versus Sally Chislett at all. Good morning. Good morning.

My name is John Mark Turner. I'm representing the appellant Carol Wagner in this matter.

Murray referred to her by her first name Carol like the parties have done

throughout the briefs referring to most of the parties by their first names.

This case involves an ancillary administration of an Alabama pro beta

state of John Chislett. John Carol were married until a 1974 divorce decree

procured by John from the Dominican Republic. In this case Carol is

challenging the validity of that Dominican divorce decree. She appealed to

decisions made by the probate court. The first was summary judgment that barred

Carol from a spousal share claim for the property that's subject to the ancillary

administration which is a piece of property in Brooklyn on the basis of

latches. The second decision she's appealing is dismissal of statute of

limitation grounds of the claim that Carol was the fee owner of the parcel.

According to the first decision which is the summary judgment decision the

probate court barred Carol from bringing a spousal share claim on the basis of

latches finding that she had waited too long and it also received the benefits

of the 1974 divorce decree by getting remarried in 1983. The reason the court

aired is because that that decision contravenes New Hampshire statute and

I'm talking about RSA 459-1 the Uniform Divorce Recognition Act which

was adopted in this state in 1949 and has only been adopted by a handful of other

states. The statute by its terms provides that a divorce in another

jurisdiction should have no force or effect in this state if the divorce

between two New Hampshire domiciliaries and the plain meaning of no

force or effect as this court has found in several cases is that that

means that the divorce is void or nullified. So is it your position that we

can never look at equitable factors when we're applying that statute? That's

your honor that's what the the plain meaning of force or effect means it's

void it doesn't exist or it's nullified and that's also what the

legislative history directs the courts. The legislative history and the

legislative purpose here is discerned from the discussions of the Uniform

Law Commissioners since this is a uniform act and we've provided materials

are briefs outlining what the commissioners were were contemplating

and thinking when they created this act and they were concerned at the

time about so-called tourist divorces or migratory divorces where one or

both spouses would leave the state and go to a jurisdiction like Nevada or

another country where they didn't have to have any connection to that state get

a divorce bring it back to to their home state and then have it

recognized and the commissioners at the time thought the problem was it

was the ramp it was such a big problem that they had to send an

unmistakable message to ever in the legislature adopted this this

act the legislature wanted to send an unmistakable message that these kind

of divorces would never be recognized to dissuade people from even trying and

when you say void is it was the Dominican divorce void have an issue I mean it

never happened never happened so what the consequences in this case the

consequence particularly for your client who later got remarried the

consequences for my for is that she remained married to John until his

death in 2018 so she was a surviving spouse of John and can bring a

spousal share claim what about her remarriage it was she wasn't validly

married to her second husband because she was never divorced but the that's

required to answer your question it's required they intended the the

commissioners intended to instruct the courts with this with this law as well

that the courts could no longer use equitable principles and defenses like a

stop-all or like latches to give effect to these divorces so the purpose really of

law was to bar what the probate court did here is there a dispute as to what

constitutes domicile in this case particularly what the definition of

domiciled was when when the statue was enacted I'm not aware of a dispute

your honor about what the demeaning of domicile I think there arguably is a

dispute over where the parties were domiciled at the time of the divorce

we've laid out in briefs that we think it's clear from from the record that

both parties were living at the marital home in Brooklyn at the time that John

went to the Dominican Republic in 1974 to get the divorce respect of that

dispute what definition of domicile should we look to I think you would look at

the definition that's in in RSA 21 colon 6 I think is the is this is the is the

citation your honor which gives a definition of domicile but was that the

line effect in 1974 6 I I don't know the answer to the question your honor

but even if it wasn't I think the court should you look at that and now

that's the that provision is instructing the courts how to interpret but John

was working in working in Taiwan at this time it's 1974 wasn't he he was working

in many places over in in in Asia at the time not just Taiwan he was working

at at a factory in Taiwan at that time but he was but the evidence is he was

he returned home after after every trip he had a tourist visa to Taiwan in 1974 so

it's it's our position that he never he never resided or was domiciled in

Taiwan but the court the probate court never reached that question because it

didn't it didn't address the statute so I to get back to the to whether

equitable defense they're allowed under the statute the commissioners knew that

this this law because it was so sweeping could lead to inequitable results the

commissioners knew that it could upset settled expectations and they you can

see from the materials I provided they even considered a repose provision

which would bar claims under the statute after a certain period of years but

they ultimately rejected that and in their words that's because they wanted a

quote absolute unqualified sweeping rule of policy applicable under all

circumstances and conditions that is the fact that the Alabama probate court

is determining the validity of the Sally John marriage couldn't we have to

contradictory determinations from the two different states it's conceivable one

of the problems here is that my client wasn't served in the Alabama matter and

so she was aware of it wasn't she she would yeah she was aware of it because

her children were involved in it but she she wasn't represented by council at

that time she the extent of her knowledge not it was not extensive her

second husband was dying at the time was in had dimension she was taking care of

him so that was definitely not her focus your honor and she was not served and so

any finding by the Alabama court does not bind her so to get back to the to

exclude these equitable defenses was a purposeful voice by the legislature

here well you talk about the commissioners yes and you're now talking

about the legislature but the commissioners weren't in New Hampshire they

weren't but the the laws I understand it your honor is that legislative purpose

and legislative intent for in you when you have a uniform act is determined

by the commissioners thinking instead of the legislature so you substitute the

legislature's purpose for what is what you can turn is the commissioners

purpose behind the statute so that's when I'm conflating two terms because

I think that I think they're equal in this court's case law so it's it's it's

essentially a legislative determination that no matter the equities of the

situation no matter how long divorces has has existed and no matter that you

are upsetting subtle expectations we need to send a message to everyone that

these divorces can never be recognized so they won't do it they won't even

try it in the future so how do you respond to the respondents argument that the

equitable analysis preceded any statutory analysis so that the validity of

that foreign decree wasn't reached in other words the equities were weighed

first I think that's I think that basically subverts what the the

legislature is trying to accomplish here the legislature was trying to rule

out equitable means that courts had historically used to give effect to

these migratory or tourist divorces here so if you if you ignore that then

you're yours you're not accomplishing what the law with the legislature is

instructed the courts to do wasn't she under constructive notice that statute

existed doesn't that defeat her claim she was fraudulently led to believe

that the divorce was valid I mean the statue has been there since 1949 it was as

you say the divorce was way to have an issue isn't she constructively under

notice that that has happened was it was of no legal effect if you're

asking I don't believe your honor I mean I think then they would both be

under constructive notice it was void I suppose and so he's he's he's using a

void a non-existent divorce to get a property settlement out of my client so

I I still think that's you know it sounds and fraud even if she knew I'm just

trying to reconcile your arguments on the one hand you're saying it was void

have an issue yeah under the statute on the other hand you're saying that she

was fraudulently led to believe that there was a valid divorce how do you

reconcile the two I mean we're all under constructive notice New Hampshire law

provides for whatever it was not my understanding she'd be under constructive

notice that that that her that her that her marriage was I mean her divorce

was was void so with respect to the fraud argument we owe the fact that the

statute exists yes I think you need to look at what at what she was led to

believe and and she was led to believe that this was a valid divorce she was

told it was a valid divorce and she was told that the divorce was registered in

New Hampshire and the John got remarried three years later she went to

a lawyer in the 80s to try to enforce the the separation agreement which contained

the property distribution was never he didn't tell her that it was a void

marriage and so it's you know a lot of people a lot of lawyers didn't see that

this was as a void marriage under the statute until 2019 when over children's

lawyers said this may be an issue so the fact that you signed a deed over

to John's of no moment she was she signed she signed signed the deed because of

fraud because of his lies so what happened was when they came back when he came

back from the Dominican Republic he told her that he hadn't gone through with

the divorce that they were reconciling and that they were going to continue

their plans to relocate the family to to tie on and that she should sign

the deed to have the marital property over to him so that it would be easier to

sell and that doesn't the statute of limitations bar that claim the quiet

title that because because the so that that's the probate court found that it

was barred because she knew that John had lied about the quick name deed when

later in the summer he told her actually we are divorced they had moved they

had gone up to John's mother's house up in Illinois as a family reunion before

the whole family was going to relocate over to Taiwan had packed up the house

had given away the pets and then he dropped the bond that they were actually

divorced and so the probate court said she knew at that point that he had

lied about the quick claim deed but what the probate court overlooked was the

underlying thought about the divorce decree and the and the validity of the of

the of the property division in the separation agreement that provided that

all jointly held proper real estate should go to should go to him and so

the what the court should have asked is when was it when did should she have

recently discovered that that was was invalid or was was void for fraud and so

I think she had alleged this was it was on a dismissal basis so the complaint

alleged various facts so it make it reasonable for not to have discovered

it until 2019 that that the that the divorce was the product of fraud and

was invalid again she knew that he made her signed documents with a gun to her

head essentially the night before she did she that factor in she was she what

she knows she did know that and she knew that he came back with a with a

divorce decree that looked valid had stamps it had seals it was in Spanish it

was in English she knew that he got remarried in 1977 three years later which

cemented her mind that it was valid not withstanding she knew but her signature

on the deed was a part a separate act separate from the force correct your

honor but but then but then the divorce decree along with the the property

division also gave on the jointly held property and so she thought that

was valid until 2019 and the question is did she alleged sufficient facts to of a

reasonable leaf that was about I see out of time thank you thank you

good morning and May it please the court my name is Stephanie Anansiata I'm an

attorney at Shaheen and Gordon my office represents the respondents tell it

Sally Tislett and her two children Kevin and Wayquan the appellate's

respectfully requests that this court affirm that the probate court's

dismissal of all of the claims presented by Ms. Wagner because they are

untimely and consequently barred other by the equitable doctrine of latches is

determined on summary judgment or by the Apple statute of limitations absent

from attorney Turner's presentation this morning was a reference to a single

case in a single jurisdiction at any time in the last century in which a

court invalidated a divorce decree in response to a challenge presented by a

party to a divorce who not only participated in the procurement of the

divorce but who delayed the presentation of a challenge to the

validity of the divorce until after both parties had remarried till after one of

the parties to the divorce had children born to a subsequent marriage after one

of the parties to the divorce died and after nearly half a century had

passed since the issuance of the distributed decree the probate court's

dismissal of Ms. Wagner's claims is consistent with the volume of decisions

rendered by courts across this country which have applied equitable

principles such as latches and a stop-all to bar similar claims presented by

similar jurisdictions had adopted the Uniform Act. I believe there were a

total of nine that adopted the act. I'm not sure if they all the cases

that you're citing involved the Uniform Act. So quite a few of them

your honor. For example, California is UDR a state and when this argument has

been raised in California repeatedly by 1968 the California Court of Appeals

held that the authorities have been practically unanimous in favor of the

proposition that a remarriage stops party from entering into it by denying

validity of a previous divorce. A couple of years later in 1953 another

California case Dietrich versus Dietrich a second husband was stopped from

challenging the validity of his marriage to his wife even though the underlying

decree of divorce was in fact invalid because he married her with the

knowledge of the circumstances that led to the issuance of the invalid

decree of divorce. The husband's position to the court at that time

was contrary to his prior conduct. The entirety of Ms. Wagner's argument is

that we should disregard her conduct over the last 47 years between the

issuance of the decree and her decision to present a challenge. We've seen the

same exact results out of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court in

1980 in the matter of poor versus poor and in relation to the UDR a the court

held that it does not purport to prevent a court from determining who may

appropriately make a complaint challenging the validity of a foreign

divorce nor does it specify that a court must ignore a person's own conduct

in determining whether a decree may be attacked. The question is not how do we

reconcile all of that with the Legislature's command that a divorce

obtained in another jurisdiction shall be of no force or effect in this state.

Well, Your Honor, can you look those words? Absolutely not, Your Honor. We reconcile

it in two ways. The first is that the UDRA specifically states in RSA 459

section 3 that the UDRA as adopted in this state shall be so interpreted and

construed as to effectuate its general purpose and to make uniform the

law of the states which enacted. Looking to other states which have enacted the

statute it has been concluded that the an equitable bar to the presentation of

a claim is not the same as presenting and debing that the decree has any force

or effect. For example, the United States Courts of Appeals for the First

Circuit in the matter of Schlesinger versus the Secretary of Health and

Human Services considered the question of whether or not an underlying

decree of divorce could be challenged by a wife or by the Secretary of Health and

the Department of Health and Human Services. And in that case it was concluded

that even though the wife would have been barred from challenging the

validity of the decree, the Secretary of Health and Human Services was not

because the bar to the wife's presentation of the claim would not have

does not make the divorce decree valid and enforceable for all other purposes.

And that is the same and true in this case. In this particular matter is Wagner

not only relied upon the decree in order to remarry, she presented that

decree to the state and held it out as a valid decree of divorce as proof

of her eligibility to remarry when she remarried in Merrimack in 1983.

Ms. Wagner has repeatedly certified to the federal government since the death

of her second husband, Mr. Wagner, that she divorced John Chislett in 1974 and

that she was her marriage to Richard was valid and she began to receive and

continues to receive Social Security benefits as a result of her second

marriage. What about Ms. Wagner's argument that the Carlton case

requires a different result and in fact precludes resort to equitable

so your honor what we see in I believe Carl Carl versus Nielsen is that Carlson

versus Ballagher 2012. Yes, your honor. So the contacts of Carlton versus

Ballagher is very different than the contacts in which we arrive at the

court here today. By remembering correctly, Carlton versus Ballagher

involved a corporate dissolution. And in that case, the juncture at

which the court was being asked to intervene equitable principles was a

juncture at which the court had absolutely no discretion to decide

anything. The process at play there required the court to enter articles

of dissolution upon a triggering event. The triggering event happened and

there was no need for further action or directive from the court before the

articles of dissolution would be completed. In this case, the court

always has and has been stripped of its jurisdiction and authority to

determine who has the standing to present a claim. So the distinction there,

your honor, would be that under the corporate dissolution statute, there

was no opportunity for a court to interject equitable or otherwise. In

this case, as far as standing is concerned, the court certainly retains

that jurisdiction. So the statute should really read shall be of no force

or effect in the state unless the spouse gets remarried or makes a claim on

the social security situation. I mean, what are the bounds of this if we're

trying to be faithful to the statute? Absolutely. And we can look to one of

the only applications of the statute that we have seen so far since its

enactment in the Ramadan case. We don't need to revise or tweak the

language of the statute in order for it to achieve its actual true and

effective purpose, which is to let citizens of the state of New Hampshire

avail themselves of New Hampshire jurisdiction, the laws and protections

of the state in the entry of a decree of divorce, the dissolution of

marital property, the distribution of marital property and parenting and

child matters. In this particular case, as every many of the other UDRA

jurisdictions have done, we can still apply common sense, but

practical equitable defenses and analyses in that location of the

statute. If we are in the world of equity, does the the balance of

equities is that affected by whether the husband fully performed under

the purported terms of the Dominican divorce agreement? Not necessarily,

Your Honor, if the facts of this case were not as extreme as they were,

perhaps, but this is a case where it's distinguishing features from the other

cases that have come before it are just simply more extreme examples of the

same reasons why courts have decided that an individual was entitled to

pursue a claim. The one case that we have in the state that kind of

touches on this issue that's the PUC cases from 1947 and 1949 involve

the interest of two innocent parties, the survivors left by the bad acting

husband and the innocent spouse who didn't even know she had been

divorced until after he was gone. And in that case, the court said we've

got to hold the balance that equities and the interests of the parties

that are remaining. And in this case, regardless of John Chislett's

actions, the people who are going to be left to sort of foot the bill for

his conduct would be his surviving spouse and his children. And the

directive from the PUC matter is that if we're going to be destroying

rather than preserving these important critical familial relationships,

if we are going to, after the death of one of the parties to the

divorce, disrupt the, especially if it's been a subsequent remarriage,

disrupt the status quo, we best have a very, very good reason for

doing so. In this case, the only reason for doing so is to allow

Ms. Wagner to participate as a surviving spouse in the estate of

somebody who she has not had a relationship with for nearly 50

years. The equities here balance in favor of the respondents.

Another important piece to all of this is that because of the

passage of time, just simply Ms. Wagner's remarriage, but because

she waited to challenge the divorce until after Mr. Chislett had

passed away, the only person we have to speak to what John Chislett

knew, what John Chislett thought, what John Chislett believed in

relation to all of the various fraud claims is Carol Wagner's

supposition to what he might have thought and what he might

have believed. My client's ability to present evidence in

this matter, to develop the record, is very much inhibited by

the fact that two of my clients were not born at the time the

divorce decree was issued. They didn't know that this marriage

had existed until after their death.

Even if equitable defenses were permitted, how is it

appropriate to decide the case at summary judgment as

opposed to having a trial where this type of the argument

you're making right now about what evidence was available or

not, or who should be believed? It would seem that's uniquely

suited for a trial.

Your Honor, that was considered by the probate court, and as

the probate court noted, the case law across the country

again is so consistent that the doctrine of latches can be

applied in a way to eliminate an individual standing to present

a challenge, a belated challenge to a foreign degree of

divorce. And so in this particular case, the court probate

court can look at the factors that are undisputed, the 47-year

delay, the fact that there is no additional fact that was

learned or concealed or hidden from Ms. Wagner that she knows

now that she did not know 47 years ago, the fact that she

relied upon and held out this divorce decree as valid. The

question then becomes, is this person entitled to present

this claim? Is this person entitled to pursue standing in

the action, in this probate action on the basis that her

divorce was invalid?

The, just to do the real property claims as well, the

dismissal of those two claims is also appropriate in statute

limitations grounds. The 20-year statute of limitations

applicable to the claims for the recovery of real property

apply to these claims because that is what those claims are for.

The statute of limitation period has the purpose of serving both

the courts and respondents against the presentation of

stale claims. Ms. Wagner knew that she signed a deed she knew

by July of 1974 that the person who induced her to sign

the deed perhaps was not as trustworthy as she could have

believed. When Ms. Wagner met an attorney in the 80s in order

to enforce the terms of the Dominican decree, she could have

availed herself of additional legal advice, perhaps did avail

herself of additional legal advice, challenge and dispute

her actions back in 1974 related to the real property. The idea

or the concept that she's entitled to the common law

discovery applicable to the six-year statute of limitations

existed at the time of these actions is, serves, fails to

acknowledge the fact that in order to apply the common

law discovery rule, you need to identify what fact you have

learned of and when you learn of the fact, you can calculate

what the statute of limitations is after the tolling

concludes. And here we've not identified the fact or when it

was learned. We know that she received some legal advice in

2019, but that's not the same as having the knowledge of the

fact of your injury. The common law discovery rule also

allows the court to consider whether the interest of equity

require or allow for the application of that rule. And in

this case, this for the same reason that the doctrine of

latches prevents the challenge to the underlying divorce

decree, the interest of equity do not allow for the presentation

of for the tolling of the statute of limitations as to

these claims. The end result of this case, your honor, in the

event of reversal, the court would then need to have to

decide whether or not the statute applies because as your

honor noted, the question of domicile is a fact that is in

dispute. There are factual issues associated with where John

Tisselt was living. The parties were in the process of moving

at the time that the divorce decree was issued. So if we

revert this back to the probate court, there's going to

have to be a decision made as to domicile. There's going to

have to be some sort of reckoning with the fact that

we have a decision out of an Alabama probate court in

this state in the primary state of administration that

Sally Chislett is the surviving spouse. The court would then

have to decide whether or not even if Ms Wagner has the

standing and can appear as a surviving spouse, whether she's

entitled to the survive the benefit of being a surviving

spouse because under New Hampshire law, if you're

living separately apart from your spouse for a period of

three years before their death for reasons associated with

your own perhaps misconduct, you're not entitled to a

share of the estate. Thank you. Thank you very

much, counsel. This case is submitted.
