This is a case of the New Hampshire Supreme Court oral argument.

Is that a state-of-the-nature versus trial chamber?

For the record, Justice Gould is not able to be with us here this morning.

He will be reviewing the recording of this argument and participating with us in our deliberations and decision in that case.

Turning Barnard, I understand you reserved one minute.

I have. Thank you. Good morning. May it please the court? My name is Thomas Barnard.

I represent Todd Burnett.

The issue in this case is whether the evidence proved that Burnett knowingly possessed 15 specific images.

Those images were recovered from unallocated space, temporary internet files, and cache gallery files.

The state's witnesses explained that this data consisted of artifacts, remnants, or artificially or automatically populated caches, not ordinary user files.

I plan to make three points this morning. First, the evidence was insufficient to prove Burnett's contemporary possession of the 15 images.

Second, it was insufficient to prove his historical possession of those images.

And third, even if the evidence was sufficient, the trial court aired by telling the jury that possession of a device amounted to possession of the images on that device.

The evidence was insufficient to prove Burnett's contemporary possession of the 15 images.

Regarding control, the evidence was insufficient to prove that Burnett controlled the files in temporary internet files or the gallery cache.

Those files are automatically generated and they are sometimes inaccessible to a computer user.

There was no evidence here that Burnett had the ability to control the temporary internet files or the gallery cache files.

Regarding unallocated space...

Well, hang on. Back from unique steps.

A regular law abiding citizen isn't going to accidentally have these particles of images on a computer.

So isn't there an inference from that circumstantial evidence?

The question is not whether Burnett was a regular law abiding citizen.

The question is whether he knowingly possessed 15 specific images.

And for the images in temporary internet files and cache, that's not evidence that he contemporaneously possessed that data.

Most computer users aren't aware that their computer automatically saves the images on the websites that they visit.

Most computer users believe that if they delete a picture from the gallery on their cell phone that that picture is gone.

They're not aware that their cell phone has created a separate computer file.

Does an act of deleting it give rise to at least circumstantial evidence that the person possessed it?

As far as historical possession, yes.

So all the data that we're talking about in this case could be relevant in two respects.

First, it could be relevant to show that Burnett possessed that data in the form in which it was recovered close in time to its recovery.

And second, as the court has just alluded to, it could be circumstantial evidence that Burnett possessed a corresponding image at some point in the past.

Our argument here is that the evidence was insufficient to prove either contemporaneous possession or historical possession.

Unallocated space is inaccessible without specialized software.

And there's no evidence that Burnett had the specialized software required to access the data in unallocated space.

Sinking with contemporary possession and turning to the element of knowledge,

there was no evidence that Burnett knew that his computer was automatically generating temporary internet files or gallery cache files.

And there was no evidence that he knew that data persists on a computer in unallocated space after its deletion.

Turning now, it is Burnett's position that that is absolutely 100% clear in the record.

The state in its brief makes some assertions that are inconsistent with that.

I don't think those assertions are supported by the record.

Turning to historical possession, Burnett has several arguments regarding historical possession.

The first is that that's not what was indicted.

The indictment was that Burnett possessed these images on or about two days that immediately preceded the seizure of the devices.

The state didn't argue, didn't present a historical possession argument until its closing argument.

And that failure prejudiced Burnett in that he was not able to present territorial jurisdiction arguments expressly to the jury or statute of limitation arguments.

But those arguments are still relevant.

Even if the court considers the historical possession argument, the state has to show that the crime was committed in New Hampshire.

And there's no evidence here, even if we consider the data circumstantial evidence of some historical possession, there's no evidence that that possession occurred within New Hampshire.

There's also no evidence that any such possession occurred after May 6, 2016.

These devices were old and a lot of the metadata that was associated with different files on the devices preceded May 6, 2016.

I think a trial judge can say, I want to know what type of person this is.

I want to know their habits, their background, their history.

I want a full picture of the type of individual that I'm sentencing.

Isn't that a thing?

No, I think there's a fundamental difference between those two things.

In the former circumstance, the judge is sentencing a defendant for the crime that defendant was convicted of in light of broader evidence about who that defendant is as a person.

And that's permissible.

In the latter circumstance, the court is punishing the defendant not only for the crime he was convicted of, but for crimes for which he has not stood trial or not been convicted.

And that is impermissible.

And that's what I've purchased.

I think we know by the statements that the trial judge makes at sentencing.

And I don't think statements need to be as clear as the example you've just provided to indicate that a judge is sentencing a defendant, punishing a defendant for conduct that the defendant has not been convicted of.

Here we have statements that I think viewed cumulatively, viewed in their totality, clearly demonstrate that the trial court here was not just considering these allegations of untried conduct to get a broader picture of who Burnham was as a person.

The trial judge was punishing Burnham for the conduct that the trial judge believed had occurred, but for which Burnham had never been tried.

I mean, somebody actually said, I don't know if I would ever get an opportunity to sentence someone on those charges who may be acquitted and not be.

Now, in reasonable doubt, it's very hyper.

The law allows them to consider the last change of the food in sentencing.

So that sounds to me like a punitive.

Exactly.

Could you address the invited error argument on the jury instruction?

Sure, sure.

The jury instruction issue, Burnham consistently maintained that the state had to prove that he possessed the images, the charged images.

And the trial judge expressed this view that as a metaphysical matter, it doesn't make sense to possess data, to possess ones and zeros.

And the trial judge expressed an insistence on telling the jury that the state had to prove that Burnham possessed the devices that contained the images.

And Burnham consistently objected to that.

But at one point Burnham said, look, if you're going to tell the jury that the state has to prove that he possessed the devices, fine.

But in any case, you still need to tell them that he possessed the images.

And that did not invite the error of the trial judge failing to tell the jury that the state had to prove possession of the images specifically.

And it did not invite the error of the trial judge telling the jury that possession of the images meant possession of the devices.

And with respect to the defendants' internet searches and the record of the websites that he visited, is that your argument that may be relevant to his historic knowledge?

Or how do you address those bad evidence?

I'm not saying that evidence is irrelevant, but the state's burden is not just to prove that Burnham sought out prohibited images and that prohibited images were found on his devices.

The state's burden is to prove that Burnham specifically possessed the specific images that were charged in the indictments.

But doesn't that go to his knowing possession? I mean, if he's specifically searching out, rather express terms, these images, doesn't that bear on his knowing possession?

Sure. Bear on, go to, relevant to? Absolutely.

But alone, it's not sufficient to prove that Burnham knowingly possessed those 15 specific images.

I want to make one point going back to the sufficiency argument regarding viewing.

And this is a matter of law that this court has not addressed. Courts and other jurisdictions have addressed it.

If you've got a statute that prohibits possession of images, then merely viewing those images without any affirmative step to download them, save them, print them, it's not criminal conduct under the statute.

And I'm not saying it shouldn't be, I'm not saying it wouldn't be a good idea for the legislature to make that criminal, but that's a determination the legislature has to make.

And the legislature in New Hampshire has not made that determination.

So is your position that the state needs to prove that the defendant, after viewing these images, expressly download those images onto his dogs in order to prove possession?

If the defendant is merely viewing images on a webpage, that is not possession. And courts and several other jurisdictions have held that under their statute.

Sure, if the defendant is aware that his computer is caching the images and views an image with that knowledge, then in that case I think he would have knowing possession.

But if the defendant, like most computer users, is not aware that their computer is doing this, then that is not possession under the statute.

Sometimes they are visible and accessible, sometimes they are hidden, according to the testimony in the record.

I'm going to make just a couple points about the jury instruction issue.

It is the legislature's exclusive role to set forth the elements of the crime, and it is the jury's exclusive role to determine whether the evidence has proven those elements.

The legislature in New Hampshire has determined, has chosen to prohibit possession of certain visual representations, certain images.

It has not chosen to prohibit the possession of certain devices.

By telling the jury that possession of the devices amounted to possession of the images, the court heard.

Thank you.

You reserve one minute.

Attorney McCullough.

Good morning, and may it please the court, Adriana McCullough for the state of New Hampshire.

I'd like to start by responding to a point that my colleague left off with when he was talking about the state would have to prove based on how RSA 649A is written,

not only that the defendant viewed the images he possessed, but also that he downloaded them to then prove possession.

And that is not what this court has ever held.

It's not what this court held in Clark in 2008, and it's not what this court held in Higgins most recently.

This court held that to prove possession of CSAI, the state has to prove that the defendant knowingly exerted some control over those visual representations of sexually explicit content,

and not that their existence on his device, computer in his home, wherever they are, was inadvertent.

That's what the state has to prove.

Asking or requiring the state to then prove also that the defendant viewed these images and also downloaded them is not part of the statute as it's written.

And if this court were to hold that today, it would be adding two additional elements to the possession of CSAI statute that the legislature has not amended since 2008 when this court defined possession.

And in fact, although they're not approved, the draft jury instructions in 2008 that were after 2008 don't have any definition of possession,

which means that the only acceptable definition of possession of CSAI in this state is what this court held in Clark and reaffirmed in Higgins.

Even if the state were to have to prove that though, in this case, the fact that these images or visual represent, I know we're using the word images,

but really they're visual representations. That's what the statute requires, which is a much broader definition.

These were downloaded onto his device. That's why they were in this cash folder.

That's why they were in unallocated space.

And that's why they were in these temporary website pages because his devices, if we take the phone, which is where the cash file was found,

a cash file is a file that's a temporary storage location for a frequently accessed item, content, video, image, webpage.

It does.

And we can take them one at a time, but either way, because this court has defined possession as exerting some control over the images,

the state has to prove that the defendant knowingly or knew that he was exerting some control over those images.

The fact that they were saved in a cash folder or a temporary file, which are essentially the same thing.

Well, it does that automatically for frequently viewed items.

Right.

But the viewing itself is him exerting some control over those images.

He's going to that exact image multiple times, that exact visual representation multiple times.

It wouldn't be in a cash folder if he viewed it once.

It wouldn't be in a temporary saved file from an internet page if he only viewed it once.

Correct.

So you go to one of these sites and there's a gallery of multiple.

I think it would depend on the rest of the facts that are presented at that trial, but it's possible,

because to then click on that image, you would have to find that image or search for that image.

And as in this case and as in Higgins, there was a lot of evidence presented to the jury of search terms

or other web pages that this defendant went to that have a whole host of disturbing names

that indicate he's looking at images of children.

And so for him to then find these images that is saved in this cash file,

which by the way was accessed by a user of that phone in 2020.

So it is accessible by a user.

He had to have looked at that image multiple times.

And in fact, it seems like based on the access and based on the state's evidence

that he was the primary user of this phone,

that he looked at the stuff in this cash folder in 2020.

Did you need to use special forensic equipment in order to...

No.

And I can talk about that.

I know that there's apparently disagreement between the sites,

so it may require this court to just read that section of the transcript.

But the testimony that was provided on that point from Lieutenant Hester

was that a user could recover files in unallocated space

as long as the system did not override them with other data.

And in this particular case, the CSAI they found that they charged had not been overwritten.

She left unsaid.

Sure.

No, there's no testimony of that explicitly.

She, her analogy for this search or review or whatever

was comparing it to a recycle bin,

which is essentially unallocated space on your desktop.

No, but it's the same concept.

It's the same concept of being able...

And again, this court has not held that a defendant to be convicted of possession of CSAI

has to know how to access unallocated space, the defendant and Clark,

all of the charging images and Clark were on unallocated space.

And this court could have in that case held that the state did not sufficiently

prove those charges beyond a reasonable doubt,

because it did not prove how the defendant knew to access that unallocated space.

But it is accessible by a user.

The other analogy that Peter LaRouche used was to a card catalog.

And I know that my colleague here says that that analogy is not how I paint it.

However, the way that he describes that analogy is talking directly about unallocated space

and how searching through unallocated space is difficult without a special device.

Non-impossible, difficult, because searching in unallocated space for one file

would be like looking in a library for one book

without being able to use a card catalog

or any other piece of information in the library to tell you where that book was on a shelf.

So you'd have to go however you chose to do it,

row by row, shelf by shelf, alphabetically whatever to find it.

That's what he's saying looking in unallocated space is like.

The investigators use special software to quickly search that

because they don't have the time to sit through and open every file

because the specialized software just doesn't look through.

It opens these things and it also categorizes them

into certain categories of sexually explicit conduct

that then the investigators review themselves and put into,

I can't remember if they call them categories or whatever,

but they sort them into types of CSAI.

One of those types is very obviously a child

engaging in what New Hampshire has defined as sexually explicit conduct.

So a sex act or very obviously in some lewd or le vicious exposition of their body.

There's a second category where you can't determine the age of the child

or the person in that picture, but the person in that picture

is doing something sexually explicit.

And then the third category, I think there are four now,

but the third category is can't determine the age,

can't determine sexually explicit,

and I believe the fourth category now that they're using

is for computer generated or AI generated images.

So that's where then the investigator comes in,

looks through those categories and determines themselves

which of these images violates New Hampshire law.

So that software is not the only way to access this space.

It's just the way investigators in this realm

access this space quickly.

And I think that's for the jury to determine

because this court has also held in Clark

that this idea of knowing possession

is a factually intensive endeavor.

However, in this case, there was evidence

that this defendant owned for a rather long time

his own technology company

called Totally Digital Communication.

And while it went bankrupt in 2009,

the entire point of that company,

according to his ex-wife at trial,

but then wife when he owned that company,

was to sell and repair cell phones.

It was also to help users transfer data

between an old cell phone to a new cell phone

and also delete data off of phones completely.

Not just, you know, I go into my gallery and delete.

Delete items off of a phone completely,

presumably so that phone could be resold by him

to some other user.

So this defendant in particular

would know based on the facts of this case

how to access these,

what my colleague has deemed hidden files

or whatever else,

because he was doing that for users on a regular basis

through his company.

Can we get a jump to a sentence from him?

Yes.

I know there are two things in it out there.

There are your summaries of the jail calls

that the defendant made.

But that's on an art record.

I know it's on the 12 expense.

Okay.

Can you explain me the significance

of that defendant?

I don't remember from the sentencing transcript

what the significance of the jail calls were.

I don't want to guess,

but it's not, I can't remember from my

review of the record.

Can you just take a look at the statement

that I've ever read that they're going to continue

to run on?

Yes.

Yes.

So, first of all, I would like to address

in sentencing this court has held

that the trial court has wide latitude

and wide discretion in sentencing a defendant.

And so when Judge Ruoff is talking about

this idea that he may never have

a chance again to sentence him,

proof beyond a reasonable doubt is a high burden,

this court cannot glean from that

that the only thing that Judge Ruoff

considered was this uncharged conduct,

of which there were a lot of,

I think it was a 92 page appendix

that I submitted and all of them

were the indictments against this defendant.

So we did have 92 pending charges.

I think what is more important

to consider about the sentencing

hearing in this case, and this sort

of answers your question, Justice Will,

about, you know, isn't this

what do we want a court to consider

about a defendant?

This court has held in tufts,

which is, in my opinion,

the seminal case on when you consider

uncharged conduct.

I know it's an older case, but this court

has not really revisited that concept

in as much detail as it did in safety tufts.

But in that case, this court

found that, quote,

a person with the passage of time

leaves behind an ever deepening

reservoir of things done and things

left undone, of associations

since, of associations cultivated

and associations abandoned,

of good works preformed and actions

taken that reflect the darker

side of humanity, unquote.

And it also held, or it also found

that sentencing courts, quote,

should be encouraged to dredge up

from this reservoir those areas

of significance that will supply

critical information upon which

the trial judge may base his or her judgment

in passing sentence.

And in this case, the trial court

used the uncharged conduct

in combination with the charged

conduct and the convictions

to find that this was not

an accident, and that this was not

the first time that this defendant

had looked at only 15 images

of CSAI. The court

found, and as it said in its hearing,

that he had engaged in

decades of

offending

in some way against children.

Not people, children.

The court made that finding based on

what this court allowed sentencing

courts to do, which is consider

punishment, deterrence, and rehabilitation.

In making that finding, the court

found that

he could not be rehabilitated.

So it was important to know if this

was his first offense, or his

15th offense, or how long

he'd been engaging in criminal conduct.

And in this defendant's case,

because of who he has offended against,

children in an image

who don't even know that who is looking at

their images, but every single one of the

children in these images has been sexually assaulted

to create this image. He's also offended

against children in his life

who refuse to testify against him

for all of the reasons that we know child victims

of crime don't want to testify.

So because of who he selected

to commit his crimes against, he does

not have a criminal record.

So in this case,

that I think is why the court went the extra

step of considering and agreeing

to hold a two-day evidentiary hearing

to hear from all of these now

adult women about how this defendant

offended against them when they were children.

In addition to all the testimony

that came in a trial that the jurors

could use to determine whether

the defendant knowingly possessed all this

CSAI, all the other

CSAI he had searched

or looked at that was saved on his computer.

I mean, he had searched the phrase

Team Pussy 92 times.

Sureteens could be 18 or 19.

He had searched images of children

engaging in hard CP

age 7 to 12. He had looked

at images that had titles with

ages as young as 2.

That was all relevant, and that was

all evidence that came in in the trial

that the jurors were instructed they could use

to determine his knowing possession.

So the court could have just used that, frankly,

to determine that for a long time

this defendant has been offending against

children.

Not a curiosity that this

did go to sentence review, or is that a

statement that stayed pending?

I would assume it stayed pending

the outcome of this appeal. I don't know,

I guess, but I would assume he got notice

of that at the sentencing, and he may

choose to seek that review

if this appeal does not go his way.

But to that point, while

the low number on the sentence

is 50 years, that is still

less than half of the maximum

minimum penalty that

this court could have, or that the

sentencing court could have issued. Because

each of these charges has a 7.5

to 15 maximum sentence.

So I guess I don't know what would happen in.

I tried to do it before I got here.

I would, if there are no further questions on

sentencing, just like to talk briefly about the

jury instruction while I don't know that I have

it, but this

the state urges, well, my red light is on,

so I will rest on my brief.

Thank you. Thank you very much, Teri

McCullough.

Thank you. Just two brief points.

There's a world of difference between a

computer's recycle bin and an

unallocated space. A recycle bin is

just a regular folder on a computer,

labeled recycle bin. You delete a

file, it goes there, it's automatically

set to permanently delete after some

period of time, but it's got metadata.

The file is indexed in the operating system.

The operating system knows the files

that are there.

Unallocated spaces

is virtually,

I would say based on the record here, it's

impossible to access without specialized

software.

There's no metadata associated with

that. The file doesn't exist as far

as the operating system is concerned.

So in order to access this, you've got to

bypass the operating system.

And computer programs

that completely bypass the operating

system are virtually non-existent.

We're talking about very specialized

tools, if we're talking about completely

bypassing the operating system.

Just quickly on the

jury. Thank you very much,

counsel.

Case is submitted.
