You see the Dwayne's here at three college now in a second.

4-0-0-4-6, BDP holding LLC versus the IDR group LLC at all.

For the record, Chief Justice McDonald is disqualified from this case, and Justice Bassett is not participating, giving his pending retirement.

Attorney Carroll, have you reserved any time?

Yes, I have.

Two minutes, Your Honor.

Thank you.

As you heard, I'm Laura Carroll.

I'm here on behalf of the defendant's appellants in this case.

Just briefly, the appellants at this point include Dean Kenney, who's the personal representative

of Ronald Roberts, who sadly passed away in January of cancer, and the other parties

that are on appeal are Roberts Asset Management, which was Mr. Roberts' management company,

and IDR, which is a family office, which handled investments for high-wealth individuals.

We have appealed on foregrounds.

Our briefs are detailed, but there's a few issues.

I do want to address at this time.

The foregrounds, as I'm sure you're aware, since you have the statute of limitations,

proximate cause, waiver, and the SEC issue.

The first two statute of limitations and proximate cause, if the trial court decision is

reversed, would end the case.

The waiver, jury instruction waiver, and the SEC issue would require a remand with those issues corrected.

The first issue before we get to those specific ones is the correct standard that this court should apply.

As we have argued, this court should be reviewing on a de novo basis.

The appellee has suggested that's not the case.

What exactly should we review de novo?

Is it the application of the discovery rule?

Well, what the discovery rule is, yes, how it's being construed.

This court will refer to factual determinations that the trial court has made.

We're not disputing that.

But the trial court's application of law to the facts and the trial court's legal

rulings get reviewed de novo.

But isn't your contention really the factual issue of knowledge when they knew of the damages?

That's a multi-part question.

There should be no dispute that the Hale family members that comprise BDP knew of the investment in G-form dating back to its inception.

Every single Hale that testified acknowledged, yes, we had this meeting with Ron.

Ron told us about G-form.

Ron showed us the G-form products.

They all date that to the inception of the investment.

As you know, there's ample evidence that even the trial judge, Judge Delker, identified quarterly reports talking about this investment.

Where we depart from the trial judge is his suggestion that the applicable standard could take of,

and when would the discovery rule, how would that impact it, was affected by what he called the level of trust that the Hales put in Mr. Roberts in IDR based on his fiduciary role as their investment advisor.

But isn't the knowledge about the knowledge of an injury not just the knowledge of the existence of the investment?

Yes and no.

I'm sorry to vacillate here.

BDP has taken the position in this case that the investment in G-form was wrong from the start, that it never should have been made, that there should have been no alternative investments made by IDR of BDP assets that never should have happened.

There's undisputed evidence and Judge Delker referenced quarterly reports.

The quarterly reports dating back to 2007, before G-form was a twinkle in anyone's eye, show alternative investments and list with those comprised.

Throughout, if your honors wanted to click through all the quarterly reports, which are all in the record,

usually about three pages each and they have pie charts and you will see that alternative investments, which include private equity of the type.

Do they identify the G-force investment?

G-form, yes.

In the annual reports, they always did.

For audited financials, two of them are, I'm sorry, I believe it's the quarterly financials, Trial Exhibit III, are the buried audited financials.

They have details about the G-form investment.

In addition, two of the quarterly reports in 2016 specifically have an extra page that does talk about names G-form, identifies G-form specifically.

But didn't those quarterly accounts for those investments indicate that they were at cost instead of fair market value, is what was required?

My understanding is that, well, my understanding is that's how you would do it with a private equity investment until there's an event that revalues.

In other words, think about it this way, if any of you are putting money into like a 401k or something like that, I just put $3,000 and you're thinking of that's the money that went.

That's how it was in terms of here's where your money went, here's the size of it.

But then you check the value of your account and you see that it's dropped.

You and your brain say, oh, I put in $3,000 and now it's worth $1,500.

It's worth $1,500 because it dropped.

Wouldn't one naturally think about the present actual value, not the amount that you lost?

My understanding is the way it's done in the quarterly reports is showing the size of the investments like where your assets went.

I think what Judge Neto is getting at is that wouldn't it be more accurate to list current fair market value?

So in other words, if your argument is the client should just lie upon the statement, but if the statement isn't reflecting actual value, then they're just assuming great.

We have at least what we put into it, if not more, but it would be normal to just assume it's significantly less what it.

I think there's a couple of different issues raised by your comment, Justice Countway.

First, BDP has taken the position that they had no idea that they were even in alternative investments from the get-go, and that's just demonstrably wrong.

Second, see, I thought their claim was that they didn't know that Roberts was co-investing in G-Form.

They didn't know that Roberts was converting loans that BDP made to that company to unsecured equity.

Isn't that the claim here that the jury returned a verdict on?

Isn't that what we should be talking about and when they have learned about that conduct?

The co-investing, there was a testimony by Ron Hale, one of the hails that he knew that Ron Roberts through IDR to RAM did co-invest in the private equity investments.

They were aware that was his practice.

That isn't something that he viewed as he testified as being hidden.

It's commonly done with a private equity investment to have the go-in co-invest.

It's also commonly done to sit on the board.

Mr. Roberts had done that with Marathon, another private equity.

But did he do that here with full disclosure to his client?

He testified that he disclosed that he was co-investing.

And Rob Hale testified that he knew that he co-invested.

And Tad Peter Hale's list of his nicknames Tad testified that he knew he co-invested and was on the board of another private equity investment at OHMD.

So to get back to one point Justice Countway had made, what we need to look at is did the hails ever ask any questions?

If you take his premise that they never should have been invested in alternative investments from the start,

which is what one of the Hale's, Kristen Hale, downs testified,

then your duty of inquiry, your trigger is I'm looking at my quarterly report or maybe the annual reports.

Why is the third of our investments in this pot?

And you ask questions.

I will note that when...

So you're saying that it's the Hale's fault here.

Is that what you're basically saying?

That Hale's was happening and it was the Hale's fault for not picking up on that?

I would...

Fault is kind of a harsh word, but I would say if the investments are...

If you think here's what my investment portfolio is going to be.

For example, it's all going to be in bonds or it's all going to be in whatever it is you contend.

You told your investment advisor and you get that report back.

You are not allowed to pay no attention to it.

So the fiduciary duty gets turned on its head a bit with your argument.

Does it not?

No, no.

I think that if there...

No, I don't think so.

I think so.

I think what happens here is that Judge Ducker and you can see this in his ruling at the close of evidence on statute of limitations,

that he said they weren't on inquiry notice because of this fiduciary role.

This court has said and other courts applying the being decision have said,

no, there isn't that heightened because it's my investment advisor.

Never need to open it.

As in the Balzati case, they talk about you need to look at your bank statements.

You need to look at that.

If what...

The way the investments were being made wasn't what you contend that you had told your investment advisor.

You do not get to wait from 2007, which predates reform until 2021 when you now decide,

oh, that one investment didn't turn out well.

You don't get to wait until then to say, now I'm damaged, now I'm upset.

I will also finally note that...

Sorry, that...

Sorry, I'm trying to get to my 2018 report.

Sorry, 2018 document.

This will be trial exhibit EE.

Mr. Roberts answering questions John Hale had about the investment.

That was the first time anyone had asked anything about it.

The investment had been going on at that point almost six years.

And I commend you to look at that exhibit because what he said, totally accurate.

There's no indication that one, there is any...

No.

Your light is on.

Sorry.

Thank you.

You have two minutes.

I'll let...

Thank you.

Attorney Harris.

May it please the court?

Attorney Harris and with very ten we represent BDP holdings in this matter.

Let me start with the statute of limitations.

The appellants argued that the trial court employed the wrong standard of conduct,

standard of review, such that this was a de novo appeal.

And they said in brief that the court applied the Massachusetts law,

which required absolute disclosure from the fiduciary in order to trigger the running of the statute of limitations.

That plainly is not what Judge Delker did.

Judge Delker applied the 504 as written and indicated that this was a discovery rule case.

A discovery rule case is evaluated both as a question of fact and as a matter of equity.

This court has said that one of the purposes, one of the approaches to the discovery rule is to balance the equities of the parties.

And that's exactly what Judge Delker did in this case.

He looked at and evaluated whether in fact there were facts in the claims that the Hales could not reasonably, should not reasonably have known.

Let me review some of those with you.

So first of all, the Hales did not know that Mr. Roberts and his entities had loaned over 25, 26 million dollars to G-Form.

The Hales did not know that when Mr. Roberts made that loan to G-Form that he was conflicted.

Not just conflicted, but that he had asked for and received compensation as a consequence of making the loan to G-Form that was on terms that were extremely favorable and not market driven favoring G-Form in preference to BDP.

Is it fair to say that the conversion from secured loan to unsecured loan benefited him personally?

It benefited him personally both financially because the other thing that the Hales could not and did not know was that not only did Mr. Roberts ask for a kickback for making the loan,

but that he received 750,000 shares as a consequence. He also had a personal investment of over 300,000 dollars.

And when he made the conversion in January, February, March of 2019, held within the statute of limitations, that was not something that the Hales knew that he was going to do or that he did.

They did not know about any of those facts. Facts that our expert has said were central to the reason for the investment in this case and the law suffered by BDP.

And back to the issue of standard of review, is that the Balzati standard that we owe deference to the trial court?

It is. There's also the, in a case citing rule versus John Deere, it talks about the fact that the administration of the discovery rule is an equitable matter and you need to balance the party's interests.

And here the interests were that of a fiduciary versus his clients. And they claim that there were breadcrumbs that the Hales should have picked up on and should have exploited to find out that Mr. Roberts was acting in delegation of his fiduciary duty that he was damaging BDP,

which you can't discern from the quarterly statement. And frankly the annual statements that were referenced by counsel were never seen by the Hales.

Instead what the testimony was was that they were available at some family meetings and nobody picked them up. And the reason that they weren't picked up, the reason that the Hales did not look further is because they were depending upon their fiduciary.

So did the Hales have a duty to acquire at any point in time?

If they were on reasonable notice and Judge Ducker evaluated that. And let me tell you why Judge Ducker considered not controlling the fact of fiduciary duty, but as an element of determining the reasonable reliance of the Hales.

And that reasonable reliance is fortified by the testimony of John Aubin, who was Ron Roberts' partner.

I asked him at trial, so you had great faith in Mr. Roberts and didn't look into what he was doing correct? Answer.

I had great faith in him, that's correct. And didn't look into what he was doing correct, that's correct.

And so you wouldn't expect his clients who had great faith in him to do any more than you were doing as an investment advisor, correct?

In terms of looking into what he was doing, I think that would be fair today.

Because that goes back to the reason that you wanted to comply with the SEC laws and that is, is clients are supposed to trust their investment advisors, aren't they?

That is correct.

They don't have to assume that what their investment advisor is doing is not in their best interest, correct? That's correct.

So, so what the, what the defense are arguing on this point is that there were references of increasing values of alternative investments.

You can look at the exhibit that they're referencing, which is in volume 5 exhibit 37, page 133, and see that there is no reference any place in the quarterly statements that talk about the G-form loan.

There's not any reference to the fact of a G-form investment.

Instead, what they're saying is you should have basically cross-examined your investment advisor who you trusted implicitly, who you were entitled by law to trust.

And you didn't pick up on the fact that you were being, that your assets were being invested for Mr. Robert's personal benefit, for IDR's personal benefit, not for your own.

That, your honor, as, as, as you indicated, Justice Abranson, that turns the fiduciary duty on its head.

It's a perversion of the fiduciary duty to essentially exploit the fact that you owe a duty of good faith and fair dealing, the utmost honesty.

You turn around and you say, well, didn't distrust me. You didn't follow up on those breadcrumbs that we left along the way.

And so you're foreclosed by the statute of limitations.

And you can look at the appellance brief. You can just listen to the argument.

No place do they talk about the loans, the 26-plus million that was loaned to G-form, the 1.35 million that was loaned to Impact Bureau, a related company.

The fact that Mr. Roberts, Mr. Robin, and IDR were charging for those loans and the value of those loans.

You cannot, you don't hear anything about why it is that Judge Delker abused his discretion in equitably limping out the fact that the BDP could not, should not have known that the limitations period have triggered.

And to your point, Justice Countway, you can look through those quarterly statements.

And there is no place that any reasonable individual would think that there is a reason to look into their investment advisors because the value of the portfolio, if you look at the first page, which is what the hails were instructed to look at, goes up every single time.

Despite the fact that there is a loan to an entity that's losing $10 million a year, and when the loan was converted from debt to equity, there's a letter that appears at Volume 5 Exhibit 37, page 133.

That's the, I made a mistake before, that talks, that is written by Frank Siegel, who was an attorney with Berks and Levinson who also happened to sit on the board of G-Form.

And what he says, he's drafting a letter to the other board of directors.

And when you read that letter, you'll see what he is saying is he's lauding Mr. Roberts for converting BDP's debt to equity, because that is saving all of their investments.

And he admits in that letter, which was reviewed by Mr. Roberts, and therefore adopted by him, that Mr. Siegel says, this was a great benefit to G-Form, my paraphrase, not the exact words.

Because had BDP wanted to enforce its loan, rather than converting it to worthless equity, it could have done so, and it would have owned the company and abolished all of the other equity, including Mr. Roberts, including all of his fellow shareholders.

And he sat as chairman of the board at the time of G-Form, so he had conflicts all over the place, and he preferred G-Form's interest to BDP's, something that the HALs could not, should not, and did not know until early 2019, well within the statute of limitations.

Let me just briefly talk about proximate cause.

Not only is it obvious that the preference, the investment in a business that's losing $10 million a year and the conversion of debt that's secured to worthless equity is both the but for and proximate cause of the

loss here.

We had expert testimony of that on that exact point.

At page, our expert, Mr. McCann, on day six, Mr. McCann is a PhD of considerable regard work for the SEC.

He says in summary, and the question to him was in addition to your work in concluding that not $1 of BDP's money should have gone into G-Form and that the size of losses range from $36 to about $80 million or so.

Did you make any conclusions or opinions, Dr. McCann, with respect to conflicts of interest that could potentially explain the concentration of BDP assets in G-Form?

Yes.

We, well, just as I was sitting here in the back, I heard testimony.

He recounts the things that I just recounted to you about the conflicts.

Those, and this says, those seem like the really big three conflicts.

Why did those concerns answer?

Well, because I can't see any other reason why anybody would invest $40 million in G-Form, especially on the terms that BDP was investing.

In fact, no one else was investing in G-Form in those amounts on those terms, but for the client that controlled by Mr. Roberts, who had a small cash investment.

He had 750,000 shares and he was on the board, ultimately the shares.

So, and for all of you to decide, but that seemed to be the motivation for the investment.

In other words, the cause of the investment was Mr. Roberts' conflict that was in Mr. McCann's and our other expert, Mr. Scheidt's view unlawful.

It produced the investment in a vanishingly small company that was losing money 10 million bucks a year, not just up until the time of the pandemic,

but during the pandemic and after the pandemic.

It's $10 million a year.

The cause of the loss is simply Mr. Roberts' various breaches of fiduciary duty.

And I would also note that when they talk about how the hails should have chased down Mr. Roberts' idea and somehow prevented them from acting,

the breach of fiduciary duty as instructed by the court is something that our fiduciary duty cannot be waived.

They did not object to that instruction.

That is the law in the state of New Hampshire.

You cannot waive the fiduciary duty, yet that is exactly what they're arguing in this case, that it was waived,

that we should be entitled to exploit it.

It stands the fiduciary duty on its head.

It would be unprecedented in the state of New Hampshire to rule either on proximate cause or on the statute of limitations based upon that premise.

We ask that the court affirm Judge Delker's ruling and the jury's verdict.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Attorney Carroll, your two minutes.

Thank you, Your Honors.

Just to address a couple of quick points.

My brother counsel had said that the G form loan were not identified in the quarterly reports.

Direct your attention to trial exhibit 29.

It's in volume five of the appendix and specifically pages 47 to 52,

which are the two of the quarters in 2016,

one of which identifies the G form revolver at that time at $10,750,000.

And then the next one identifies at $13,750,000.

And that is G form expressly by name.

We are not.

So is that disclosing the investment or the loan?

It's disclosing the loan.

It's listed under promissory notes.

When were they told that the interest on the loans were going to be forgiven?

I believe in 2018.

The issue here, I think, for your honors is if you're looking at when it started becoming clear,

this was, let me back up because there's another point I want to make before I visit.

Mr. Harris has talked about the investment, you know, taking the loan, turning it into equity.

The record is clear.

The context in which that happened was there was a new, very sizable investor coming in.

So it isn't as if the issue was can we get all the money back?

Calling the loans will own the company because the company, that's not real, you know, in terms of that money.

Here's an investor willing to put tens of millions of dollars in Eldridge, which did happen.

So it isn't as if this was just a random, why are we converting?

It would be like a new mortgage company coming in and going, I want to be the first mortgage.

And it was preferred equity.

It wasn't what's being called worthless equity is really unfair.

Later, the BDP decided to cash out the investment.

It did get paid for that.

That was the decision it made after it changed investment advisors.

So I just wanted to flag.

Okay, your red light's on.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Court is in recess.

Thank you.

Attorney, good to see you.
