This case is 2024-0439, a state of New Hampshire versus Richard Truman.

Good morning, Attorney Phelan. I understand you reserved two minutes.

Yes.

Please proceed.

Good morning. May it please the court. I'm Pamela Phelan. I'm here on behalf of Mr. Truman.

Today I'd like to talk about three points. First, even when viewed in the light most favorable to the state, the evidence was insufficient to exclude rational conclusions other than guilt.

Second, the defense did not open the door to the 404b evidence that the trial court had determined was not admissible prior to trial.

And lastly, the error in admitting that evidence was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.

Regarding sufficiency of the evidence, the evidence here did not establish beyond reasonable doubt that Mr. Skillin did not already have the fatal drugs on him when Mr. Pease picked him up at 11.30 in the morning, which is when Mr. Pease says he picked up Mr. Skillin.

Well, if that's the case, then why was he making these phone calls one after another trying to get somebody to provide him with fentanyl?

We don't know what he was trying to get by those text messages and phone calls.

The timeline also does not line up.

Most of those phone calls were between 10.55 a.m. and 11 a.m. and then one completed call at 11.03.

And then after 11.30, there were 30 calls.

Mr. Pease said he didn't even pick up Mr. Skillin in Dover until 11.30, at which point they then went to a Hanna-Fords in Rochester.

There was no evidence about what Mr. Skillin was attempting to accomplish by those unanswered, most of them were unanswered phone calls.

The one call that Mr. Pease says that he heard Mr. Skillin make while in the car, Mr. Pease had no idea what was said.

And there's no indication as to who he was talking to, let alone talking about drugs.

The messages also don't, the timeline of the text messages also don't line up with the timeline given by Mr. Pease.

Mr. Skillin says in a text message at 11.26, I'm on Winter Street.

Mr. Pease, that's in Rochester.

Mr. Pease does not say he picked up Mr. Skillin until 11.30 in Dover.

So isn't it a reasonable inference that Mr. Pease was mistaken?

But another reasonable inference is that Mr. Skillin was attempting to get something from someone and the evidence here did not establish what he was seeking at that point through those messages or calls.

Or from whom?

Or when and if he actually ever met with anybody, let alone Mr. Truman.

There was fentanyl found in Mr. Skillin's wallet.

Mr. Pease says that he never, he doesn't testify to ever seeing Mr. Skillin with his wallet out.

He says that when he went to Hanifords and they stopped there, he did not go with Mr. Skillin anywhere.

Mr. Skillin left the car, presumably went into Hanifords.

He has no idea what he did in Hanifords.

He has no idea what else he did besides going to Hanifords, if anything.

He has no idea if he met up with anybody.

And when he gets back, Pease says when Mr. Skillin gets back to his car, both at Hanifords and later at the Art Center,

he doesn't notice that Mr. Skillin's carrying anything except for slim gyms when he came back from Hanifords.

He doesn't say he's ever sees him with his wallet out, which is where the fentanyl was found in Mr. Skillin's wallet.

He also, like I said, does not, Mr. Pease does not, there's no evidence that he heard Mr. Skillin talking on the phone about drugs or specifically anything.

The evidence also does not establish beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Skillin didn't get the drugs from someone else.

If he didn't have them when he got Mr. Pease's car.

This is not a case like State v. Collins, which this court decided last year, where there was a witness who actually saw the defendant transact something with a decedent.

Here we have no witness that ever indicates that Mr. Skillin ever met with Mr. Truman that day.

Is there any dispute that the defendant is the owner of the Scotty Truman 24 handle?

The defense raised questions about whether that was his account and if other people were accessing it.

The police did not investigate.

There was no evidence other than the police officer's testimony that the name matched up with Mr. Truman.

But other than that, there was no evidence that Mr. Truman was actually using that account that day as opposed to someone else or definitively that that was his account.

Was there any information or evidence regarding Mr. Truman's location on this paper?

Absolutely not. I was just going to get to that.

There was no evidence in this case about where Mr. Truman was on September 29.

And whether specifically he was in the area of the Art Center in Rochester, which is where Mr. Pease said he took Mr. Skillin after they left Hanna Ferts.

There was no evidence about who was at the Winter Street address.

The police testified that they knew that address, 31 Winter Street, to be an address associated with Mr. Truman.

But there was absolutely no evidence that Mr. Truman still was associated with that address at the time of this incident.

And there was no evidence that Mr. Truman was at that address.

There also was no evidence that Mr. Skillin ever went to that address.

Mr. Pease drove him to a parking lot by an Art Center in Rochester.

The Winter Street address that the detective talked about was about a block away, but it's a city block.

There's lots of businesses and homes in that area.

There was no evidence where Mr. Skillin went when he got out of the car at the Art Center, who he may have met up with.

And again, Mr. Pease testified that when he came back to the car, he didn't have anything in his hands.

So I want to give you an opportunity to address the 404 of the evidence, because I'm somewhat concerned about that.

Yes. So with respect to the 404 of the evidence, the evidence came in solely because there was a determination that the defense had opened the door.

The defense did not open the door to evidence, the Facebook evidence.

The Facebook evidence consisted of some messages on the Scotty Truman email account.

On September 29, the detective was allowed to testify that in those messages, the individuals involved in the messages all unidentified were talking about quantities of drugs and prices.

There's no indication, but excuse me, the police did not get that Facebook evidence until several months later.

I think it was about three or four months later.

Your brief said seven months.

Okay, it may have been seven months.

And these are conversations that occurred before Mr. Skillin's death?

On September 29, I don't believe there was any specific testimony about the actual time frame.

But the police did not have this evidence on September 29 and September 30.

The cross-examination that the defense had done that led the court to make this ruling was about the police not doing a search of Mr. Pease's car on September 29, not getting and searching his phone on September 29.

So the fact that the police seven months later got this additional information had no bearing on why the police did not investigate Mr. Pease on September 29.

And that was the only thing that the questions by the defense had raised.

The state, I just want to make a comment about the state's argument.

In the state's harmless error argument, the state suggests that this error was not harmless because there was an alternative ground for admitting the evidence.

The state argues that under 404b, the evidence was admissible for knowledge.

The problem with that argument, first of all, it's not a harmless error factor.

But second, the court did address whether this was admissible under 404b.

And the court did that after a pretrial hearing, an extensive order was written by the court.

The court wrote another order denying the state's motion to reconsider that decision.

The court found two things, one or three things.

It wasn't intrinsic to the charged act.

It wasn't admissible for knowledge.

It had minimal probative value as to knowledge based on the state's argument.

And lastly, that the limited probative value of the evidence was substantially outweighed by the prejudice associated with this classic propensity evidence.

I don't think the state can show that the court unsustainably exercised its discretion when it found that the evidence was not admissible under 404b.

When your yellow light is on, how about harmless error before you?

Yeah, I don't think it's harmless.

I'm sorry, but can you address, because you didn't file a reply, can you address the state's argument that you can't argue in sufficiency because you haven't presented the court with the entire record?

Well, I think we resolved it.

I mean, the state had argued that because two exhibits were not transferred to the court, this court did not have a full record upon which to rule on the sufficiency issue.

First of all, the testimony at trial went through at length what was in those two exhibits.

But when I saw the state's argument, I moved to transfer the state agreed, sent it to my request to transfer those exhibits so you now have those.

So I think that eliminates that issue.

This is propensity evidence.

We have to be very careful, and this court has been very careful and very explicit about this.

We should be trying people on facts related to conduct alleged related to the charged crime, not propensity evidence.

The court here, by allowing this evidence to come in, allowed it to come in for the only reason it could have come in, which is propensity purpose.

The limiting instruction that the court gave did not cure that harm.

In fact, the limiting instruction, unfortunately, that the court gave led the jury to, it must have, if it followed the court's limiting instruction, it must have considered this evidence for a propensity purpose.

The limiting instruction said this evidence is only admitted to rebut a claim about the thoroughness of the police investigation.

The instruction went on to say you may not consider it for any other purpose, such as, for example, tending to prove that the defendant engaged in drug transactions with third parties unrelated to the case.

But to consider this evidence, to answer the question as to whether the police were thorough on September 29, the jury would only have to conclude or use this evidence to say because this account had statements about drug dealing to other people,

it must mean that Mr. Truman, through this account, was drug dealing to Mr. Skillan.

So the state's case was basically based upon cell phone calls between Mr. Skillan and Mr. Truman. Is that an accurate characterization? How did they connect it to? By virtue of the phone calls?

It was these Facebook messages. And I think they weren't phone calls. They were Facebook message calls. There were multiple calls made that were not answered, both before and after Mr. Pease picked up Mr. Skillan.

Right, but those calls were they made to Mr. Truman or do we not know that?

They were made with that Scotty Truman 24 Gmail account. And that's all we know.

I see my red light is on me.

Thank you very much.

Attorney Philan.

Attorney Baldrige.

May it please the court, Robert Baldrige and Pam Shreys.

They would like to first address the sufficiency argument and then turn into the open the door issue and then addressing harmless error.

In regard to the sufficiency of the evidence, the evidence showed that the victim messaged the defendant, dogged in the time between 11 a.m. and 12 p.m.

Virtually non-stop. He then had his friend drive him to a parking lot that he had no reason to be in other than it just happened to be next near where the defendant lived.

So what was the evidence connecting the defendant to this Facebook account? Just the names? Or did anybody say that this account was held by the defendant?

The biographical information matched up. I can't recall at the top of my head what exactly it was, but like the address checked out.

There's other names associated with the account.

And I don't recall any testimony at trial implying that this might not be the right account.

It more factored on the fact that slang was used, we never saw them directly together, not that this was someone else's account.

Presumably that information could have been used.

But the messages that we know came from the victim did not have content with regard to the defendant. Is that fair to say?

Well, there is no words. I'll give you $60 for some fentanyl. There was slang used. I'll give you $60 for a ticket, bro, or a long-distance line.

And the behavior, the urgency of the call, the virtually non-stop nature of it.

Well, we're talking about calls, and then we're talking about Facebook Messenger. Is that right?

I believe there are actually messages like calls through Facebook Messenger, but yes, there is phone calls, some were answered, some weren't, and there was also actually...

But we don't know anything about the content of any phone calls.

We do not know the actual contact of the phone call, but we knew they kept coming. There were messages that kept showing a certain amount of urgency.

I think his message is, time's not on my side. Just tell me how long, and then eventually I'll give you $60 for a ticket, and then the respond, I'm ready.

And based on the timeline, the victim would have been around the defendant's house. And just to explain that, it is true that Randall P. did testify that around 1130 is when he actually got there and they left.

Now that's just based on his memory. There's no record showing when he got there.

So if we just assume he slightly misremembered the time, the timeline does make sense.

A message was sent around 11, saying, I'm on my way. Come scoot me, it works to that effect.

P's remember they first went to Hannaford. That was about 15 to 20 minutes from his house.

The victim's scaling was in the Hannaford for 5 to 10 minutes.

And then they went to the parking lot at the art center, which is near the house.

So if we assume that it took about 20 to 30 minutes from those tasks to get to the parking lot, that would put both P's and the victim in the parking lot around 1126.

If he actually got there around closer to 11, then 1130.

So the timeline can be reconciled. And then when he would have been around the parking lot, he sent in the message, I'm on Winter Street.

The scaling then leaves the car. He's gone for around, P's remembers around 15 or 20 minutes.

But around 20 to 30 minutes, I think it's when he sends his message, I'll give you 60 for a ticket, and then there's a response, I'm ready.

The victim returns to the car, and he immediately starts setting off.

This urgency, and the urgency and the cause, the slang used, it adjusted behavior that day.

It is someone acting just like someone who's desperate to get a hold of his drug dealer and cannot get it from somewhere else.

Was there any evidence in the record explaining to the jury what the term ticket meant?

There wasn't any testimony along the lines of unfamiliar with this term. Ticket refers to fentanyl.

There was a lot of testimony that slang term is often used, that it changes, it's evolving.

And they try to be not exactly explicit with what they're referring to.

I understand your argument, but how does the evidence exclude the reasonable possibility that someone other than the defendant supplied the drug?

Right. Well, we need a reasonable theory under the evidence, and Leibniz will say it's not just any possible.

So, regarding to that he got it from Randall Pease, that would mean he's earnestly calling and messaging the defendant.

Even when getting close to his house, when he could have gotten it from Pease the whole time.

That is not a reasonable explanation.

The other explanation-

Is it reasonable to conclude that he needed a dose for later after work or during work, so he had a dose from Pease and he needed a second one?

How is that unreasonable?

The testimony from Alcaza, I believe was around four grams were still found.

And there was testimony that a phrase half a ticket or half a stick is a common amount purchased, which is about five grams.

Was there any testimony about $60 being a typical amount for a certain number of grams?

There was not, but he had not used up all the fentanyl at the time of his death because they found a significant amount in his wallet.

In regards to maybe he made it to Winter Street when he was trying to earnestly get a hold of the defendant and someone else provided to him,

that would require that there's someone else available to sell drugs in the same location when he was still, frankly, trying to get a hold of the defendant.

And I think it's important. There's phone calls or messages that were sent that would have occurred after the victim got out of the car.

But in regards to, I'll give you $60 for a ticket and I'm ready. Only three minutes pass since then.

And when he gets in the car, he immediately uses it.

So the reasonable inference is this is somebody who's earnestly trying to get fentanyl.

He's at one location where he can get it and he immediately takes it.

How does that exclude the reasonable possibility that he already had the drugs even before he met P's that day?

The reasonable, well, it's not reasonable that you're constantly calling someone to get about someone if you already have it.

Justice Coway just offered a reasonable proposition for that?

Yes, but he still had fentanyl available in just a one little baggy.

So if he's looking to, if he needs more to carry them over the second one, then there's no evidence of support that he's buying.

He doesn't have enough for his pre-work fentanyl use.

And he needs them more afterwards because there's still a significant amount after he takes it and he takes it right away.

What about the notion that there was no evidence that Richard Truman was anywhere near Winter Street at that time frame?

How do we exclude that he didn't have some kind of a shared account with a significant other or a partner in business that could have been the person that did the actual exchange of drugs for money?

Yes, there's a theory that someone else operates under Richard Truman.

No, Scotty Truman.

Or Scotty Truman.

Well, the Ulster County explains how he leaked it, like the biograph way of information.

So whether someone else got into his account, there's no evidence to support that theory and it's reasonable, reasonable inclusion.

It's not any possible theory inconsistent.

How was the switching gears here a little bit?

How was the evidence of the other Facebook messages admissible under the specific contradiction rule where those messages were not even discovered until the following April, some seven months later?

How does that have any bearing on whether the investigation around the time in September when this event occurred was thorough?

Right.

And before I answer Richard, just to clarify the record, I believe author Neto testified that it was November that he got the first Facebook account records in December that he got the records.

And not April.

I think that April confirmed a statement of the prosecutor made when there actually happened this actual bench conference about whether to reconsider the previous order excluding these messages.

In regards to health care relevant, the cross-examination exposed the police decisions not to search Randall Pease's car.

That would have left a jury the impression potentially that they could have investigated Pease further, but they instead targeted the defendant and provided more information along those lines.

That it was a thorough investigation.

They looked through Pease's phone and everything in his phone lined up to what Pease said, but when he eventually required the Facebook record, they showed discussions about sale of controlled drugs, quantity and slang.

But how does that go to whether the police adequately investigated Pease as a possible source of this at the time that the transaction took place?

It was more just the thoroughness investigation not to show that there was some reason why they didn't search his car at the time.

That was just off the counter with the first responder.

But that would still let the jury impression why didn't you target the defendant?

It was basically because we got these Facebook records.

When did Mr. Officer Neto apply for the warrant for those records?

I don't believe there's a date where he applied.

There is a date where he actually received them.

He received the first Facebook records from November.

That appeared to be an account that the defendant had, but there was only a message of like, is this the account you used?

So he looked at the Facebook account and the person who sent that message figuring, okay, maybe the defendant likely has multiple accounts.

And then when you look at the fate, that user's friends list, he saw an account that he thought belonged to the defendant.

Then he got those Facebook records and those mashed up of what he saw on the victim's phone.

And they also had the control sales on the sale to the third parties.

So are you disputing that the cross-examination of Neto was confined to the sufficiency of the investigation of P's?

Are you suggesting that the cross-examination challenged the sufficiency of the entire investigation?

Yeah, it was a challenged suspicion of the entire investigation.

There was information about not tracking cell phones and also just not.

And there was the previous cross-examination about not searching P's car.

So I would, yes, I think it was the entire investigation that was attacked, not just that one decision on September 2019 not to search P's car.

And regardless of the opening the door, it is important to remember it is a sustainable outside the discretion standard, not a denote issue.

Third is investigation is almost always relevant, so it's more of an issue is it relevant or outweighed by its unfair prejudice.

There was a limiting instruction that was only to be used for the limited purpose to provide a claim that the police investigation was not thorough.

Well, in the court's order on reconsideration, the pre-trial motion to exclude this evidence, the court wrote,

the court views the prejudices substantially outweighing the appropriate value,

a limiting instruction could not mitigate the unfair prejudice.

So how is that harmless error given that observation by the trial court?

Right, so I'll pivot to harmless error as well.

So the original order excluding it was this will show it's relevant to knowledge, but it will show propensity and that was incorrect.

So I would have an experience that lets them be familiar with drug terminology.

It doesn't show propensity, it just heard they had the experience that would allow them to acquire that knowledge.

That was also an order entered before the trial court had any opportunity to hear the actual cross-examination.

It was also an interlocutory order, so the trial court could have, the trial court didn't need the opening of the door issue to actually reconsider it.

Now that turned to a whole separate issue of whether it was unfair surprise, but that's not a final judgment.

In regard further to harmless error, this was a single sentence in a three-day trial.

It was not emphasized or discussed at all during closing argument.

The jury had already heard a significant amount of evidence that a drug deal did occur between September 20th and September 29th.

When you look at the victim's behavior, constantly calling the defendant.

After you go to a park, I had no reason to begin.

The response of I'm writing the return would mean use of fentanyl.

Frankly the victim's cage behavior, it is true that they never use explicit words to explain what they were doing,

but the reason why inference is that because they're doing something illegal.

Of course he's not going to tell his friend, I'm buying some drugs, please don't say anything more.

He wouldn't tell me anything or he wouldn't tell me to read and very much fits into the state's case.

I guess based on the evidence presented at trial, which is almost completely circumstantial,

I don't know how that displaces the trial court's original concern about the prejudicial nature of that evidence.

How does it?

Well the concern was just the third is an investigation was attacked.

This is all circumstantial evidence.

There was a lot of why didn't you do this, why you could have done that?

In the context of an entirely circumstantial case, isn't propensity evidence like this by nature prejudicial?

All evidence is prejudicial.

And wouldn't that be a substantial concern in an entirely circumstantial case to tip the balance and harmless error?

No, because that can also tilt both ways and I see my life.

If it's entirely circumstantial then the jury is going to wonder why didn't you look into these other potential suspects.

First it was important to state to explain that there was a limiting instruction as well.

And the jury is presumed to follow the trial court's instruction.

So that reason we ask that you affirm the conviction.

Thank you.

Attorney Pellin.

The case is submitted.

Thank you, counsel.

Court invites counsel.
