Good afternoon, Senator McCandless. I understand you reserve one minute for a rebuttal.

Yes. Please proceed.

Good afternoon, may it please the Court, Roy McCandless, for the Appellants, Fred Potter, N135, and SS, LLC.

We are here to ask the Court to overturn determination by the Code Administrator and Conqueror to reclassify the uses of the carriage house,

which he determined to be for an indoor commercial recreational facility on the second floor

and a public assembly for the first floor as unlawful and unreasonable.

The determination is unlawful and unreasonable because, first, the uses that the carriage house had been put to were approved by the Zoning Board of Appeal in the variances that were granted.

Second, the determination of the Code Enforcement Officer as affirmed by the ZBA and the Superior Court was based upon speculation on a fear of potential overuse where there was no evidence of any excessive overuse of those granted variances.

And finally, Mr. Potter relied upon the assurances and the assistance of the Concord Zoning Code Administrator consistent with the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance to work with him,

locked step to make sure that the plans were fulfilled and put into practice as had been approved.

And it eviscerated his vested rights when the new Code Enforcement Officer basically reclassified the uses that had been approved as the two that they claim on appeal should be affirmed.

Some background, this was a very complicated project requiring many variances dealing with the St. Peter's Parish campus that had served the community for decades long before the Zoning Ordinance had been fulfilled or had been approved, excuse me.

There were two historic structures that desired to be preserved by the City of Concord.

The mansion and the carriage house built in 1890, that was the residence of Governor Rollins.

It involved an innovative developer, Mr. Chorlian, very well known in the community for doing things that are way out of the box.

And this is another one of his projects that was way out of the box requiring thinking way out of the box.

It involved Mr. Potter, who has legal business and nonprofit experience and shareable interests, particularly in this neighborhood, given that the business is the owns right on the same block.

And it also involved the City that was looking and supporting efforts to think out of the box, to implement the kind of ideas that Mr. Chorlian and Mr. Potter were putting forth that didn't fit into the Zoning Ordinance,

like putting it around the peg into a square hole, but they were willing to work with them in order to bring that about to benefit the community.

Was the issue really more about the race simulators and the golf system or simulator that was put in there more than anything?

That certainly was one of the issues, Your Honor.

And the question of whether or not that was a fitness room or not, but I think that's a red herring, frankly, because here's what happened.

You've got this pocket neighborhood that Mr. Chorlian was proposing to tear down the church and put it in the pocket neighborhood.

That doesn't exist in the Zoning Ordinance.

So they had to make an incredible number of variances to allow that to happen.

The mansion, the concept there was live work, you will not find in the Ordinance the live work use.

They made that up and they're very honest about that because they wanted it to work to have people who were actually living in that building as well as working in that building.

What was approved with regard to the carriage house, that issue, was the use of a community room that concept does not exist in the Zoning Ordinance,

but that was what was approved by the Zoning Board in that 54-18, September 2018 hearing.

And in that context, the Co-Enforcement Officer was working hand in glove with Mr. Potter and Mr. Chorlian to bring before the board these novel concepts

and get the variances that they believed they needed in order to make this project work.

It was a very expensive project.

They were just talking about putting aside Mr. Chorlian's pocket neighborhood

and talking about refurbishing these beautiful old and unfortunately falling into disrepair because of the Catholic Church was moving on.

They were consolidating their parishes and these buildings, as beautiful as they were, were in great disrepair.

And the budgets that Mr. Potter demonstrated and showed to the City of Concord showed it was a $2 million or $3 million investment.

So is it in this position that the race simulators and the golf simulator fit within the approval for the community room?

Your Honor, the community room is on the first floor.

The second floor is a professional building, a professional office space. Wasn't that the variance that was granted?

Not with the carriage house, Your Honor.

The second floor in the mansion is where the offices are.

The basement of the mansion is one of the live spaces and the third floor of the mansion are other live spaces for six residents, essentially.

It's the carriage house. The carriage house is behind this building.

It's smaller than the building.

Mr. Chorlin had proposed it to be a community home or community center or community building for the pocket neighborhood.

They could use it.

The City said we would prefer that the same owner, the same person, own both the mansion and the carriage house to keep them together.

That's where the second hearing came in in September of 2018.

And it's at that hearing where they were to approve the carriage house, the use of the carriage house in conjunction with the mansion.

They needed the variances.

And if you read the variance that was approved, Your Honor, it basically says the Z-Bit grants your variances to articles 28-2-4-J-slash-K.

The table of principle, accessory uses to permit the use of an existing building for a community room, fitness rooms,

comma, and garage slash storage as accessory uses to an office and live-work use, comma, where such uses are not permitted.

It's our contention that that finding, that determination approved the use of the carriage house first of all as a community room.

Because that's what it says.

And the second floor for the fitness rooms.

That's what it says.

And that covers weddings.

Can I do events?

And then having golf and racing simulators upstairs?

Yes, Your Honor.

Because it's this, the community room is primarily, here's the other community rooms, primarily used by non-profits.

In front of the ZBA there were, I think, 47, but they rent, they offered for rent.

Community room, for instance.

Correct.

And there was one way with four people, Your Honor.

What's the governor's club, by the way?

The governor's, okay, the governor's center was the moons by which Mr. Potter was implementing the approval for this limited use to the public of the carriage house for the community room and for the fitness rooms on the upstairs.

No one could just walk off the, off the street and rent these facilities.

So you have a fee or something?

A fee, exactly.

If you pay that fee, then you have a right to ask to reserve that space because it's not, you just don't walk off the street and use these facilities.

I wouldn't say, I mean, it seems like it's offering it to the public.

That's something different than it is.

That's true.

And as Mr. Walker testified in his affidavit paragraph number seven, he's the one who specifically writes these approvals.

I mean, he's the one that writes what the motion's going to be and then what the approval is.

And as he testified, when you look at what was granted, it's a variance to article 28 to F4J slash K.

J is a variance for principal uses.

K are the accessory uses.

As he testified it, we needed the variance under the principal uses because the carriage house was going to be used as limited rentals to those not associated with 135 North Straight Street building.

Wasn't there an issue with regard to parking in the variances?

Yes, Your Honor.

The issue was raised because you needed to get a variance for the parking.

And those variances were approved.

But weren't they approved with a specific thought in mind of what the use would be?

Correct. And was this these uses, Your Honor?

The fact that there's going to be a very limited access to this building to the public for community uses, the community service for nonprofits to come in and use the first floor room to have their meetings.

What if somebody had a wedding with 50 guests or 100 guests? Where would they park?

The testimony was, Your Honor, that the wedding was for people.

No, what I'm saying, in the future.

And that practically speaking, the carriage house cannot accommodate more than 50 people.

And the use never got close to that, but that was the notion. You're not going to use that facility for more than 50 people.

But wouldn't the city have an interest in ensuring that they're not approving a use that would create a parking problem?

Exactly. And there was no evidence of any parking problem.

It's very clear, if you look at the hearing minutes, the intervenors said basically there has been no problems.

We're concerned about future excessive use.

There was no evidence. That's why the finding of both the ZBA and the Superior Court are erroneous.

There's no factual basis for their findings that this was, that the upstairs commercial immigration facility, number one.

Or number two, that the first floor community use is anything like a, you know, a public facility.

Or I don't know what the term is to escape me. Excuse me.

There was no evidence of that because there was zero evidence of any parking problems.

They came in there because they were concerned about, they saw some advertisements and they thought,

Oh, is this going to be a problem? Not that it is a problem.

What really happened was Mr. Potter was implementing the approvals that had been given and it was operating fine.

There was no evidence of any problems, parking-wise, noise-wise, no complaints.

The neighborhood supported. There was evidence that the property values had increased because of the developments that took place here.

So there's, what happened was you had a ZBA, well first the code enforcement officer, then ZBA,

and the Superior Court affirming these reclassifications to use as that number one didn't exist.

But they were the very thing, he was doing the very things that had been approved by the ZBA implementing it in a very, very way.

I still don't see how race simulators or golf simulators fall within the original approval.

Well, you are, it's a, fitness rooms, using it for exercise. Golf is certainly a sport and can be used for fitness.

And since it's a golf simulator, two people can up there.

Okay, so set aside the golf simulator, how is a race simulator a fitness?

Well, a race simulator, it's, I use it, but it's very, very physically demanding to use it.

I mean, racing is a sport. It's the most popular sport in the United States, as far as I understand.

So golf might be a sport, a recreation, but if you're walking, you're not walking with a simulator.

You're standing there and you're hitting a golf ball.

I understand.

It's not a workout room.

It's like this year, if you're thinking about it, if you have a small offer and you want to get away for a retreat,

you want to have a meeting that's off-site, off, away from your offices so you can talk to your partners.

This is a place where you can come and make a reservation and rent the space for the force of the Lord.

And when you take a break, your folks can go upstairs and recreate.

You can hit a golf ball. You can do a racing simulator. It's like team building in that regard.

So my son was having a bachelor party and decided he wanted to use that facility on the second floor with eight buddies.

Could he do it?

He would be eligible to do it, but he wouldn't have a right to do it.

He would have to, number one, pay a fee.

Pay a fee, but also deal with Mr. Potter and his business in that regard and saying,

is this consistent with the community, the supporting kind of uses and the accessory kind of use?

What about the live-work space and the mansion that was being rented out on a full-time basis?

So that issue has been already resolved between the parties, Your Honor.

Absolutely.

We're not here on fighting about the live-work issue.

I didn't hear any reference to your taking claim. What's the status of that?

Well, Your Honor, the taking claim, it comes to the notion that Mr. Potter lied on.

I understand that. Did you raise it below?

Yes, you did.

Where would I find that in the record?

It's going to be in our memorandum, the pre-trial memorandum that we put in and then the, well,

November 23, 2025, Your Honor, as well as the post-hearing memorandum in December.

That's in there.

And I believe we also raised it in the motion for reconsideration when we were asking for

a hearing on the issue in that regard.

Just another sort of procedural question.

When did you raise the issue of discovery with respect to a stop-all?

It seems like it was right on the eve of that.

It was right on the eve, Your Honor, because frankly, I was looking at the record.

I've never seen a more replete record in below.

Mr. Potter's a sophisticated lawyer.

Salloway and Hollis was his law firm.

Sophisticated lawyers, you know, there were, and if you look at the history,

he working with the lawyers documented indeed these variances were in place

before he actually purchased the property from Structural and invested the, you know,

two, three million dollars in this.

He worked hard to do that, so I thought the record was very replete with regard to that.

Thank you, Attorney McAnlis.

You've reserved one minute.

Thank you.

The appellees are splitting time.

Attorney Volte.

Yes.

I understand you're going to take 12 minutes.

Yes, Your Honor.

Thank you.

For the record, Chris Volte, Donny Utakritsch and Dela on behalf of the interveners,

the owners of the pocket neighborhood units.

The ZBA and Judge Kissinger got it right.

This is a case of develop creep that you claim you get approval for one use

and you spread out and change what it's about.

Your question at the very end, Chief, is the real one,

because those issues of taking, those issues of fear,

those issues of we got this previously,

you will note that there's no reference to any of that through the certified record

or in the brief.

You look at the motion for re-hearing followed by Attorney McAnlis's predecessor,

Kelly Ovid Puck.

None of that is in there.

That is the controlling document for the ZBA appeal coming up,

pursuant to 677-3.

That's the limited pool that you have of grounds because the statute expressly says

no ground not raised in that document can be brought forward to the court.

Could they have brought a separate equitable action?

Could have.

They also could have brought, made a request for discovery,

made a request for additional hearing time before we had the hearing

in front of Judge Kissinger.

Because we're all, as you may recall, we get a notice from the court.

You've been given 15 minutes a side or you've been given 30 minutes a side.

They didn't ask for more time.

At no point in time in the 11 months this case was proceeding before the Superior Court,

did they ask one interrogatory, one request from anything.

There is no discovery that they asked for.

For them to come in now as claiming with their motion,

their pre-trial motion that was filed literally about an hour before our hearing,

that the transcript shows Judge Kissinger didn't have a chance to read.

We didn't have a chance to read is when they first raised this.

But more importantly, I think for all of you,

Attorney McCandless admits during that hearing that there is no basis for municipal stop-up.

Because he's saying there is no misrepresentation by city representative.

That is the key.

So this is a red herring truly.

One of the things that you raised, Justice Conway, was the parking issue.

That parking issue was a very big concern.

By the use of the man's for offices and live workspace,

they should have had 50 parking spaces.

They were granted variants to have 14.

And the record was replete.

They did that based on Mr. Chorlian's representation.

That this was, the carriage house was going to be ancillary to the folks that were already there in the mansion.

So it is definitely one where I urge you to look at the old Forrester v. Hennaker case on what is ancillary.

And this is a spreading out the arguments by Attorney McCandless today,

that they're saying they were approved for this use.

They were not approved for community use.

That was at the time originally to be the community room for the pocket neighborhood.

Then they decide that they want to keep the two buildings together.

And the ancillary use becomes ancillary to the mansion only.

There was never any reference to renting to third parties, to having this be a wedding venue.

To claim that there was no violation, no traffic, no noise, no anything.

My clients found out about this when they see a sign go up for a wedding venue type of thing.

And they ask about it.

There's no variance for that sign text ever.

There is no approval for that use ever.

And they get it in the bud, frankly.

Keep in mind also, the carriage house is renovated in 2020.

Many of us were dealing with something else at that time.

And not a lot of gatherings were happening at the beginning of COVID.

This is one where we believe the record stands cleanly in support of the ZBA who had years of experience with this project.

If you will remember, St. Peter's Church was in the middle of the block.

The parish house was behind it and the parking lot was behind that.

This mansion that we're talking about, the governor's mansion is on the corner of church in North State Street.

It's carriage house, the original barn for the mansion is behind it.

No weddings happened in the carriage house.

They happened in the sanctuary and the celebration is in the parish hall.

We all know that.

You know, it was run down. It was at best a barn.

The original plan was to have there to be parking spaces in the carriage house.

Instead of carriages, you had the horse's carriage.

And to have some space above.

That changed with the developer change.

But at no time was this carriage house ever approved for community room to the public, for rental to the public, for these uses that they're now desiring.

Yes, sir.

It was a community room for the pocket neighborhood residents.

It was originally intended to be, but that changed when it got caught.

So when the two buildings were merged, the carriage house went over to the mans.

Correct.

That use went away?

Correct.

I see.

Correct.

And so those residents don't use, don't have access?

Correct.

Correct.

Now their parking, their driveway comes between the two.

The access from Church Street to the bulk of the pocket neighborhood units come between those two buildings.

That's why their concern over parking was so important.

They didn't want their access clogged.

And they also didn't want people parking in front of their garages, which back up on an internal driveway that is accessed through there.

One of the things that was mentioned was the city knew about everything.

The city approved this and that's that and the other thing.

Remember, Attorney McCandus' brief gives no citations in the certified record to such events.

They do claim that the city council knew what was going on and giving them a tax break under 79E.

Keep in mind the Buxton v. Exeter case, that is only the ZBA can grant a variance.

Only the ZBA can grant a special exception.

And they know what they did and there are a number of lawyers on that board and they've been there for a while.

They had long experience with this project and knew what had been approved and knew what had not been.

So we would argue the record cleanly supports the ZBA and Judge Kissinger.

They got it right and I'm happy to answer any other questions and I'll save some time for my colleague from the city solicitor's office.

Thank you, Attorney Bolton.

Thank you.

Good afternoon, Danielle Passick.

I am the city solicitor for the City of Concord.

I'm happy to take any questions that you may have.

I would just ask the court to refer back to the variances that were received by the applicant because they are very clear.

And on Appendix page 45, the variance for the carriage house says that it was to permit the use of an existing building for a community room,

fitness room, and garage storage as an accessory use to an office and live workspace.

And the key word in that is as an accessory use.

And there is no question that many office buildings will have a community room or conference room that they use regularly,

or fitness rooms that they might provide to employees.

And that was always the intent of that space, was an accessory use to people living and working in the neighboring mansion,

which was basically an office building and it had live, work rooms.

That changed significantly when all of a sudden on the website,

the fitness room was being advertised to the general public as having race simulators and golf simulators that could be rented.

That is very different and I would think it's fair to say that most office buildings don't have simulators that are rented to the general public.

And similarly, conference rooms. We understand that there may be an occasional after hours mixer where people from the general public are coming in,

but it's limited to those types of specific events, which is very different than an office building using one of their conference rooms

to suddenly be advertised for weddings and other sorts of venues where the parking restrictions are going to be a lot more intense.

Obviously, during the previous variances when the applicant came in,

over and over the zoning board of adjustment was told that they should be permitted to reduce the parking from 50 spaces down to I think ultimately it was agreed upon.

How many parking spaces are required for a commercial indoor recreational facility?

For that, there are parking tables that we have. I don't know if I have them in front of me,

but I think it's one parking spot for every 50 square feet of area.

And I think that this particular area has, I don't want to, maybe 400 or 500 square feet, so probably 10 parking spots.

And certainly, if first they need, first of all, the applicant would need to go get a variance to have this as a principal use.

And then if they thought that there was too many parking spots needed, then they could go ask for a variance.

Too few, in other words.

Yes, if they thought there was too many required by the ordinance, they could ask to lower the number of parking spots.

Excuse me.

That's a remedy for the appellants.

It is, absolutely.

And same thing with the wedding venue.

They would first need to get it approved through a variance to have it be an events facility.

And then obviously there's going to be many more parking spots than 12 required for that type of facility.

And they would need to go and ask for a variance.

And they did do that step.

They later on, after this, I think, case was filed, they did go seek a variance for an indoor recreational use facility

and an event facility.

And it was denied by the zoning board of adjustment because of the intensity of use on that particular lot in that zoning district.

If there are no other questions, I will rest on our brief.

And I thank you for your time.

Thank you very much, Attorney Pech.

Attorney McLean.

Thank you, Your Honor.

To answer your question, Justice Cowley, the golf simulators were in the plans from the very beginning.

So there are no surprises on that.

And the racing simulators were part of the plan presented both to Mr. Walker and to Mr. Walsh at the city with regard to the 79E application.

The notion that the carriage house was solely to be something used by the residents of the mansion makes no sense.

In the March 2020 application that Mr. Potter brought to amend the variances when he needed to move the parking out of the garage.

He specifically noted that this relates to the community use in the carriage house.

And it was necessary for its functional, in order to make it functional as far as to afford to be able to do these renovations.

Otherwise, we're going to have to tear the building down.

And that was understood that he had to use that building to generate income.

The first plan was for his business to be the tenant.

He's not going to be generating income from his own business.

So the only place that was going to be generating the income was the carriage house.

That was understood.

That was understood at the time.

And that was what was placed in front of the city in the 79E application for the tax relief with proformas showing the income that was to be generated by the carriage house.

Thank you very much.

Thank you Your Honor.

The case is submitted.

Take a brief recess.

Please rise.
