This is case 1224-0066, State of New Hampshire v. Gene L. Zarella.

Good afternoon. It appears that the intervener and the state are splitting time.

Yes, sir. Okay. Attorney Vincenanzo, are you going first?

Yes. Okay. Please proceed. Thank you.

May it please the court. I'm David Vincenanzo for the intervener, KR.

It is my hope in the short time that I have to spend almost all of it addressing your questions.

But I have a brief point to make first about the issue of whether or not – kind of a threshold issue of whether or not there is a federal overlay here of due process protection that is involved in the analysis of Gagne and its extension in the Cressy decision.

I want to refer the court to the U.S. Supreme Court's decision in Jaffe v. Redmond in which it said in recognizing a psychotherapist privilege the following.

We reject the balancing component of the privilege implemented by the lower court and a small number of states.

Making the promise of confidentiality contingent upon a trial judge's later evaluation of the relative importance of the patient's interest in privacy and the evidentiary need for disclosure would eviscerate the effectiveness of the privilege.

An uncertain privilege is a little better than no privilege at all.

Those are the words of Justice Stevens and he wrote the decision for the 7 to Supreme Court.

That was 1996.

Well, before that year and for years afterwards, for about ten years, I myself was running federal prosecutive functions both in this district as well as in D.C. and another state.

And never once in the entire – indeed hundreds, maybe even thousands of cases I supervised was there ever such a thing as a Cressy motion.

I have been practicing for 40 years in the federal criminal system.

There is no such thing as a Cressy motion.

Those are my anecdotes and they certainly don't take the place of all the cases that we have cited in our brief and Mr. Galgeri has cited in his brief showing that there is no federal due process right implicated in this matter.

The fact is that the federal courts and the federal criminal system has never extended discovery rights under Brady or Ritchie or their progeny like Giglio, Bagley, Kyle v. Whitley.

They have never untapped any subsequent decision from the basic holding of Brady, which is that potentially exculpatory material must be disclosed if it is in the possession of the government.

So are you arguing that Gagne and Gerard wrongly decided independent of the new constitutional amendment?

Not Gagne, your honor.

I believe that Gagne involved – Gagne is clearly within the history of Brady.

Brady, again, was the ensemble decision in the 60s, adding an exception to the general rule that there was no constitutional right to discovery in criminal cases.

That is still the general rule.

The exception is Brady, but Brady only applies to material that is within the possession of the government.

And in Gagne or Gagne, the material sought was in the possession of the government.

It was in the possession of DCYF, which was doing a parallel investigation to an AFSA investigation being conducted by the county attorney's office.

And the Gagne court appropriately relied on Pennsylvania v. Ritchie, the Supreme Court case in 1989, which said that Brady is limited only to material in the possession of the government, but it can be a little bit broader than merely the prosecution team.

If there is a parallel investigation by, let's say, a prosecution-adjacent government agency like DCYF, then the right extends that far.

So Gagne was not wrongly decided in my view. I think Gagne was correctly decided.

The problem is when Gagne made the leap without explanation, without any apparent justification from seeking potentially expelatory information in the possession of the government to basically in the possession of any other person in any other part of the world.

It's Cressy that made that leap.

Cressy made the leap.

Are you arguing Cressy should be overruled?

I don't need it. It doesn't have to be overruled. I know that's always a difficult thing to ask a court.

But I think that Article 2B would effectively overrule it if it's applied in the way that we have suggested.

I don't think it has to be, I think, effectively, if you interpret Part 1 Article 2B to actually be a fundamental right of privacy in private individuals and privileged information.

I think effectively Cressy is overruled. I think it's two sides of the same coin.

You can approach it from the Part 1 Article 2B side and do it that way, or you can actually go back and say, you know, Cressy, we're not sure why we did what we did in Cressy.

I think, though, there's a reason why the court should take a look at it, because it is dealing with the constitutional right in that case in due process.

And generally speaking, the reputation and respect for the court and for the Constitution is not served by opinions construing the Constitution that do not explain themselves,

that do not actually show clearly a credible or a very arguable interpretation of the Constitution.

If you recall in Cressy, the language was, whether it's government, whether it's just any private party, it's a distinction without a difference.

That's how the court wrote it personally, you know, respectfully.

I suggest that that phraseology and that kind of rationale is a little too flip and a little too dismissive to be credible to people who are actually worried and concerned about how the Constitution should be interpreted and whether the court is properly doing so.

And it's not just the opinion of the judges who happen to be in front of it and deciding the case.

So I think you should take a look at it. You don't have to in order for our position to prevail.

Part one article. I'm sorry, Judge, were you trying to interrupt me?

I understand your point in the federal context about Ritchie not being extended beyond government records.

There are state cases, Supreme Courts, that have extended that.

There are. It's a minority, as the Jaffe case pointed out. It's a very small minority.

Is there a state other than Wisconsin which has reversed itself that you know of?

Yes, Indiana, in the Crisis Connection case, and there are others that I believe they're cited in our brief, Your Honor.

And the Wisconsin case is very similarly presented to where we are here.

We have a history of a case that said basically without explanation.

Due process should allow, it's not just government files, it's anybody's files anywhere.

And you know that, it's important because the Article 15 is part of the Bill of Rights.

And this court has a long history of saying that the Bill of Rights has a very limited and extremely important function.

And the function is to serve as a bulwark of the individual against the state.

What Cressy did, and what the Wisconsin court was correcting in Johnson, was that no longer it was just a bulwark against the state.

I mean, what due process is interpreted in Cressy to mean that one private citizen now had the ability to raid, go into another private citizen's privilege files and pull out information.

That had never been done before.

It truly is an anomaly in the discourse jurisprudence, and of course the federal jurisprudence has never gone there, probably for reasons that I'm describing.

Thank you, Attorney Vincenanzo, Attorney Galdieri.

Oh, I'm sorry. Thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you, Your Honor. And may it please the court. My name is Anthony Galdieri. I represent the state.

Part 1, Article 2B, changes the test to obtain a victim's private, privileged, mental health or medical records for in-camera review.

It grants the victim a fundamental right to live free from government intrusion into that information, a right that now stands on at least equal footing with any state-based due process right a criminal defendant may have to obtain those records for use in his criminal case.

Would that right extend to a criminal defendant that's being investigated by the state?

Well, in terms of, so we do have cases in Ray, a search warrant of the medical records of CT, where if the state wants to get privileged information, it must meet, that is privileged under the medical records, it must meet the essential need test.

So do those cases go the way of Cressy? Is that still good law?

No, I think what happens in these cases is, I think what this court's case law recognizes that implicates persons trying to get access to privileged information for use in litigations is that the essential need test applies.

It applies under the statutes at issue here because they're put on par with the attorney-client privilege and the analysis is either waiver or essential need.

And baked into the essential need test is the requirement to make a compelling justification. Compelling justification, that's usually what you need to overcome a fundamental right.

So I wanted to ask you about that, that essential need is sufficient to meet the protections of Article 2B.

I think essential need is sufficient to take them in for in-camera review if you meet the essential need test. Yes, because you have to make a compelling justification, which could be that you will be deprived of access to a fair trial.

That's what this court said in the Desclose case.

And we get there through CT and pain, is that fair to say?

I think you could get there through CT and pain. I think you could also get there through Desclose, through the analysis there where you're also testing unavailability of the records.

But it would require on the front end, it would require on the front end that criminal defendants make an enhanced showing.

And that just say, I know that the victim has been to therapy and may have spoken about this.

They have to make a more particularized showing, something that's more enhanced, that would allow the essential needs standard to be-

Has such a particularized showing been made in this case?

Well, you know, I suppose, I think that the defense and the intervener know the facts and the records better than I do at this stage.

I could foresee in this case a good faith argument being made by defense counsel that there would be essential need, that there would be a compelling need in this case.

And that the records they're seeking may be unavailable from another source.

So I don't think that the essential need test is impossible to meet or too difficult to meet.

I think it strikes a fair and reasonable balance between the state constitutional rights that are at issue.

Is it the state's position that essential needs applies in the case of the privilege documents, but then the reasonable substantial probability standard of 173C applies in the context of crisis center documents?

Is that-

Yes, I think you-

Yes, that is correct, Your Honor.

I think what you-

I think you're looking at the legislative enactments and how the legislature has balanced now these policy considerations.

Are those couture-ness for constitutional purposes? I mean, are they the same thing?

Well, I-

I mean, they'd be applying two different standards to protect the same right, as I understand your argument.

Well, we would be saying where the legislature has put a certain privilege on par with the attorney-client privilege against a background of knowing what it takes to get to that information,

that that legislative judgment should prevail, where the legislature has created a privilege for other specific records, rape crisis counseling records.

They've created a procedure there to access those records that I think is- they've balanced in the fine, but against these rights and is appropriately protected there and is entitled to deference.

So, I think what the end result of Part 1 Article 2b is, is that the standard has to be raised above Gagne.

I think-

You can't have two different standards. I mean-

Well, you could have different privileges that certainly have different standards to get access to the privilege material. Privileges can be a creature of statute.

Do we import all of the attorney-client doctrine into the essential needs or the privilege records analysis? I mean, for instance, ad-issue waiver?

Well, I think there could be, yes, there could be waiver issues. And I think you would have to look at that. I mean, the court articulated that in State v. Doyle in the competency context in a criminal case.

Um, so I do think if it's on par with the attorney-client privilege, you're going to look at, and you could look at first, whether there's been a waiver, and if there hasn't, second, whether there is essential need.

I think it's important in these cases, though, especially, that the court exercised its supervisory powers to make it clear to trial courts that they need to give victims or witnesses who are the targets, whose information is the target of these subpoenas, notice and an opportunity to be heard.

Am I correct that in this matter, the complainant never received notice at the outset?

That's how I understand the record, that the complainant didn't receive notice, perhaps on more than one occasion, that records were being pursued.

Is that compliant with the Bill of Rights?

Um, I don't think that that probably complies with the Bill of Rights.

I think that that probably doesn't comport, um, you know, in the Payne case, for example, the court set forth a procedure for grand jury subpoenas where the state is seeking privilege and information.

And one of the requirements is that you give notice and an opportunity to be heard to the person whose records are sought so they can come in and contest the matter.

Um, and I think that has to be made clear to trial courts below because it seems all too frequent that, um, that victims are not getting, or witnesses are not getting notice, uh, of these things.

Um, I also think it's important to consider, particularly for victims, that they receive appointed, uh, counsel or the opportunity to receive appointed counsel.

Victims in particular should not be forced to defend pro se their constitutional privacy rights and their statutory privileges against their alleged perpetrator's counsel.

I think it's very unfair to be forcing victims into that position.

And I think that runs contrary to the Victims' Bill of Rights and the obligations that the Victims' Bill of Rights imposes on courts to treat victims with fairness, uh, in respect for their safety, their dignity, their privacy throughout the criminal justice system.

Um, and victims and witnesses are provided an opportunity for appointed counsel when their Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination is at stake.

And we call that a Richards hearing below in, in the lower courts.

An appointed counsel, um, can, uh, safeguard all of those rights.

And in some of these cases, it may not be beyond the pale that the way the defendant has framed their motion for in-camera review suggests that there's Fifth Amendment rights at stake.

Um, so...

Do you see that opportunity, the appointment of counsel as coming under the new constitutional provision or is that already in existence under the Victims' Bill of Rights?

Well, I, I, I think I would see it as an, an exercise of this court's supervisory of powers that can emanate from Part 1 Article 2B and from the Victims' Bill of Rights.

But I think it's particularly important in these cases because counsel for the victim can adequately assert and defend those rights, can review the records that are sought without breaching the privileges,

can litigate an essential need standard or a heightened standard, tender a privilege log to the court and the parties if that would be helpful, um, can help narrow the universe of records that have to be reviewed in-camera,

and can actually provide informed argument about those records.

None of this presently occurs below.

What occurs below is the trial court gets them and in a vacuum almost assumes the role or has to assume these competing roles as advocate for the victim and the defense attorney and evaluating these records,

and none of the counsel have seen the records to be able to make reasoned argument to help the court.

Um, so...

Attorney Claudio, you already red lights on?

Yes, with that I would conclude. Thank you, Your Honor.

Okay, I would state the Intervenor of Reserve for three minutes.

Attorney Christine.

Attorney Christine.

Attorney Christine.

Attorney Joseph Johnson Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice and may it please the court.

Attorney Joseph Johnson My name's William Christie and I represent Gene Zareller in this matter.

Attorney Joseph Johnson The trial court correctly determined that with the passage of Part I and Article IIB,

that the test first adopted over 30 years ago by this court in State v. Godhead remains the appropriate test to determine both in-camera review

and to determine whether confidential records should be produced to a criminal defendant,

because that test balances both the privacy rights that exist in those records with a defendant's right to due process in a fair trial.

As pointed out, the Gagne test was reaffirmed by this court two years after the amendment was adopted in State v. Girard,

and three years later this court has begun to adopt Article II being its orders regarding the Gagne test.

It's a workable test that has worked well for over 30 years, and this case also demonstrates why.

Well, we've never confronted this question before, and in fact our orders say rights under Part I Article IIb, if any.

Understood, but my point being that those orders have been carried out by superior courts that follow these court's orders, including in this case,

and it demonstrates how that process still works well in the Gagne test to this day.

Hasn't the bell been rung in this case already, given the fact that records have been reviewed in camera?

They are in fact in possession of the government, and a trial court has indicated that there's information that needs to be disclosed.

The trial court has made detailed factual findings that based upon our motion, which was, by the way, assented to by the State below.

All the arguments you heard from Attorney Galdieri, none of which were raised below.

The State agreed to continue the trial so we could obtain these records.

But isn't it true that the complainant wasn't aware of that at the time that the State assented?

That's an assertion by Attorney Vizinanzo. There's nothing in the record to support that. That was not our information at the time.

In fact, she was interviewed by the county attorney's office with some of the records in this case before this motion was filed.

So it's in the record. She was interviewed with confidential records shown to her by the county attorney's office before we filed the motion that's the subject of this appeal.

So I disagree that she didn't have notice.

So she shared that information with the county attorney's office?

The confidential records?

I'm sorry, I'm sorry, Justice Dunderman?

She shared the confidential records with the county attorney's office?

No. We, some of the records that we, we obtained records in three steps in this case.

One was from Concord Hospital, excuse me, one was from her initial counseling session where she made the disclosure.

And that those records contradicted what she said in the disclosure and what she told to the police were radically different things.

And there's no dispute about those records?

Nothing. We then obtained records from the DCYF and from the family court matter that had in the previous investigation of Mr. Zareller.

And there were additional contradictory information from those records that were disclosed, including a recantation of the first set of charges in this case.

She was then told the county attorney's office she had been hospitalized at Concord Hospital.

We obtained those records, which obtained such a radically different narrative of events that the county attorney's office felt they needed to re-interview her.

At that time, they showed her the records, the confidential records, or at least discussed them with her in her interview.

And she initially denied she said any of those things, and then she admitted she did say them and tried to explain them.

That's what caused the court to say that we needed to, that we filed these motions for the additional records that are at issue here.

And you're correct, the trial court has made detailed factual findings that there's additional statements in there under the Garnier test that need to be disclosed so the defendant can have a fair trial.

That is the record in this case.

Is Cressy consistent with Ritchie?

So, Ritchie's a red herring.

In Ritchie, the records in Ritchie, Ritchie itself isn't a red herring, but the arguments being made here, with all due respect, are.

In Ritchie, the records were in the position of the government entity.

However, Ritchie is not dependent upon, the custodian is, the Ritchie decision is not dependent upon the custodian of the records.

Ritchie is dependent upon due process, that the defendant had a due process right to obtain those records in order to have a fair trial.

So your reading of Ritchie is just, it was, any limitation is just based on the facts before the court at the time.

Correct. And Ritchie, the U.S. Supreme Court has declined to take cases that have either tried to expand or narrow that exception, and has not dealt with that since Ritchie was decided.

Recognizing that there is some debate below among state courts at least.

Exactly. And some states, like New Hampshire, are very clear that it's a distinction without a difference.

Other states, like the recent Wisconsin decision, are different, and the Supreme Court has not attempted to resolve that debate at all.

So, for that reason, Ritchie is not applicable. And also, in its reply brief in this case, we believe the state misapprehends our position.

We never took the position at any stage of this litigation that Ritchie says it applies to records in the hands of a non-governmental entity.

We cited Ritchie the same way that this court has cited Ritchie over the years to say it demonstrates, at least in the federal constitution, there's a due process concern here.

And that is consistent with how this court has ruled for over 30 years. And in our brief, I think we have something like a two, two and a half page string site of cases which in a variety of different contexts have cited the Garnier test without dissent, without a suggestion that it is somehow the inapplicable test in New Hampshire.

Would the test under 173c or the essential needs test fail to protect a defendant's federal constitutional rights?

I believe so. I mean, I think this court's order below, the trial court's order below, demonstrates why Garnier remains the appropriate test.

And the trial court made the finding that applying that the problem with the essential needs test in this context is that the defendant, a criminal defendant, does not have the resources available to him to make that showing that there is something in these records that you essentially need, to paraphrase.

And so that's different from the in-raise CT and petition-to-paying cases where the state, with its resources, conduct a wide-reaching investigation and then go to the court at that point in time and say,

we've tried everything else, we've tried subpoena power, we've tried search warrants, and there is something in this confidential record that we absolutely need and so we satisfy that test.

A defendant, especially an indigent defendant, would not have the resources to develop that record to satisfy.

To establish a reasonable probability that the records contain information.

Exactly. And that's why Garnier properly balances that test.

And again, Garnier is a test with teeth. I mean, you have to make a showing in Garnier that there is information material and relevant to the defense.

It has to be based upon a specific concern. And if the court gets to the point of in-camera review, it needs to find that in fact material and reasonably necessary evidence is in the file.

And material means reasonable probability that disclosure could prompt a different result. That is the prior precedent of this court.

It is not a test where someone just asks for records and they willy-nilly get them. The defendant needs to make that showing to either have the court even look at them and then the court needs to make those additional findings.

Do you think that standard is equivalent to the one under 173C2?

No. I think that the problem with 173C2 in this case, first of all, no. The short answer is no. And that's because a substantial likelihood test is, it seems to me, even higher burden on the defendant than an essential need test that was argued below.

And then secondly, the problem is, that wasn't argued below. There's nothing in the record about the substantial likelihood test. It's not in the court's order. It's not in the interlocutory appeal statement. It's not in the questions presented.

And there's additional problems with that. For instance, there's no finding in the record that KR received sexual assault or domestic violence counseling at all. There's no finding in the record that these entities are rape crisis centers.

And one of the entities, Simmons College, is in Massachusetts. So whether that would even fall under that statutory rubric at all, there's just nothing in the record. We're all guessing on what that...

Can a New Hampshire court order those records from Massachusetts?

Yes, I think they can. And I suppose the Massachusetts entity could claim there's some jurisdictional issue, but that wasn't claimed here.

And Judge Ignatius has found that there's documents in the Simmons College records that are, meet the Garnier test, and if this court affirms, will be produced to the defendant in this case.

So from a due process perspective, I think I just heard you say there is a substantive difference between essential needs and reasonable and substantial.

I think that between the essential need test that was argued below and analyzed in the trial court's order, and then the substantial likelihood test, which is 173C.

Now, I'm on a little uneven ground here because we didn't brief that below, but my understanding of that statutory privilege is that it is a more difficult standard to meet than essential need.

And, you know, the trial court made findings that the essential need privilege was too high a standard for defendants to meet for the reasons I've just spoken to earlier.

And I think that the danger with – not the danger, but the problem with this appeal and some of the arguments that we've heard, including most of the arguments that we've heard today, were not argued below.

They're not briefed in this case. And they ignore the detailed factual findings that the trial court made about KR's contradictory statements in the record and which are taken not from the characterization of the defense.

They are direct quotes from the counseling records. They are direct quotes from the police reports that were provided in discovery.

And this case started with a mandatory disclosure under the disclosure statute.

They've taken no position about whether Article 2b overrules that law. I mean, a law that requires a counselor in a confidential setting to call the police and say my client has told me something confidential.

And under the threat of criminal sanction, if they don't do it, they don't claim that statute's been overruled by Article 2b.

I don't understand the argument why in re CT and petition to Payne that that essential need says why the government – this is an amendment that talks about governmental intrusion – why those cases aren't overruled by Article 2b.

When the government can get a defendant's records, they're not asking this court to appoint counsel to have that person whose medical records or counseling records and investigation to have counsel appointed to them so they can argue to the court.

In totally inconsistent arguments in here, which has ramifications for carefully crafted decisions of this court over the past 30 to 35 years, which are not fully briefed, and the inconsistencies in those arguments demonstrate why those arguments should fail.

And furthermore – let me ask you, Judge Ignatius, in her order, she says that the court will conduct an in-camera review, and if it finds disclosure of any records are necessary, it will take into account Casey's rights under Part 1 Article 2b.

Do you quarrel with that?

Well, I think that that's – that is – that – so this court started giving the direction, I think in Chandler or Gorman, regarding that process.

And what the court did in this case, and what the court has done in other cases than my experience, is that it issues the – if it produces the records, they are produced under a very strict protective order.

For instance, in this case, even before these arguments started to be raised, every time we got confidential records, they were produced under a – in-camera review protective order,

eyes only, and that they could not even be photocopied or reproduced without further permission of the court, and they could not be used at trial without further permission of the court.

It was incredibly narrow who had access to these records, even when they were produced to us in the case.

And so it seems to me that is the issue, that is a way to protect a person's rights, who obviously is a legitimate concern in their counseling records,

and people rifling through them or seeing them. But this is also a judicial process where the defendant is on trial with the greatest force of coercion that the government has against any citizen,

which is to incarcerate them. And in this case, shows why their arguments fail. They're arguing Mr. Zarela should never have seen these records at all.

We know from those records that KR has materially contradicted what she told law enforcement, that she told her counselor that Mr. Zarela digitally penetrated her,

and she fought him off and locked herself in the bathroom until he went away.

She told police he penetrated her with his penis, and she laid there frozen, afraid, unable to do anything.

Under their standard, we would never know, never know that first statement.

Regarding the first set of allegations, she recanted.

We would never know under the test that they want applied in this case today.

And that is a denial of due process. That is a denial of our constitutional rights.

And that is not the law, nor should it be the law in the state of New Hampshire.

Furthermore, there's nothing in Article 2B which commands this result.

It is an attempt to restrain the government, but in this case they're attempting to restrain a criminal defendant's ability to obtain exculpatory evidence.

There is nothing in the text of Article 2B which talks about the Garnier test or criminal defendant's rights.

But isn't it the court that is issuing an order, and wouldn't you say that's the state?

Well, I think the court, we're not challenging that there's a privacy interest in the records.

But what I think the trial court correctly found was that that privacy interest is protected through the Garnier test.

And what I'm arguing here today is that there's nothing in the Garnier test which requires a change.

There's nothing in Article 2B which requires a change in the Garnier test.

That the Garnier test adequately covers the privacy rights of the person who holds the privilege and balances those privacy rights against the right to due process and fair trial.

Do you think the constitutional article adds a notice provision or an opportunity for counsel?

Well, there's nothing in the amendment that says that.

There's nothing in the legislative history that says it.

In fact, the legislative history suggests that they didn't reference medical records.

But they were more interested in computers and phones, electronic information, and to make sure.

And there is some statement near the end that it was not intended to change search and seizure law at all.

So I don't think there's anything in the amendment that does that.

And also this issue about notice to the person who holds the privilege, not briefed below, not preserved, not really briefed here.

So, and I think there, I understand emotionally or intuitively why there may be some appeal to that.

But it's also would be, to my thinking, very peculiar that, you know, in a criminal case, the allowing someone who's not a party in the case to control the evidence,

especially evidence that may impeach their testimony.

I mean, there's not, I think it's presumed in these cases that the person who holds the privilege doesn't want the records to be seen.

And I, and cases don't say that, but I think that's presumed.

And in most circumstances, we don't allow a witness to control what evidence the state gets to see and what a defendant gets to see.

And, and I suggest that should remain the rule here.

Um, finally, I'll, I'll, I'll just say my lights on, um, my yellow lights on, not my red light.

That, again, that Garnier, Cressy, Gerard have been upheld for over 30 years.

Um, there's nothing in the amendment which requires this court to, to change these rules.

And stare decisis, which isn't even briefed by KR, mentioned only in passing by the state, requires this court to uphold that, that line of cases.

There's no, no explanation in the briefs why the tests being proffered below, or the new, oops,

the new tests being proffered on appeal, which aren't preserved, have worked better than the Garnier test.

This court has routinely reaffirmed Garnier, including as recently as August, um, without any dissent or any suggestion by this court that there's a problem with this test.

It applies in a variety of settings, not just confidential psych, counseling records.

It applies in a variety of settings, none of which have been considered in the briefs in this case.

And there's an overwhelming factual record why Mr. Zarella has met his burden to obtain these records in this case.

And the court should affirm the order below.

Thank you.

Thank you, Attorney Christi.

Attorney Visonazzo?

Yes.

Two minutes.

Thank you.

Uh, briefly, um, I hear what the defense saying about the record below.

Respectfully, we, uh, view it as mischaracterization of the records and how they're put together and cherry-picked.

And it's the kind of thing that happens when stuff happens behind your back.

In this case, the witness knew nothing about what was going on.

It's not going to end to the case at the very last minute, long after records had already been produced, lots of ex parte proceedings and so forth.

Uh, it's a, it's a process that's bound to, to create distortions, putting it in the hand of a defendant who wants to, wants to.

So, Attorney Visonazzo, what's your remedy that you're proposing, other than to change our standard and to apply the constitutional amendment?

What we've really not heard a lot about here is Part 1, Article 2B, which is a right of privacy that the people of New Hampshire found to be essential and inherent and natural,

which is this court's definition of a fundamental constitutional right.

It's not like the world hasn't changed.

It has.

Yes, Gandhi has been reaffirmed.

It was the law.

But that's before the consideration for this new fundamental constitutional right.

It has to change.

It has to change the standard.

I, I, I would submit because how, how do you have on the one hand an alleged due process right that was never explained, but assuming it exists,

versus somebody's other fundamental constitutional right, the two of them are of equal value.

They're both fundamental.

And generally when that happens, they kind of cancel each other out.

And what happens here would be that it defaults back to the origin of the privilege.

The privilege was created by the legislature, the medical privilege, the mental health privileges are created by the legislature.

The legislature decided that they would be treated the same way that the attorney client privilege is treated.

And that's what the result should be.

As Mr. Christie pointed out, there's no full-blown stare decisis analysis in your briefing.

And how can we overrule that line of cases?

It doesn't have to.

As I said to the Chief Justice earlier, Justice Bassett, it doesn't have to be overruled.

Cressy does not have to be overruled.

You can focus only on Part 1, Article 2B, and say, well, this is, all right, this is similar to when a Fifth Amendment right and a Fourth Amendment right conflict.

Well, they conflict and they basically cancel each other out, and that's what happens here.

You default to the standard that the legislature created, which is these mental health privileges are equivalent to the attorney-client privilege.

I haven't been subpoenaed yet.

I've talked to KR.

She's the witness.

Am I going to get a subpoena for my files to find out if there's anything useful to the defense in my attorney-client files?

What is the difference?

The only difference is we're all lawyers, and for a long time we've recognized how valuable the attorney-client privilege is.

We have devalued the mental health privileges for the last 30, perhaps 50 years.

I'm asking the Court to take a look at that under Part 1, Article 2B, and elevate these privileges to first-tier privileges that actually assist and help people with mental health problems to get treatment without fear.

Thank you, Attorney Vincenzo.

Thank you, Your Honors.

Attorney Godierry, one minute.

Attorney Godierry.

Attorney Godierry, one minute.

Thank you, Your Honor.

A couple of brief points.

The defense counsel stated that it's peculiar that a witness can come into a criminal case and exert some control over information.

I would suggest that what is peculiar is the fact that we have recognized that criminal defendants can go after the information, privileged information, in the hands of private parties and get it under such a low standard.

That is anomalous across other litigations in this state and across the country.

It is an extreme minority position and it's not supported by the case law.

The other problem, I think, here is that Gagne really has no teeth.

That is the problem with Gagne.

It is speculative at its core and it has no teeth.

And as this court's jurisprudence has developed, it has seemed to devolve more to just a basic relevance test with struggles over what is material.

How can we imagine that there's material information in this?

And as a result, so long as an individual says they're in therapy with respect to maybe this matter, the entire file goes to the court and the intrusion begins.

And that intrusion may be extraordinarily overbroad and all sorts of things.

This elevates the standard.

Part 1 Article 2B, we'd ask the court to consider that.

Thank you.

Thank you very much, counsel.

The case is submitted.

All right.

Thank you.
