This is case 2024, 0368, state of New Hampshire versus Kyle Bab.

Good morning.

Good morning.

20 Donovan?

Yes.

I understand you reserved two minutes.

I did, thank you.

Good morning, Mr. Chief Justice, Associate Justice of the Court, and may it please the court, Timothy Donovan, for defendant Kyle Bab.

Since this trial took place, there have been two opinions of this court that kind of address issues that I think that we're going to discuss today.

So I would invite the court to ask questions at any time.

But I'll start with my intro here.

As this court has stated, the purpose of the trial court's jury instructions is to state and explain to the jury in clear and intelligible language and the rules of law applicable to the case.

Juries are not made up of trial attorneys.

They are to apply the facts as they see them to the law.

But they only understand the law to apply through the jury instructions.

For this very reason, in capital cases, failure to provide a lesser included jury instruction is reversible error under a due process.

It should not be the province of the trial judge to withhold options from the jury or to weigh contradictory evidence.

The weight of evidence is for the jury to decide.

In this case, the defendant was charged with two counts of felony second degree assault.

That was recklessly causing the bodily injury to another under circumstances of extreme indifference.

The lesser included instruction of reckless bodily injury for simple assault was read to the jury.

The jury was not instructed and therefore not allowed to consider the lesser included offense of mutual consent to fighting under the simple assault statute.

Can you address the state's preservation argument?

Of course, we believe that this has been adequately preserved on the second day of trial ahead of Mr. Bab's testimony.

Defense counsel in this case said we would like to on both simple assault and mutual consent.

The judge unequivocally said, I am not giving that instruction over sustaining the state's objection.

Prior to that, the defendant had filed a notice of defenses with the court.

The county attorney was on notice of these defenses.

Did counsel provide the court with an instruction that would have been suitable to the defendant?

Not in this case, Your Honor.

And he didn't issue an objection before or after the trial court actually instructed the jury?

There was no subsequent objection after the discussion at the bench, which was a minute or so about the mutual consent.

Did defense counsel give the judge a proffer as to what Mr. Bab would say in order to provide evidence that would support an instruction of mutual consent?

That did not occur, Your Honor.

The judge, Justice Delker, said unequivocally from the bench following the request for the jury instruction that he was not giving that instruction.

It appears defense counsel did not feel that there was an opportunity to re-object after the fact.

This court has held, in a case in 2003, state vegans' alas that an objection at the bench ahead of time is enough to preserve an issue for appeal.

We believe that this was properly before the judge.

The judge denied the request and there was no, the opportunity to object again would have been duplicative.

So the judge denied the request before he heard all the evidence?

That's correct. I will not give this instruction.

What do you did say is subject to whatever the defense may put on?

That's true. Judges will often say at the trial court that I am going to allow a subject to a subsequent objection or I'm not going to allow it subsequent to an objection.

If that was the standard, then there would not be many appealable issues, Your Honor.

So what is the evidence that would support a mutual combat instruction?

Well, in this case, Your Honor, the evidence of mutual combat is that Mr. Bab was walking out of a diner in Manchester with a friend.

There were homophobic slurs thrown at the defendant.

The alleged victim swung his cane at the defendant and the defendant responded with a continued verbal altercation with the defendant.

The defendant, I mean, with the alleged victim, the alleged victim swung the cane at his friend and threatened to stab the defendant and his friend.

I don't know at what point the line changes between self-defense and mutual combat, but I think in the heat of the moment they are substantially similar.

Whether I'm going to continue this fight because I want to or because I have to, I think might be the test there.

How do you respond to the state's argument that Bab's own testimony undermines his argument that it was mutual combat?

I think this court has addressed that type of scenario in the Brooks case, which came out subsequent to this, where there was a teacher who argued I was doing this in self-defense,

but is eventual, and then asked for a jury's instruction to say that this was part of his job.

I don't think arguing one way or the other doesn't matter, and again in the heat of the moment could be both.

But if Mr. Bab said I was just trying to get the cane away from the guy, how was that a mutual combat?

Well, he did admit to striking the alleged victim whether it was on purpose or by accident, but he did engage with the alleged victim.

But if he struck him accidentally, how was that mutual combat?

He engaged. I think that's a question for the jury.

There is some evidence, as the case law points out, there is some evidence that there was an agreement to engage in mutual combat or an implication of such by the alleged victim swinging the cane.

The implication of Mr. Bab attacking, I think that there was some evidence of an agreement to fight in this scenario.

Again, subsequent to this trial, there was an opinion, State v. Miller, which discussed the mutual consent,

came out in February of 25, discussed mutual consent, and in that case, this court affirmed that there was no evidence, absolutely, of mutual consent.

It was a domestic violence situation.

We contend that we can distinguish this case.

There was video of that incident.

In Miller, there was video of the incident, and the judge found in that case after watching the video, that there was a break in the action,

and therefore that any degree of consent to fight had then ended, and that was indisputable video evidence.

Whereas in this case, we have three witnesses.

We have the alleged victim himself, who doesn't remember any of it.

His testimony was mostly in response to questions, he would say things like, that doesn't sound like me, I wouldn't do something like that.

Isn't there video evidence of this?

There is no video evidence of the altercation.

No, the testimony comes from the alleged victim, who could not offer a lot of substantive evidence.

The defendant himself and a third party witness from a window, I believe, in an apartment nearby.

Mr. Sebastian who testified a trial.

But didn't the third party witness basically say, he swung his cane, he fell down of his own accord.

How is that not a break in action there?

I don't think that was not found by the judge to be a break in the action.

And it is contradicted by the defendant's testimony that that did not.

Now, yes, that is Mr. Sebastian's testimony, but that doesn't mean that there isn't some evidence that a jury should hear their opportunity

to convict on a mutual consent.

Moreover, during the course of the trial, or I'm sorry, during the course of deliberations, the jury asked a couple questions.

Kind of indicating that they were wondering what kind of lesser included offenses existed.

Now, again, Mr. Bab was charged with secondary felony assault and simple assault was the lesser included.

The jury had asked our both second degree assault and simple assault felonies.

And then they asked later, if we found not guilty on both second degree assault charges, but we found guilty on both as simple assault, how do we deliver the verdict?

Clearly, the jury was deliberating over what degree of culpability the defendant should have here.

What they didn't have in their toolbox at the time was whether this was mutual consent to fight.

And while the judge on the morning of the second day said, I'm not issuing that instruction,

he did say at sentencing that he found both the alleged victim in this matter and the defendant to be less than credible witnesses.

So the two people that were involved in the incident, the judge found to be less than credible,

given that their evidence was important for a jury to decide what happened here,

I think the jury needed the option of whether mutual consent was something that they could find.

So again, the focus here is on how much evidence.

Now, if I were to leave a bar and someone were to attack me on something that I found fundamentally true about myself and then swing a cane at me,

would that be in my response? I think of myself as a peaceful person.

But if that was, if my response was to defend myself or say, I'm going to defend my identity,

I think that that would be an option for a jury to decide whether this was mutual consent.

And the amount of evidence as we've seen in the case law is very, is low.

It is more than a minutiae or a scintilla of evidence, but it is not,

it doesn't need to be overwhelming and it doesn't have to be uncontradicted.

Now, yes, Mr. Sebastian testified about what he saw, but that's just contradictory testimony

that a jury should have been able to hear from the defendant to decide whether that

his versions of the facts were different. And again, the judge found less than credible,

but that's a question for the jury. Happy to answer him for the questions that I can reserve.

May it please the court, Robert Barnard, for a stay in New Hampshire.

A dispositive issue in this appeal is the defendant's claim that he has always contended,

that he did not intentionally strike the victim, that RW was the aggressor,

and that he was acting in felt defense. And that is important because this court

is held that a defendant is not entitled to a jury in search of an offered defense,

and they merely present evidence of a different factual scenario than the one provided by the case.

The state's case was that RW was on the ground defenseless, and the defendant stomped on his

head and kicked him in the face multiple times. And the state's evidence did not provide any proof

there was any type of mutual agreement to gauge and to fight. Now the defendant testified,

and he alleged that he was only trying to kick the way, or kick the cane away from RW,

that any contact would have been a result of just trying to get the cane away from RW,

and he insisted there was nothing mutual about his encounter. His testimony was

he was just trying to get out of there unharmed, and at least they quote,

I didn't want anything to do with it. Under these circumstances, the trial court did not

err in not instructing on a mutual consent defense because the case provided and presented

by the defendant was incompatible with the claim that this was a fight entered into

by mutual agreement. But essentially that argument is essentially academic because

the defendant did not preserve his appellate argument because he did not make a contemporaneous

objection to the trial court's jury instruction. He only discussed jury instructions

after the state rest of its case. And requiring the defendant to raise a contemporary's objection

to the trial court's jury instruction was not just of mere formality in this case.

But the defendant did issue a notice of self-defense prior to trial, right? So

the trial court obviously considered that, didn't he?

Yes, the trial court...

Would be considered if it wasn't preserved?

Yes, for two reasons. When the trial court stated that they didn't see enough to

instruct on mutual consent, the defendant had not testified. And that's important because as I

understand the defendant's argument, if mutual consent and argument at least

partially depend on this notion that, well, the RW insulted me and that somehow provided

evidence as to the mutual agreement to fight. But the defendant hadn't testified yet,

and he was the only witness who provided any testimony that RW issued any insults or

threats at him. And two, the final instruction should be viewed based on all the evidence presented

to the jury. But the defendant is arguing now that he should have received a mutual consent

instruction, even though he testified, denied an attention strike from the victim,

claimed he was only trying to act in self-defense. But he still should get a mutual

consent instruction with that. That's an argument that the trial court never had the

opportunity to consider. In the essence of the preservation rule, that an argument should

not form the basis of appellate relief, that the trial court hasn't had opportunity to

first conserve the argument. Judge Jalker had every reason to think that the defendant had

abandoned any attempt to get a self or a mutual combat instruction when he elected

to testify and assist. I was acting in self-defense and put on evidence that

there was nothing or a letter, there was nothing mutual about this encounter.

And it do think it's worth noting that if you look at the self-defense statute,

it's strictly stated you can't use non-deadly force if it's a result of mutual comfort.

So this argument that you can somehow make what are essentially inconsistent or mutually exclusive

defense and receive in search of both of them when you testify that it was self-defense

appears to be a fairly novel argument. Trial court that never got opportunity to consider.

So it should not be considered preserved. How does Brooks impact our analysis, if at all?

Not at all. The state does not dispute Brooks's ultimate holding in that

whether the some evidence standard had been met if a de novo review

is similar to some readjustment in a civil case. Regarding the actual fact of that case,

state doesn't see how they're really, particularly

applicable or analogous. I believe Brooks was just declaimed self-defense.

The trial court found it wasn't enough for one of those claims.

And if we're looking at plain error, first the defendant cannot show any error.

There was nothing mutual about this encounter. The evidence was, by the only neutral witness,

was the defendant, I'm sorry, RW was on the ground defenseless.

And even if he swung first, there was still a break in the action.

That makes it very similar to Miller, which was discussed previously.

It's also similar to another case that the defendant cited in a reply brief, State v. Place.

That was a case where the evidence was that the defendant's wife insulted him,

slapped him, and turned him back. And that's when the assault occurred.

Then they claimed he should have received a mutual consent defense.

This court held the evidence and warned that.

And also, regarding no error, mutual consent requires evidence of mutual agreement by both parties.

Being on this, making insults, even very offensive ones, is not itself an invitation to begin a fight.

I know Cieplinski talks about how fighting words are not protected by the First Amendment,

but that doesn't mean they're an agreement engaged in a fight.

They're just, they might provoke a response. They might reach an imminent breach of a peace.

But they're itself not enough for a mutual agreement to a fight.

Or at least no president had been cited holds that.

And conversely, having a cane swung at you is not both acceptance to a fight.

So there's no error because there's a break in the action,

and there's no evidence of mutual agreement.

And if we're talking about plain error, we also need a plain error.

So that means plainer obvious under governing law.

No case is held that you can testify and claim self-defense,

but the trial court might be required to sue a spot-to-issue an instruction on mutual consent

or mutual combat.

And substantial rights, if the defense presented at trial was with self-defense.

That's what it's opening presented.

That was its closing.

Stay with contender, substantial rights are not violated

when you get the instruction on the defense who actually presented at trial.

And just the word on the jury's question, not relevant.

It's only what the evidence was presented.

Judge Juddrow was correct when he just told the jury.

The level of defense is not important for you,

but it also doesn't really provide any evidence that the jury might think this is a fight.

It's pure speculation, but they could just thought,

we don't see manifest indifference to the value of human life,

but this conduct seems so terrible, it really shouldn't be infallible.

The trial court said you can't consider a level of defense.

It's not relevant to this appeal.

No further questions.

The state will rest on this brief and ask that the court affirm the defense convictions.

In response to the argument that just because self-defense was claimed as well,

the same thing happened in Brooks.

In Brooks, the teacher had claimed self-defense when he grabbed a student's hand

and the trial court in that case said,

once the defendant grabbed the complainant's hand,

all steps the defendant took thereafter were in self-defense,

not to enforce discipline, which was in that case the equivalent.

Not to deal with the disturbance.

And this court found that it's not the state of mind of the defendant necessarily

that is used to determine some evidence.

Some evidence is a very low threshold.

You don't need the defendant's state of mind in order to determine whether in that case

an affirmative defense or a pure defense.

What we're talking about here is what I would call a mitigating defense

because the simple assault goes from a misdemeanor to a violation.

If there are any questions on that, I'd be happy to answer.

Thank you.

Thank you very much, counsel.
