This is case 2024, 035, a state of New Hampshire versus Dillon Sleeper.

Morning, Attorney Johnson. I understand. Is there one minute?

Yes, Your Honor. May it please the Court, Christopher Johnson on behalf of Dillon Sleeper.

There's two issues in this appeal. My plan is to start with the first, the taint from the Miranda violation, and then move to the second, the admissibility as consciousness of guilt of Mr. Sleeper's musings about the evidence, about the law, and about strategic choices.

Happy to take the Court's questions at any point.

So beginning with the taint from the Miranda violation issue.

The law defines a test that is the totality of the circumstances and the Court has identified factors that aim at answering the question whether there's a causal link between the first statement and the second.

And here the causal link was shown from all the circumstances.

There's only a few hours lapse at the middle of the night.

Mr. Sleeper is under arrest the whole time.

There's no intervening event or contact that he has between the first and the second.

He's never told that the statement can't be used.

And I think the sense of compulsion that was exerted is corroborated by the fact that the statement he later makes at the state, at the station house is not substantially different, really,

from the statement he made at the side of the road to the police officer.

It's a little more detail, but nothing of substance.

So because of that causal link, we'd ask this Court to reverse on that issue and point out the state has not made a harmless argument as to this first issue.

And rightly, because confessions to the police or statements to the police are well understood to be very powerful evidence.

I'm going to turn to the second issue.

Let's continue with the first.

You do push back a little bit on the assertion that the officers did not adopt or encompass the original statements when the second interview occurred.

To me, from what I can see, to the extent that occurred, it's very minimal.

And so that should be in favor of the statements being voluntary, right?

Sure.

I mean, there are circumstances that are not present here that, if they were present, even more powerfully demonstrate the involuntaryness.

And so that is one, you know, under granted.

But what I would say in response is that under these circumstances, it's very clear that the officers knew what had happened at the roadside.

We have evidence from the suppression hearing that that is, in fact, true.

But it's even, regardless of what's sort of secretly known to them, I mean, it's obvious to a reasonable person in sleeper's position that they wouldn't know that.

Because that's why they're questioning him at 4.30 in the morning is this event.

And it's obviously, if the police are coming out at 4.30 in the morning to question about it, it's obviously a serious matter.

And so a reasonable person would understand that they would be briefed as they were about what had happened.

And so I think, true, they didn't sort of explicitly exploit that information with him.

But I don't think that defeats the claim under this kind of circumstance.

Was Mr. Sleeper given the opportunity to call anyone when he was arrested?

The evidence doesn't reflect that.

And again, it was between like 12.30 and 4.30 in the mornings.

You know, I think it's very unlikely that he was or that if he had, he would have reached anybody in those hours.

There was some fact that he had an existing warrant.

Do we know if he was aware of that?

Yes. I don't recall and I don't think it's clear.

It's what we know about that from the roadside officer and his name and discovered that there was one.

But Sleeper, if I remember the circumstance, was already sort of sitting on the bumper of the recruiter in handcuffs when the officer discovered that.

And so it's not clear that he was.

What's the significance of the fact that the second round of questioning was in a different location with different officers?

Again, because it's a totality, these facts also matter. I think that's right.

But the scenario where the circumstances sort of cut the causal link would be different.

It seemed, for example, that these officers didn't know why he had come to the station or why he was there.

You know, a person in this position might think maybe they don't know what I said to the police, but that isn't this.

So true. I mean, it was exactly the same officer.

It would be even more obvious that they knew, but I think it was sufficiently obvious, even though it was different officers.

Well, the traffic courts spent some time analyzing the Miranda violation statements and the nature of the questioning that the officer engaged in.

And it wasn't really, they're open-ended questions.

And does that factor in our analysis? It's not one of the factors that we've identified.

I don't think really that it matters much.

If the roadside questioning had been abusive or violent, we'd have a different claim.

It would have been involuntary under those circumstances.

The fact that the law recognizes that a statement extracted in violation of Miranda can lead to an involuntary statement sort of in the structure of the circumstances

is the claim that we're making.

And so the fact that there's other things that would also, in a different way, have been coercive didn't happen doesn't change the fact that this situation was coercive in the way that it did happen.

So yeah, I mean, it just means that we don't have a different claim.

And what about the fact that the defendant exercises right to remain on two occasions and subsequent questioning?

So he understood, he was aware of his rights and he exercised them.

Right, but I think what the compulsion was is that a person in sleeper's position knowing that he's already sort of let the cat out of the bag at the side of the road functionally said the same thing.

I think your honest point would have a great deal of force in this circumstance if sleeper had, they confessed a lot more at the station.

Because then it would show he's sort of, he's gone above and beyond what he had said at the roadside.

And there was another statement that he provided to the officers.

Would Miranda waved after all this occurred?

What happened to that statement?

So the policeman did a few different things wrong.

And so the later statement, so after sleeper invoked his right to silent, the police came back again and tried to, twice.

And the first time he still didn't want to talk and the second time he did.

And so that later statement was suppressed as dishonoring the invocation of silence.

And the roadside one was suppressed as a Miranda violation and so it's this one in the middle that we're talking about.

With respect to the news about evidence law and strategy, the fundamental idea of this claim is that statements about the adjudicatory framework about evidence law or strategy generally are not probative of consciousness of guilt.

For example, it is not probative of consciousness of guilt if a defendant says they have a strong case or they have a weak case or maybe I should go for self-defense or maybe I should take the plea offer or I need to research homicide law.

Innocent defendants could equally say those things, those kinds of things.

And innocent defendants, which is another way of saying innocent defendants do not stand above or outside the system of adjudication.

We might agree with that, but innocent defendants don't say, dude, I stabbed a man to death.

And that one we concede is admissible.

So when sleeper said things not about the case or the law case, but about what happened on the road that night with JW, that's in.

Because he's not talking about the event and so I concede that's admissible.

But it's statements of this kind that I've just given would not be admissible.

And sort of in a perfect world, I think the inference the state is getting at sort of assumes a perfect world.

Because in a perfect world, the system of adjudication would perfectly mirror what happened.

And innocent people would be effortlessly exonerated, but that's not the world.

And so the innocent defendants are allowed to use about what rights they want to assert and what rights they don't.

And in this respect I think it's important to say from evidence of flight, because there a defendant is running from the system altogether,

that's admissible as consciousness of guilt.

When a defendant within the system is making statements about which direction to go or what evidence might mean, that's not consciousness of guilt.

So the defendant's reference to the knife and the reference to the murder weapon, is that something that you're not challenging?

So I think there's some things he said at the knife that we wouldn't because they're about what happened on the road in Hooksett.

But there's things he said, for example, he said at one point, it's no weapon, it's manslaughter.

That's assertion, it's an erroneous assertion, but it's an assertion about a legal principle.

That's not about what happened at the roadside.

When he said or asked his father for help researching the law of homicide.

That's not an assertion, expressing interest in the nuances of the gradations of murder is not about the crime.

Isn't it part of the challenge though, the fact that his musings were also combined with statements that would be clearly admissible.

And it seemed to me that the trial court was really offering to limit what was admitted, but then it would be out of context.

And I could really see both sides, both the defense and the state, struggling with how do we give the jury the context of the discussion of what is admissible without getting into the musings.

Yes, well, and this is where I think the trial court needed to use a scalpel to kind of distinguish.

And because I don't disagree in principle with the premise of your questions.

When he says things like, I stabbed a guy, if you needed some more context around that to understand it, the context also comes in.

I don't think you do.

I mean, I stabbed a guy to death doesn't require context to make it relevant.

And the other things.

But with the comments about the blood spots and him being scotch free.

I mean, it just wasn't as clear that you precisely find what is clearly admissible and clearly not admissible.

That one I would take issue with because that one I would say is just about the evidence.

I think what he said is towards the effect of they got four spots.

So I got four chances.

So they got four spots is sort of information he's learned from the discovery, you know, that I've identified blood.

And so four chances is sort of his prognostication about his chances at trial.

Would he just say there are spots on me because, you know, when I stabbed him, the blood splattered admissible.

Absolutely.

Because that's about the event.

It's not about, you know, the legal architecture that he's facing as a defendant.

You address harmless error on this issue?

So the state did raise harmless error on this issue.

I think what I would say about that is that in so far as this was an identification case, the state would probably be right.

But the litigated issue in closing argument and really the litigated issue in the case is whether this was murder or manslaughter.

And that's a subtle distinction between the element that distinguishes reckless murder from reckless manslaughter

is extreme indifference to the value of human life.

And so that's a subtle mental state thing.

And I think these statements, prejudice and defense.

And so let me point out a couple of the statements I think that you conveyed that prejudice.

So for example, in one of the calls his father says to him,

I should have taken that knife away from you years ago.

And that implies a years-long word of bad behavior that his father's aware of.

Or when his grandmother says you were a good person to wait for the police,

when in fact he didn't wait for the police, sort of conveys a kind of unintended moral condemnation of sleeper.

Sort of bad character stuff that put the rest of the evidence, certain flavor on it that was unfairly prejudicial.

So yes, I think there's plenty of other evidence that he was the other person involved in the incident.

But it's not harmless as to that element, unless the court has other questions we're asked to reverse.

Can we turn to Johnson?

Good morning, and may it please the court, Adriana Makula, for the State of New Hampshire.

I want to start first by talking about the motion to suppress

and talking about the defendant's argument about this causal link between the two interviews being sort of impossible to breach.

And he listed a whole host of factors, many of which are not the five factors that this court has said it uses

to determine whether that second interview or a subsequent interview is free from whatever Miranda violation occurred in the first interview.

He talked about the statement not being substantially different between the two.

That's certainly not one of the factors. He talked about the defendant being under arrest.

That's certainly not one of the factors.

What I want to focus in on though is your question, Justice Donovan,

about whether the types of questions or the tone of those questions

and whether that should be a factor this court can consider.

And I think it is because it goes to that third factor about the degree of police influence exerted over the defendant.

And the goal of this court's analysis in this context is to determine was this subsequent confession or statement or interview voluntary,

given the pre-interview where the Miranda was violated.

I want to point out for the court as the trial court found the defendant never argued that his first interview with Officer LeBlanc was involuntary.

It was just that it was a custodial interrogation during which his Miranda rights were not read to him.

But he never asserted on appeal or at the trial that that interview with Officer LeBlanc was involuntary.

And that is because the nature of those questions were not threats.

His will was not overborn. He was not pressured to speak with that officer.

It was simply the officer turned around. He put his hands up.

The officer handcuffed him and immediately asked him,

what are you doing and where is your car?

Because Officer LeBlanc was looking for a car with front-end damage,

given the information he'd had from the scene.

We also asked him, do you know why I'm here?

He did. That was the first question. Do you know why I'm here?

And the defendant just said, yeah, but didn't offer any other explanation.

And the officer LeBlanc didn't ask, why did I stop you?

His next question was, where is your car?

And then they had a conversation about, sorry, one moment.

Then he did not read Miranda.

The defendant said, in response to where is your car?

I don't have a car. I'm waiting for a ride.

I got in a fight and punched and kicked someone.

So again, he was not asked, he wasn't asked initially,

why are you here? Why am I stopping you?

But that response about getting into a fight where he punched and kicked someone

was not in response to a direct question,

and it certainly was not in response to any threat or pressure from Officer LeBlanc.

In response to that, Officer LeBlanc immediately asked

if he needed medical attention, and the defendant said no.

And then Officer LeBlanc, maybe under some caretaking,

asked if that other person was okay.

And the defendant said, I have no idea.

And then he got his identification, ran his name,

so I had the warrant and arrested him.

It is unclear from the record if the defendant knew about that warrant.

I'm not even sure what that warrant was for,

whether it was for a failed appearance or some new charge.

But regardless, then he's brought to the police station

where four hours of time pass.

It is true that there's nothing in the record about him

asking to talk to anybody, friends or family.

It's also clear though from that interview with the troopers

that he doesn't really feel like he has anyone.

And I say that because he talked about how he had

recently been living in Concord and then he had

been kicked out of the place he was living in Concord.

And that's why he was at the Manchester shelter

and that's how he met the victim.

So maybe I don't know if anyone offered that to him,

but I don't know that he had anyone to call.

Which is why, again, this test is a totality of the circumstances

and no one factor is dispositive.

Then again, that interview started with do you need water?

Are you okay? Do you need the bathroom?

They went through Miranda.

He seemingly understood Miranda to your point,

Justice Dunnevin.

Not only did he stop this interview after 39 minutes,

when they came back 11 minutes after this interview

ended and wanted to talk to him again,

he denied several times wanting to talk with them.

And then later, 12 hours later or something did

interact with them and then ended that interview as well.

So he certainly understood his rights.

So again, his will was not overborn,

there was no pressure going on here.

And the nature of the questions were not so

that this defendant, as the defendant argues,

would assume that these officers had been briefed

about that roadside encounter.

Specifically, Sergeant Shackford testified she did not know

what the defendant had said to Officer LeBlanc

at the suppression hearing and the trial court

credited that testimony.

So while she may have been briefed in terms of

I picked him up, I found him on the street,

had a warrant, that's how we're here,

there is no information in the record to know

specifically what Officer LeBlanc told her

and she definitively says I did not know

any specific statements that he made.

That the interviews are consistent,

does not mean that the defendant knew or believed

that they knew what he had told Officer LeBlanc,

it just means that he was being consistent.

And in that interview, it was 39 minutes of him

offering very little information about what happened

to their very open-ended, calm, collected questions

as the trial court found.

So while they may have internally been frustrated

with his desire to not give more information

about what started this argument with the victim

or what happened or that it was more

than some sort of verbal argument that turned

into a pushing match that he then leaves the scene from,

their questions don't indicate any of that frustration.

Does a four-hour break factor in favor and voluntary

or involuntaryness?

It favors in this case in favor of voluntary

because as the trial court found,

that amount of time sufficiently separated

this roadside encounter from this interview

in addition to the location being different

and the officers who were interviewing him being different.

In Carrier there was an 11-hour delay

between the legal arrest or statements

and the interrogation.

Yeah, we found in favor of the suppression.

So how does that factor into our analysis?

I think that factors in because this court,

I can't remember the case, I know it's in the trial court's order.

This court has also held that the amount of time is not,

there's no right amount of time that has to pass,

and the amount of time is not dispositive

because there could be no time that passes in between the two,

yet this court could still find that it is a voluntary interview.

And that's because these other factors,

frankly I think this court has put a lot of weight

of that degree of police influence exerted over the defendant

in determining whether that second interview is voluntary.

In a lot of the cases I read,

I'm not going to remember them all by name,

but I know that this court has analyzed many times over

the degree of force or threats or pressure

that the officers are exerting on the defendant

when they're trying, even outside of the context

of Miranda violations or voluntary interviews,

a lot of what the court is looking at in these

Fourth Amendment issues or Fifth Amendment

or whatever constitutional issues is,

did the police exercise undue influence on the defendant

so he felt like he could not say no

and could not and had to agree with them

or had to provide false information to them.

This defendant did not feel that way

based on the tenor of that interview.

And these questions were not pressuring him.

He was not advised by them that whatever he said

to Officer LeBlanc would not be used against them,

but at the same time they also did not ask him

any questions that would indicate they knew

what he had said to him roadside.

And they very broadly just said,

please help me understand what happened here.

And he, time and again, said,

I've told you everything I know

and refuse to give any more than

he swayed into me or he pushed me

and I pushed him and then I ran away.

I agree that the state did not make

a harmless error argument to this issue.

However, I did find one case,

so there is at least one instance of this court finding

that harmless error can be applied

to an interview that this court finds was involuntary.

And that is State v. Rezik, REZK,

150, New Hampshire, 483.

And this court did find that the admission

of the coerced confessions was harmless

because of all the other evidence

that had come in at the trial.

And the court reason that was because

the admission of a coerced interview

is similar to the erroneous admission

or erroneous exclusion of other evidence.

Given that it is a statement by the defendant

that in some respects is treated as evidence.

And I just point that out for the court's curiosity.

If there are no further questions on this issue,

I will move to the next issue.

The trial court did sustainably admit

these portions of jail calls.

The state disagrees that these portions

that were admitted are technical musing

or defensive conversations that the defendant

is having with the people he's calling.

These statements, as you pointed out,

Justice Countway are sort of happening

in the context of talking about

the thing that I think is in the defendant's mind,

which is the upcoming trial

and whether he's going to be convicted of

knowing homicide, reckless homicide, or manslaughter.

And so these statements about

calling the knife a murder weapon

or asking people to research the different

variants of homicide for him

are really going to what was the contested

issue at trial, which was his mental state

and how aware he was at the time

that these crimes were committed

and what proof the state has at trial

to meet those different elements.

That's not technical musing.

That is the defendant trying to avoid

detection or conviction

under the consciousness of guilt standard

that this court has adopted.

That's what he's doing.

He's talking about they can't find the murder weapon.

I'm off Scotch-free or there's only

four spots of blood. I'm off Scotch-free.

That's not him musing about maybe

the evidence will help me.

That's him saying they don't have a lot of evidence

from his perspective.

He can't avoid conviction as long as

that little evidence comes in at trial.

That was relevant for the jury

given his defense strategy.

If his defense strategy had been identity,

maybe the trial court would have

come out differently. It's hard to say

because that wasn't the issue at the trial.

And frankly,

if the defendant wanted the trial court

to use a scalpel to go through

these jail calls, then the defendant

should have taken the state on its offer

to review these jail calls pre-trial

for suggested redaction.

It was in the record

on the third day of trial and into the fourth day

of trial. The state said to the trial court,

I've

reached out to the defendant before trial

to propose redactions to these

jail calls. I haven't heard anything.

We're at trial now.

I would like to play these calls.

Here are my proposed redactions

meaning states.

And the defendant objected to all of the

jail calls wholesale on the third day.

And the trial court said, well,

I'm not going to not let them all in.

So the trial court took time

out of the fourth day of trial to listen

to these calls individually

that morning, hear specific arguments

about the calls, and then decide

which portions were admissible

and were not. Some of the calls were

excluded altogether. Some of

the calls were admitted altogether

in full. And some of the calls

the trial court did order the state to further redact

based on these different

statements that the defendant was arguing were irrelevant

or unfairly prejudicial.

What's the impact to the analysis

of the defendant arguing

for the lesser

included offense? In other words,

if he is essentially

agreeing that the

physical acts happened, should

that impact our analysis on the phone

calls?

It can in this case because the state's

reasoning and the argument

about them having probative value goes directly

to their probative value to his mental state.

And so while, yes, obviously

some of the calls then also prove

the act, the state's argument was

these are really probative because

the mental state is the fact of

consequence in this case. And I need these

calls because of their probative value

prove that his mental state was

something other than reckless manslaughter

which is what he's arguing at trial.

And I think the state

made that clear to the trial court.

Almost every call the state argued

was relevant either for

the consciousness of guilt factor

to show that he

knew he was guilty and was trying to avoid

detection or was relevant to

the mens rea meaning proof of knowing

versus proof of reckless with

an extreme inference to the value of human life.

Are there certain

calls organized

by date that you think

are easily admissible

and not subject to harmless error?

I

could look through the brief. I

have that off the top of my head

because I think to your

point, justice can't wait, a lot of them

you cannot

excise them so it's just one single

statement. They do need the context

and so I think it becomes hard to look

at these with a scalpel, especially

after the fact and determine

this part was harmless

error versus this call being

completely admissible without doing a harmless

error analysis.

I believe you have the calls though

so obviously while this

is sustainable exercise of discretion

the court could certainly listen to those calls

and decide when it's

reviewing this call was

completely admissible the way it is versus this one

being harmless.

From the state's perspective they're all

admissible as they are because the trial court did

do that careful review

pretrial and did listen to the party's arguments

and decide in real time

whether it was admissible and what was not.

And this argument that raised on appeal was not raised

to the trial court.

So the trial court did not even consider

whether any of these were tactical musings

or defense strategies.

But if this court finds that some of these calls

were erroneously admitted

it was harmless and that is because

there is strong and overwhelming evidence

of the defendant's guilt based on the unchallenged

portions of the calls where he admits to

stabbing a dude to death.

He had sent a letter to his mother

saying that he stabbed the victim's neck

and he bleed inside out.

He had fled from the scene of the crime.

Many witnesses saw him running.

I think when Officer Leblanc found him

he was one to two miles away from the scene

of the crime versus all these other witnesses

many of whom were teachers

who stopped and either went home

to get their bomb or combined with their

significant others and turned around

to go help the victim.

One of whom said I think I just witnessed a murder

when he talked to police.

You also have the victims and the defendant's

DNA found in those bloodstained jeans

or those four spots of blood that the defendant

was talking about in the jail calls.

He was wearing

the defendant I mean was wearing clothes

and a hat that matched.

He was wearing on surveillance video

hours before he killed the victim

or he had some of those clothes

in his backpack because he had changed

post leaving the scene.

And again these calls were inconsequential

also an obtrusive at trial.

And what I mean by that I see my red light is on

so thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.
