This is case 2024 0073 state of New Hampshire versus Dale E. Holloway, Jr. Thank you for the record. Keep justice McDonald and justice school.

I mean, who I understand you are not preserving any time for rebuttals, right? No, Chief Justice McDonald. We've requested to reserve two minutes.

May it please the court. There have been quite a few issues briefed by both sides here with a number of sub issues.

But in the very limited time that I get to talk to your honors today, I'd like to begin with discussing sentencing in absentia before moving to competency.

And then if time allows discussing the filament possession count and the motion for change of venue, but I'm happy to take questions at any time.

So beginning with the issue of sentencing in absentia, both the state and the defense site to state be Davis repeatedly as the critical case here 139 of Hampshire 185 is really setting forth the standard.

And a number of facts make Davis distinguishable here and applying the rule in Davis would lead to a different result.

And Davis proceeding did go in absentia because Davis is represented by counsel have been warned by the court specifically of the consequences of refusing to appear even though he was in custody.

And what that established was where there's been a knowing waiver and that the waiver could be refusal to appear after having been warned about the consequences of failure to appear that the trial or sentencing could proceed in absentia.

And that's different here because in this case we don't have any record of anyone warning Mr. Holloway. What will be the consequence if you don't appear? What does it mean to be sentenced in absentia? What will be the consequence of that for you?

Will you get an opportunity to be heard later? Are you waving all of these issues permanently? There were a number of issues.

How could those warnings be given if he wasn't even there?

And so I think it's correct that he wasn't there but we're not trying to set up an impossible hurdle that the court can't clear.

There are a number of ways that the court could have shown that had warned Mr. Holloway.

For example, he received written warnings about the consequences of failure to appear but those consequences that a warrant could issue and he could be assessed a $50 administrative fine.

The written warnings could have also said that proceeding could go in absentia.

There are other ways to establish whether he knew the consequences.

The court could have inquired of standby counsel whether he had been advised of consequences of failure to appear did not inquire.

The court could have relied on admissible evidence instead of hearsay evidence about what he knew.

Could standby counsel have easily answered those questions without a waiver of attorney client privilege?

So, yes and no.

So, Justice Countway, you're correct that statements from the client that the client intends to remain secret are privileged.

But the client has a discussion with his attorney and says, I don't want to participate in sentencing.

I'm making a knowing waiver. I don't want to be there.

And I want you to tell the court I don't want to be there.

Then yes, counsel can tell the court that my client told me that. He doesn't want to participate.

I told him about the consequences. He told me I want you to tell the court that I understand those consequences.

So, privilege applies when conversations are meant to be secret.

But people can also communicate through their counsel while telling their counsel things they want the court to know.

So, yes, absolutely standby counsel could answer those questions if this was indeed an intentional and knowing waiver.

The information from the Sheriff's Department was insufficient in your opinion?

Yes, and I think so for two reasons, just, Countway. And thank you for directing me that.

That is, I think, the next critical point.

Because the information from the Sheriff's Department was that Mr. Holloway said, they're going to have to sentence me in absentia.

I think there's two problems with that statement.

One is Mr. Holloway is not a lawyer and what does in absentia even mean to a lay person?

What are the consequences of that? Does that mean he's going to get another chance?

Does that mean he'll get to respond at some later time or in writing or that things can be amended later?

Or he gets a do-over? We don't know what he understood in absentia to mean or if he understood what it meant.

Second is that those were hearsay statements.

And this is where argument gets a bit technical, but I think we are correct in that the rules of evidence still apply to a determination of whether

an individual has waived their right to participate at trial or sentencing.

And the hearsay statements were not admissible.

And for that we're relying on rule of evidence 1101.

And 1101 has a specific list, although it's titled as miscellaneous.

It's not a miscellaneous list because it doesn't say et cetera or similar or anything else.

It names specific types of hearings to which the rules of evidence do not apply.

So if you agree with you, what's the remedy? Reman for re-sentencing?

Reman for re-sentencing, Your Honor.

And that reman for re-sentencing is we will also move to some of the other issues that would be raised specific to sentencing,

such as the challenge to the extended term statute, which the court directed to be raised at sentencing.

But of course, Mr. Holloway wasn't there. He didn't have counsel there.

And that's the last point I want to stress before I move on, unless Your Honor has other questions,

is that he didn't have counsel. And that's the other critical difference with State v. Davis.

There is no consensus so far as I can find from other jurisdictions, and this court has never addressed

trying a person in absentia when they don't have counsel.

But I think it's particularly problematic when someone doesn't have counsel to try them in absentia

when you're relying on hearsay statements about whether they understand the consequences of their actions.

I often describe to people the justice system and its adversarial process as being like a boat where both sides have to row.

The prosecution has to pull hard on its side, and I as the defense attorney have to match it so the boat goes straight towards justice.

But here, when we're moving to sentence someone in absentia and they don't have counsel, you only have to pull on one side.

So that's where things want to rise. We had sentencing going in a circle instead of going straight.

We had sentencing talking about the impact on the victims, but we didn't have any discussion at sentencing of Mr. Holloway's history of mental illness.

But wasn't that Mr. Holloway's choice to not have counsel, and that was knowing intelligent and voluntary?

I think it was his choice to not have counsel, Your Honor. I'm not arguing that his ferretta waiver wasn't knowing and voluntary.

I'm simply arguing that in this case, unlike State v. Davis, we didn't have anyone to argue his side at all.

And that compounds the error when we can't be sure whether he's waived his right to proceed and instead proceeding in absentia.

With respect to a warning, are you arguing for a sort of per se rule that there must always be a warning?

Or is the trial judge able to factor in other considerations, such as the prosa defendants' level of sophistication about the legal proceedings,

how he's conducted himself so far, and use sort of a factorial analysis to impute a knowing and intelligent and voluntary waiver?

So I don't think any of those factors that you just listed, Judge Will, are relevant to whether there's a knowing intelligent or voluntary waiver.

His general knowledge of the law or his ability to proceed in other parts of the trial.

Mr. Holloway ably proceeded with cross-examining witnesses, for example, and making several arguments.

But that doesn't mean he knew what he was waiving or what in absentia meant.

But can that be implied? Can there be a totality of a circumstance as sort of an approach that says,

look, I mean, it certainly, for you as a lawyer, you would know what the consequences might be,

and could someone in his position acquire sufficient sort of sophistication that his understanding of potential consequences could essentially be implied or imputed?

So I think the purpose of discussing the warning is that in that instance it is implied.

So I think you need a knowing intelligent voluntary waiver.

And Davis says, where someone's been warned and refuses to intend, that refusal is the waiver.

So in that instance it is implied.

But absent a warning where you just have refusal to attend, there's been no warning.

Where's the knowing involuntary waiver?

I read someone saying, I know, and I'm voluntarily waiving these rights or a warning and refusal to attend.

And I'm not categorically rejecting any other form of evidence, but I think that the other forms of evidence that your Honor mentioned are just not relevant to whether he's waiving this specific right.

And I would put it up equally with Ferreta rights.

We have a very strong record of his waiving his right to counsel and proceeding pro se.

And that's why we're not arguing that it was error to proceed without counsel at sentencing.

But we don't have anywhere near that record when it comes to sentencing him in absentia.

But I can turn next to competency.

The court denied the request to dismiss for competency in which Mr. Holloway argued that he should have been examined for competency already.

And that he believes he's not competent and therefore the case should be dismissed, which is the proper remedy when someone is not competent and not restorable is dismissal.

So I think that that issue is preserved by his written motion.

Are you saying he explicitly asked for a competency evaluation at that point in time?

No, your Honor, I'm not.

I'm citing to the appendix where he explicitly said the court should have conducted a competency evaluation.

The court was on notice that I couldn't work with my appointed counsel.

And the records replete with references from the court about him being unable to work with knowledgeable and experienced counsel who remain ready, willing and able to represent him.

And that he needs to learn to work with and take advice of his attorneys.

That's one of the two prongs of competency.

So I'm arguing that with that record, the court was aware and should have examined for competency.

And he argued and raised his motion.

I should have been examined for competency.

And he argued that it's clear I'm not competent and therefore the remedy is dismissal.

But you're not arguing that it was not competent to represent himself.

So how can he be competent to represent himself but not competent to be in trial?

Well, those aren't separate inquiries as I understand it, Justice Donovan.

I think that you have competency, whether you're representing himself or standing trial, is one inquiry.

And whether you're waiving your rights under Ferretta is a separate inquiry.

So I'm not arguing that you didn't waive his rights.

I'm arguing that he's not competent.

But if he wasn't competent, he couldn't waive his rights.

Well, I think that's correct.

That infects every level of the case.

That's true.

But I'm not arguing there's any specific error in the Ferretta waiver.

I'm arguing that the court should have held a competency determination.

And yes, that infects every level of the case.

In this case, I do think that there is an available remedy of a retrospective competency determination

because there were mental health experts retained by both sides who testified on both sides,

who both examined the defendant.

Neither of them were asked about competency.

They were only asked about criminal responsibility.

So I do think that on this record, the court could make a retroactive determination of competency

if indeed he was competent.

If he was not competent, then the remedy would be a examination to see if he's restorable.

So the evidence would be whether he was competent to stand trial at the time he stood trial?

At the time he stood trial.

So what happens if he's not competent now?

So the next inquiry would be whether he's competent now.

It could be that he's already been restored, in which case trial would proceed now.

If he's not been restored, then the state could make the necessary showing to have him restored.

We're just arguing that in this record, there is probably evidence that the court could use

to determine competency, but it didn't.

And the state has argued that the court was correct to say that the competency motion was untimely,

but they don't cite any authority for that.

And the court didn't cite any authority for that.

And the court didn't make any other findings of fact about competency other than to say unsupported

by the evidence, which was a global response to all of the motions raised.

The court really didn't address competency at all, and it should have, particularly given the record

where he had numerous attorneys ready, willing, and able to represent him.

And he kept saying, I'm being forced to proceed pro se.

But can't the trial judge who has had, you know, in essentially close contact now

with the defendant and has had a lot of contact with the defendant over the life of the case,

I mean, fundamentally, you know, when competency is raised, the trial judge has to make the

determination whether there's a legitimate basis.

I can't remember the specific language, but it's, and so ultimately the trial judge is going to make

that observation regardless of the sort of the actual words that come out of the defendant's mouth

about whether I, you know, I want a competency evaluation or what have you.

I mean, can we not rely on the judge's assessment of the defendant in real time

as this was all unfolding?

I think that we could if the judge had said, despite the motion, I see no bona fide concern here.

Bona fide concern.

Right?

But the judge didn't say that.

He said that the motion was untimely because it was filed after jury selection, which was clearly wrong.

It's contrary to long-established case law that competency may be raised at any time.

And I do think that there's at least a bona fide concern here where we have repeated statements

by the court itself that the defendant just can't seem to work with his counsel.

Thank you.

If I may, I do want to address the felony and possession issue.

I know it has many sub-issues.

I see I'm onto my red light.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Good morning, Your Honors.

May it please the court, Sam Gagnier, for the State of New Hampshire.

I'm going to start off with the sentencing and absentia issue moving into competency as the court just discussed with Attorney New Hall

and we'll move into the other issues time permitting.

Beginning with sentencing in absentia, this court did not hold in state versus Davis that for a knowing and intelligent waiver

such that somebody could be sentenced in absentia that that warning was required.

That was not the holding there.

There was a warning there, but I think Judge Will is correct that a record can allow a court to draw in a conclusion

impliedly that the defendant did understand the consequences when he made the waiver.

And I think we do have that record here.

Attorney New Hall made the argument that we don't know what the defendant understood in absentia to mean.

I think that can cut both ways.

I think it's notable that he even used the phrase in absentia.

I also think it's important that we look at the sentence that he said to the corrections officers.

I don't want to go to court.

The court can sentence me in absentia.

That sentence seems to suggest impliedly that you know what the consequences are.

I don't want to go and so the court can do what it was going to do anyway without me there.

But that's hearsay, isn't it?

So it may have been hearsay, Your Honor.

Even if it was, it was not a problem.

So there's probably two layers of hearsay.

It's the defendant's statement, so that one is not hearsay.

The second level I think arguably, and I don't know why I haven't run the entire analysis,

but I think arguably could have been caught by the catch-all.

I think in this circumstance there are circumstances of reliability for those memos.

And there were two memos and then on top of that to continue corroboration, I guess.

There are emails between even higher-ups from those officers about what was said.

But even if they were hearsay, I still think the trial court could consider them in this context.

The rules of evidence did not apply here.

Further, Your Honor?

You're saying under Rule 1101?

That is correct, Your Honor.

And you're saying it's not hearsay because it's a party admission, or what's the theory there?

So I think, again, I think that this is two layers of hearsay.

I think the first layer is the defendant's statement.

That one is not hearsay because it's the statement of a party opponent.

But then that statement is tucked into a memo, and the memo itself is hearsay.

But I do think there are circumstantial guarantees of trustworthiness there,

such that it might be able to fit the catch-all exception if it were hearsay,

but it is the state's position that it is not hearsay.

Finally, notwithstanding the defendant's argument,

the only thing that we didn't hear is Attorney Newhall represent

that the defendant affirmatively did not know what he was doing,

that he didn't know what it meant to be sentenced in absentia.

He's making the argument that we don't know what it meant to him,

but he's not standing here affirmatively saying,

I wanted to be at sentencing.

These people are lying.

These memos are not true.

None of that's here.

It was an objection file to the extended term, sentencing, right?

Not at sentencing, but when the notice of an intent to seek an extended term

at the beginning of the case was filed, then the motion was filed.

The court considered those arguments?

The court did not consider those arguments.

The court said that this is one woefully underdeveloped

and does not apply the correct legal standard,

but also it is premature, which was the right decision.

The court should not address the constitutionality of a statute

when it remains possible that the defendant is acquitted of everything

and so you don't need to reach that constitutional question.

But the defendant did not then re-raise that argument when it was time to.

I understand that he was not there,

but as Justice Countway pointed out, that was his choice when he represented himself.

He did not move for the evidentiary hearing.

The trial court pointed out that he would need.

All he had submitted with his original motion were statistics.

And as this court said in Addison, that alone is not enough.

He had to develop some factual record to prove that claim,

or at least to support it.

And he didn't even move for the evidentiary hearing

to try and start building that record.

Moving into competency.

As Justice Donovan pointed out,

there was no explicit request for a competency evaluation here.

The defendant was found competent to represent himself

and the state submits he did so competently.

If the court looks to the motions that he filed,

they are quite articulate.

They make good arguments to some of them.

He was even able to successfully get his statements to police suppressed.

And he filed that motion to suppress.

It is difficult to maintain that he was not competent to stand trial.

That is, he did not rationally understand the proceedings

such that he could assist in moving forward and defending his case

and then out of the outlier side of our mouths.

Acknowledge that he did have some success in defending the case.

Those two things just contradict each other.

And then further, the motion itself,

it points out that the defendant has paranoia and PTSD

and then seeks a remedy of dismissal.

And it's under the heading,

failure to investigate mental health.

It's unclear exactly what the defendant is saying there.

It should the case be dismissed with prejudice

because the court had some affirmative obligation

that it did not undertake.

It's not exactly clear,

but it does not look like a request for competency here.

Somebody can have PTSD and paranoia

and still rationally understand the proceedings that they're going through.

That's not, and to point out that somebody has a mental illness

is not necessarily a request to be evaluated for competency.

And as to the retrospective evaluation,

I do not think this court can conduct a retrospective evaluation of competence here.

I don't think the court has the record for it.

I'm not sure there's any authority for that

or that it would be proper.

And moreover, to the court,

to the extent that the court does have records related to mental health,

those mental health professionals were evaluating the defendant

for criminal responsibility.

I understand Attorney Muehl's argument.

He's arguing that we should remand for retrospective hearing on competency.

Not that we do it here,

but the Superior Court would do it.

Is that a proper remedy?

That is also not a proper remedy, Your Honor.

Nor do I think the Superior Court would even have the records to do it.

Nobody evaluated the defendant to determine right now,

do you understand the proceedings that are happening?

Can you consult with people to defend yourself?

They evaluated him to determine at the time that you committed this crime.

Were you sane?

Did you understand right from wrong?

Did you know what was going on?

The answer to that question is yes or no.

It tells us nothing about the defendant's competency at the time of trial.

And finally, the judge did, to Judge Will's question,

can this court rely on the trial court's interaction with the defendant

over the case of four years, many legal pleadings, many discussions?

I think the answer is yes.

And the trial judge does not necessarily so many words

that I don't have any bona fide doubt as to the defendant's competency,

but the court did not just say that the motion is untimely.

The court also said that the motion was, quote,

not supported by the law, the facts, or the procedural history of this case.

I think that is essentially the judge saying that is not consistent

with anything that I've experienced over the last four years.

The defendant is ably arguing.

He's articulate.

He's submitting motions.

He's raising defenses of self-defense and competing harms.

He's doing the things that an attorney might do.

So I don't think there is anything on this record to suggest

that competency was really an issue

or that the defendant ever sought any sort of a ruling on competency.

Looking next to venue, the defendant did file a motion to change venue.

So he preserved the issue, but he did not make any arguments about prejudice.

Even setting that aside, even if this court says that it's preserved,

notwithstanding he did not make this.

Can I take you back to sentencing in absentia?

Yes, please.

So you observed that Davis doesn't lay down a requirement for warnings.

So what is it that you say would be enough for a trial judge

to find a knowing intelligent and voluntary waiver

of his right to be present at sentencing?

So I mean, if there's a black line rule or a black line rule

that a warning is required, then that makes these disputes

sort of much easier as a matter of fact, right?

And it makes the rules of the road very clear for everybody going forward.

Under your scenario, what would the analysis be

and what's the basis for that?

Excuse me.

Sure, Your Honor.

I do think that the point is well taken

that with a black line rule, it would be very easy.

We know what you have to do to waive this.

Because this court has not said that,

that just is not the law right now.

And because this argument would have to be analyzed under plain error,

that cannot be plain.

Because this argument that you can't sentence me in absentia

was not preserved.

This is what the defendant requested.

So now getting to the heart of the question,

how do we analyze it in this case?

I think because there is no law that says, you know,

this is the call of way you have to conduct,

like there is in other circumstances,

I think what we have to do is look to the facts and the circumstances

and ask, you know, putting those together

in the totality of the circumstances,

do we think the defendant knew what the consequences of this would be?

Was the waiver voluntary?

And I think on this record,

the defendant is not saying that it's not voluntary.

He's not saying that the DOC told me

they're not taking me to sentencing,

so you better just get sentenced in absentia.

He's not saying any of that.

And I think his knowledge is pretty clear from this record.

He is very well involved in these legal proceedings.

And again, does not just tell,

he doesn't just tell the DOC, you know,

pounds saying, I'm not going to sentencing.

He says something more specific.

I don't want to go to sentencing.

The court's going to have to sentence me in absentia.

Essentially, again, baked into that statement is,

this is my decision,

and I understand that that is my consequence of that decision.

Is the trial court's determination a factual one?

I don't...

I'm certain that there's an answer to that in case law, Your Honor.

But I think that there are facts to be found

in determining whether somebody knowingly

and voluntarily waived something,

and so I think that deserves some deference.

On the venue issue,

the defendant submitted one news article

with his motion to change venue

and then a few more news articles

when he submitted a filing after the state had objected.

And as the trial court observed,

he never argued that the contents of those articles

were so prejudicial.

He just argued that there was a lot of them.

And if this court looks at those articles,

it will see that the articles pretty even-handedly

cover what the state said in pleadings

and what the defense said in pleadings

and what the state said...

What's that, Your Honor?

The publicity was addressed during jury selection.

That is correct, Your Honor.

And the trial court said when it denied the motion

that this will be addressed at jury selection

and then it was jurors who said I followed this so closely

that I can't be partial or excused.

Some jurors said I don't trust the media.

They may have gotten sat.

And the argument that is tucked into the defendant's brief

that the jurors' responses to questions

supported his motion for venue,

that didn't get put before the trial court.

That argument was not raised,

so the trial court never got to consider it.

As to the testimony at the felon phase of the trial,

the defendant says that the trial court aired

and not allowing him to say that he was not a felon

because in Massachusetts...

If he were charged with the crimes

he was convicted of in Massachusetts in New Hampshire,

he would have put forth a self-defense defense

and a defense of others.

The trial court made no error

in stopping the defendant from telling him that.

That is also the law in Massachusetts.

The defendant tries to distinguish this on appeal

by saying that Massachusetts has a duty to retreat

and New Hampshire does not.

Even if that is true now, that was not true

when the defendant pled guilty to these charges.

That development happened in 2011,

eight years after the Massachusetts convictions.

So that was not an error.

Jury instructions that the trial court did not instruct

the jury on the definition of felony.

The defendant concedes he's raising this under plain error.

This court has never held that that instruction is required.

Therefore, even if there is an error, it cannot be plain.

And even if you could get there,

you couldn't get over the third and fourth prongs

of plain error because as a matter of law,

the convictions were indeed for felonies.

So the jury reached the correct result.

And as to the final point, the sufficiency,

this is a bit interesting to me.

I usually see this element stipulated to.

It wasn't in this case, and so it goes to the jury.

But that's something of a head scratcher to my mind in itself

because whether or not the defendant was convicted of,

whether or not the defendant was convicted

in Massachusetts of crimes, that can be a question of fact.

But whether or not the crimes for which he was convicted

are felonies.

That is a question of law.

There is a right answer and there is a wrong answer.

It's not a gray area where facts need to be found

to reach a conclusion.

It's right or it's wrong.

And the jury reached the correct conclusion.

Any error that could have happened there

was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt

because the jury was correct as a matter of law.

If the court has no further questions,

the state would rest on its papers.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you, Your Honor.

I want to try to address a few issues

that were raised by my colleague on the other side.

He argued that the issue of sentencing and absentia

was not preserved, but we have argued in our reply

that preservation can happen by anyone,

including by an opposing party,

and in this case it was addressed on the merits by the court.

It was addressed by the state's motion

on sentencing and absentia,

and the court itself showed that it was aware of the issue

and it was addressing in detail,

so particularly where the defendant's not even there

to raise and specifically preserve it.

I think that it's been preserved under this court's precedent

requiring an opportunity for the court

to address the issue on the merits,

which is what happened.

Second, to justice,

and to your question of whether it's a question of law

or a question of fact,

the waiver is a mixed question of law.

In fact, certainly the court's factual findings

about this was said or this was not

based on this evidence, those are questions of fact.

But whether those statements were a knowing and voluntary waiver,

that is a question of law,

whether that amounts to a waiver.

So the fact that no warnings were given,

that's a question of fact,

and the record supports that no warnings were given.

But whether he under his statement

about the sentence being absentia,

whether that's a knowing and voluntary waiver,

that's a question of law.

On the felony and possession charge,

I do want to note there's no evidence

provided to the jury at all

as to what the penalty was

for the Massachusetts crime,

which is how this court has defined a felony

when it's from another state.

Also, although the state is correct

about the timing of the amendment to the Hampshire statute,

New Hampshire requires only that you retreat

if you can do so, quote, incomplete safety,

and quote, whereas Massachusetts,

in the case cited in our brief,

states that you must attempt retreat

or attempt to retreat.

So Mr. Holloway could have claimed self-defense

or defensive others in New Hampshire.

He could not have claimed it in Massachusetts.

What significance does his having pleaded to those charges

and therefore essentially waive those defenses

in Massachusetts have?

None, Your Honor, because the defense

didn't exist in Massachusetts.

It only exists in New Hampshire.

In Massachusetts, under the facts he would assert,

he would have been guilty because

the person he was defending did not attempt

to retreat or attempt to retreat.

But under New Hampshire law,

he would have been not guilty

because he could show that

they could not retreat in complete safety.

He was not allowed to put on that evidence.

And I see my red light is on.

Thank you, Your Honors.

Case submitted.

Thank you, Your Honor.
