This is case 2024-0391, Kimberley-Larris trustee versus Stephen P. Wilgaard's junior trustee at all.

I believe I have two minutes reserved for a moment. Good morning.

May it please the court? My name is Matthew Dulude, and I represent the appellants from cross-appellees Stephen Wake-Larris and Mary Wake-Larris.

With respect to our appeal, there are two remaining main issues that we look to have the court reverse from the trial court decision below.

Those two issues are the estoppel by deed issue and the attorney's fee issue.

For the estoppel by deed issue, we look to the actual language of the doctrine.

Where property is conveyed in a deed and one or more of the calls is in a buttle on a private way,

there is at least a presumption of a grant of an easement in such way when the way is owned by the grantor.

And looking at that test and unpacking its elements, we see that several are missing in this case.

And therefore the trial court in Providence granted an easement based upon the estoppel by deed doctrine.

Our primary argument on this is the fact that the grantor didn't own the way in question.

Ultimately, as the trial court correctly found, that the defendants established that the portions of the towel plan and the Sibarowski deeds

that describe the way depicted that way to be located on a property that was not geographically located where the Wake-Larris parcel is located.

And when I refer to the Wake-Larris parcel, I'm referring to the disputed parcel, the right-of-way parcel, the right-of-way.

It's been described in a million different ways in this case, but ultimately the parcel of property that was the Acroyd remnant parcel.

That parcel was not owned by the grantor, or that parcel was owned by the grantor at the time of the conveyance,

the towel deed in the towel plan.

However, the towel deed and the towel plan described that right-of-way to be located in a location that was not where the Wake-Larris parcel is geographically located.

Well, why does that matter?

That matters because the test that I just read, Your Honor, the test for the estoppel by deed requires that the way that is described in the deed,

and it is, again, as described in the deed.

But the conveyance from Acroyd to Palmerlow and Picard, the northern Picard property,

set the boundary of the right-of-way between those two.

If you take those two deeds together, the right-of-way boundary, the east and west boundaries,

are set by the common boundary between those two parcels and the right-of-way.

With respect, Your Honor, they're not, actually.

When Acroyd conveyed her parcels out in the course of conveying a parcel, she owned most of Cedar Point,

and when she was conveying parcels on Cedar Point, she described that parcel, the remnant parcel.

She always described it as other land to the grantor.

I missed that. What did you say?

Acroyd. Every time Acroyd ever referred right away, she would describe it as such.

Every time she conveyed land in this area, she always referred to the Wake-Larris parcel as other land to the grantor.

The first time we ever see it referred to as a right-of-way is in another deed that's a stranger to these deeds

and is in a conveyance that was subsequent to a conveyance that she had created.

It was never in a conveyance that Acroyd created.

And it was also never in a conveyance that Towell created, or that Sibarowski created,

or that the Salvation Army created, which are the subsequent title owners prior to Laris,

and then there were some more in between.

But ultimately, every single time it's ever referenced in the actual title history that's relevant to the Laris parcel,

it's always just referenced in passing in the Meads and Bounds as a right-of-way that's referenced.

But that description, and we parse it out more clearly in the brief and below,

that description always tracks along distances and measures,

and it never puts that right away on the Wake-Larris parcel.

It always puts it to the west of the Wake-Larris parcel,

a land that's currently owned by the ex and was owned by Picard at the time.

But that's ultimately what is...

But this is critically important, because if the grantor doesn't own the way that's described in the deed,

then the grantor can't be stopped from denying the existence of the right-of-way,

because they don't actually own that way.

And it has to go based on what's described in the deed, because it is, in fact, a stop-off by a deed.

And we see that regularly in the court's decisions.

We look to the face of the deed.

In fact, in their own brief, they quote the Lawfler decision,

such an estoppel is one by deed, because the deed on its face

makes either an express grant or one arising by necessary implication

and prevents the grantor from denying the representations made.

So we have to actually look to the representations that are made in the actual deed.

We don't look somewhere else.

We don't go searching about for other evidence of where it might be.

Well, we don't look around for other land of the grantor that could be potentially a right-of-way.

We say, what does the deed say?

And if the deed says that there's a right-of-way,

and that right-of-way is in fact owned by the grantor at the time, then fine.

There's a right-of-way by a stop-off by a deed.

In this case, we take another step with respect to the tally deed,

because the tally deed directs you to a plan.

And that tally deed directing to a plan shows us a plan that shows a right-of-way on that plan.

But once again, the right-of-way is not depicted to be located

in the geographic location of the Weigler's parcel.

It's depicted to be located to the west.

But doesn't the trial court's order make a factual finding

that the tall sisters owned that right-of-way

at the time they deeded out the other properties?

At the time the tall sisters deeded out the other properties,

they owned the acroyd remnant parcel.

It wasn't called the right-of-way.

It wasn't said to be a right-of-way.

And just to be clear, a right-of-way doesn't exist on its own.

It always exists over a parcel.

They did own the underlying Weigler's parcel at the time they conveyed out,

the deed descriptions.

What we looked to in the Estoppel by Diet analysis,

the descriptions of the right-of-way in those deeds

are describing a location that does not geographically align with what they owned.

It geographically aligned with what the Picard property owned,

or the X owned, or the Russell Realty owned,

but not what the tall sisters ever owned.

There was no point in time when the tall sisters ever owned the property

that's actually described in the deed to be the right-of-way.

So yes, they owned the underlying Weigler's parcel.

There's no question about that. There's no dispute about that.

When you say Weigler's parcel, you mean the strip of land

that is being called the right-of-way by the trial court, right?

That's correct, Your Honor.

It's about 50 feet wide at the top and it's about 13 feet wide at the bottom,

which is another problem fundamentally

because the towel plant depicts it as a 17.3 foot wide right-of-way

and neither of those spots measure out.

There's not enough room at the bottom and there's too much room at the top.

So it doesn't even line up with what the towel plant shows,

but yes, that is what I refer to as the Weigler's parcel.

We could call it the disputed parcel if we're looking for a more neutral term.

I call it the Weigler's parcel because that's what the top of my clients

require by adverse possession in the by title action

and so we call it the Weigler's parcel,

but the disputed parcel works just fine.

What I do push back against is the idea of calling it the right-of-way parcel

because that sort of, you know, it puts out the answer.

This is what we're saying is not the case, right?

And there's really no such thing as a right-of-way that stands on its own.

It's always a right-of-way over a piece of property.

So that's the first main argument on the Estoppel bike deed analysis.

The second is that it has to...

Well, let me stop you there for a moment.

Of course, absolutely.

So the tollsisters owned the disputed strip of land

That's correct.

and owned the land that they conveyed to Siborowski.

Yes.

Why didn't that conveyance of land to Siborowski

without the strip of land that they owned?

Why didn't that create an easement bike deed?

By Estoppel bike deed?

By Estoppel, thank you.

Because the way that was described...

First of all, they didn't do a grant, so there's no express easement

and I can get into that more if you want to hear more about that.

But ultimately, there's no language of grant.

They're not granting an easement.

As the trial court found, it assumed that an easement already existed.

But ultimately, the reason why it doesn't create an easement by virtue of that

is because we looked to the Estoppel bike deed doctrine

and the Estoppel bike deed doctrine didn't describe that parcel as the right of way.

So they're not a stop from anything in their deed

from denying the existence of a right of way.

But why doesn't it abut on a way?

Why doesn't the Siborowski parcel abut on a way?

Right, so that gets to the second part of the Estoppel bike deed analysis

and the language that's always been used in this court's decisions

is that it abuts on a way.

In other words, the way itself is a boundary of the property.

Essentially, the most common situation is a series of streets

with different parcels around the streets.

You're budding on the way and logically,

you have a right to use that way if you're budding on the way.

In this case, at best, it's perpendicular

and it's not a budding along the way.

It's not the border.

And the language has always been that it's on a way.

So I'm in some of the exact language.

In Laughler, it was fence turning

and running in the southeast early direction

along the 40-foot right of way for a distance of 150 feet.

In Doleman, it was describing properties at issue

with a 30-foot wide passageway by affecting a larger regional parcel

and it said, it must be emphasized that this is a case

where the face of the deed itself represents

that the conveyed parcel borders on a way.

That's in other words, it's running alongside.

It's essentially to ensure that somebody doesn't create a series

of streets and then forget to create an easement

that grants the right to those streets

and then they can go and use those streets.

That's the purpose of it.

And ultimately, that has been a consistent theater.

The consistent basis of New Hampshire law on easements

is that you don't just willy-nilly grant them.

They don't just willy-nilly come to existence.

There has to be something that creates them.

It's just not sufficient to have a close enough.

It's not that.

We have to actually need the elements

of the different standards that we've set.

I see that I might eat my yellow lights on.

So I'll briefly move to the attorneys of the issue.

I grant you that we have a pretty tough standard of review

if we're looking at the bad faith determination

or we're looking at the necessary party determination,

although I think that could be considered a legal issue.

But with respect to race judicata, that is de novo.

That is just a rule of law.

Race judicata, as the trial court itself has found in this case,

race judicata applied to prevent the issuance of any fees

related to the quiet title action.

And that's essentially what this is about,

because as the court had said before,

the right that they had for...

Here we are.

The trial court only concluded that while the plaintiff's right

to be named in the prior action was clearly defined,

her right to use the right-of-way was not.

This case that's on appeal now

is about whether or not layers had a right-of-way

over-the-way glares, the disputed parcel.

This case is about that.

The prior case, the quiet title case,

whether or not she should have been notified

as a necessary party in that case,

if she was in fact a necessary party.

Whether or not that was correctly done or not,

whether or not there was even bad faith associated with that

or not, which of course we dispute.

Even in those circumstances, it's ultimately

race judicata that applies to prevent

re-litigation of that issue, because

we had the quiet title order, we got the final order,

then they moved to intervene.

They requested to undo the entire quiet title order

and to get fees among other requests for relief.

Didn't the trial court vacate the prior

order on the quiet title action?

That's correct.

The trial court vacated the prior quiet title order

and issued an amended order that

essentially addressed the issues that they had raised,

but critically, did not award attorney's fees.

And that order was an amended final order.

You can see it on the record.

It's been a final order since I think 2022.

It has not been appealed.

She never appealed it.

And the trial court itself recognized that that was correct.

That you can't issue fees in that case,

because that case was concluded by

a final order that was not appealed.

So race judicata bars any fees associated

with conduct in that case.

And we see that the only factual

determinations that the trial court ever made

with respect to attorney's fees in this case

were related to the quiet title action.

So whatever arguments layers might have had

with respect to that case and for those fees,

those are all waived by race judicata.

They're no longer available.

It makes sense that it would be in that case,

because realistically, if we did something wrong

in bringing that case without notifying her,

then in that circumstance, the amount of fee

at work should be cabinet based upon

what actually was done in the quiet title action,

what needed to be done, the motion to vacate,

the motion to intervene.

Those things would have been things associated

with remedying the alleged issue.

That's why we have those cabinets separate.

If she had appealed that and brought that up

and then had gotten a different determination,

that would be one thing, but it didn't happen.

Race judicata now bars her for bringing it in this case,

and the court respectfully erred

by a basically sanctioning us for conduct in the case.

And there was no request for fees in the quiet title case?

In the quiet title case, there was a request for fees.

There was.

And it was denied.

Go ahead.

I'm sorry.

I see my red light.

Go ahead.

The request was made in the pleadings,

the motion to vacate, the motion to intervene.

There was no explicit binding by the court.

Determination, I'm not granting you fees,

but the amended final order was an amended final order,

and it did not grant your fees.

So she had included the request

and essentially the pleadings going to the court.

Correct.

And the motion to vacate the order,

I can find it specifically while I'm waiting for counsel,

but specifically in the motion to vacate, I think it was.

It was one of her requests for reliefs

essentially in her prayer for relief.

That's correct.

Yeah, and I think it was in the body of it as well.

She was pretty zealous about it.

In fact, there was an entry in the time entries

that they were teeing this up to try and get a fee award,

which I pointed out in the freeze.

Thank you.

Attorney Dolan, you've reserved two minutes.

Attorney Graham.

Good morning, Your Honors.

Thank you, Mitt.

Pleased to court.

My name is Owen Graham.

I'm Solesee Kitter Saber-Lohman,

and I represent Appellee Cross-Appellent.

Kimberly Laris,

and I'm the trustee of the Hope for a Better Tomorrow

Revocable Trust.

I will confine most of my time, Your Honors,

to responding to the arguments on the Estoppel by Deed issue,

and I will briefly address the attorney's fees issue as well.

I'm, of course, happy to answer any questions

about any other arguments the court may have.

As to the Estoppel by Deed arguments raised by appellants here,

I think they fundamentally misapprehend what is required

by the Estoppel by Deed doctrine.

The court, the trial court here found that the Tau sisters

conveyed some of their land to Sibyrowski,

and in doing so used as a call in their deed to Sibyrowski

the right-of-way parcel here.

I may use the right-of-way parcel.

I may use the speed of parcel.

I know there are a lot of different ways.

But if you refer to right-of-way parcel,

I mean the speed of parcel.

So the trial court found, as a matter of fact,

that the deed used as a call a buttle on the right-of-way parcel

and therefore found that implied easement was created

under the Estoppel by Deed theory

and that all parties in privity, including the appellants here,

are stopped to deny the easement's existence.

Now, appellants have advanced the argument that the location

as described on the face of the deed is what controls,

but that is not what the Estoppel by Deed doctrine supplies.

In fact, as appellants just referenced,

this court in Doleman stated,

it must be emphasized that this is a case where the face

of the deed itself represents that the conveyed parcel

borders on a way.

What is integral to the application of the Estoppel by Deed argument

or doctrine is that the deed itself references

that there is a boundary on a right-of-way

and that gives rise to implied easement to use

over that right-of-way.

That is exactly what occurs here.

There is a deed, as I just referenced,

from the towel sisters to the Sibarowskis

that uses as a call in a bottle on a right-of-way.

And so, what the trial court then correctly did

was get engaged in a historical analysis

under the context of the historical record

as to where this right-of-way parcel exists.

And as Your Honor correctly pointed out,

it dates back to the acroids' possession of the land

and her very purposeful retention of certain land

running between other parcels,

which, as the trial court concluded,

really could only be deemed to be used

by those northerly parcels

to access Cedar Point Road and Little Bay.

So, you know, I think it's important to make clear

that the correct application of the stop-by-d doctrine,

how the trial court applied it,

is finding the threshold issue of whether or not

the deed itself references an abuttle on a right-of-way,

which it does here,

to then give rise to the implication

of an easement over that right-of-way parcel.

We submitted, in our papers,

reference to a Pennsylvania Supreme Court decision,

which, of course, is not, I understand,

mandatory authority for this court,

but I think it's persuasive.

It's a 1974 case, Justin J. Powell, Inc., via YN,

I believe is pronounced.

Similar situation where the party in that case

objected to there being a stop-by-deed

over a abutting parcel,

which was a 100-foot street abutting the property

that was not adequately defined in the deed.

The Pennsylvania Supreme Court found

that still an easement by implication arose

applying the stop-by-deed doctrine

and said something the effect of mathematical certainty

with respect to the location of the right-of-way

is not material to the application

of the stop-by-deed doctrine.

And again, in this case, that's what we have.

We don't have mathematical certainty

as to exactly where the right-of-way existed,

perhaps when you're looking solely

to the towel deed and the towel plan.

But as the trial court correctly concluded,

if you engage in the level of analysis that it did,

it becomes very clear under historical context

that the right-of-way exists over the disputed parcel.

And historically, it was intended to be located exactly there.

And I will just also note that the trial court

made this determination not only as a matter of law,

but also as a matter of fact.

And as this court is well aware,

these findings of fact are due deference on appeal.

And it would suggest that that finding of fact

should be given the deference that it's due.

Turning to the issue of the second argument

advanced by Appellants,

that there is not in fact in a buttle

shown by the deeded issue here,

the black slaughter dictionary defines a buttle

as the boundary lines of a piece of land

in relation to other contiguous lands.

I would submit, and as the trial court concluded,

the right-of-way does in fact abut the land

that the towel sisters conveyed to Sibirasi.

And one of the calls for that conveyance

was in a buttle on the right-of-way.

So as a matter of fact,

the deed conveying to Sibirasi

uses that a buttle as a call.

Appellants seem to suggest

that the directional nature of that right-of-way

is material.

But I would submit that the case law,

whether it's perpendicular or parallel,

I would submit that perhaps

that in certain instances in this court's cases

it has been running parallel

versus perpendicular,

but that that's not a material issue

as to whether or not there is in fact in a buttle.

Again, this argument was rejected by the trial court

and we would submit that it should be rejected

by this court as well.

One issue that was not discussed

just now by Appellants,

but that I will respond to briefly

is the third argument they raised

with respect to a stop-up by deed,

which is that it's somehow material

whether or not there was reliance

by the grantee on the fact of the easement.

And if you look at this court's decision in Laughler,

it in fact states that nowhere in our discussion

of the contours of a stop-up by deed

or in our application of it to the facts of the case

did we suggest that the doctrine turned

upon the reasonable expectations

of either the grantor or the grantee

separate from those arising from the deed's use

of the right-of-way

in describing the property's boundaries.

Now in Laughler, the court does go on to consider

whether or not the original grantee

had a reasonable expectation

in, you know,

acquiring an easement over the right-of-way,

but it did so and noted that it was a departure

from the earlier decision in Doleman

and it was not deciding that it was inclined

to use that as a factor in its analysis moving forward.

So we would suggest that the body of law

does not support finding that the reliance

is a requirement of the stop-up by deed analysis.

However, I'll take it even one step further

to suggest that we're the court inclined to do so,

which again I would suggest is not appropriate

based off the prior law.

The trial court itself expressly concluded

that the fact indicate that the original grantee

here, Sabarowski, indeed, reasonably could have expected

and in fact did expect to receive an easement

over the right-of-way.

I would just admit that that's the finding of fact

that this court would appropriately be guided by.

So even if reliance were to be determined

to be a factor in the analysis,

the trial court in fact determined that reliance

would have been appropriately found here.

Can you address the attorney's fees argument

and Mr. Dulude's contention

that residue Ducata bars us from addressing it?

Thank you, Your Honor.

Turning to the attorney's fees issue

and particularly residue Ducata,

a couple of points.

First, while there may have been a passing request

as a request for relief in the quiet title action

for fees in that action,

by that point, this case, the underlying case here

was already being pursued.

And I think it would be...

It used to be being pursued.

You mean filed? You get exit filed?

They were filed on a parallel track.

They were both asked to vacate the order

of the quiet title action,

but then also there was a quiet title action

filed by my dissection here

to pursue her...

to vindicate her easement rights.

And so I think that there was a tacit understanding

that there was going to be an issue

of going forward with respect to fees in this action.

And I think it would be impossible

for the trial court to have determined

in the quiet title action filed by the appellants

the entitlement to fees in this action

because those fees had not yet been incurred.

And there was evidence to continue

to be heard by the court ultimately to be determined.

I will also note, and I believe

we've supplied these authorities in our papers

that there are equitable exceptions

to the residue Ducata doctrine

under circumstances similar to these

where I would submit

where there is a effort perhaps

to interfere with a litigant here,

my client's ability to present her case.

What's your understanding of the extent

to which the trial court vacated

the prior quiet title?

I'm very sorry.

I didn't hear the first part of your question.

What's your understanding of the extent

to which the trial court vacated

the prior quiet title decree?

Sure. I believe the language

that was included in the quiet title,

the amended quiet title order

was to suggest that the title was quieted

except to the extent of any easement

or encumbrances existing as a matter of law

or to be decided in the quiet title action

that we are now before Your Honor saw today.

So it left open the extent of the easements

that might be determined in this case itself

if that answers your question.

Could you go back to your thought

on how equitable principles may set aside

residue Ducata in a case like this?

Yeah, sure.

Excuse me.

Yes, so I wanted to find the authorities

and I might not be able to put my finger on them,

but I do believe there are papers.

Anyways, the concept, I believe, again,

is just that, well, raised Ducata

is often rigidly applied.

There are exceptions to rigid application

of the doctrine where there are

certain equitable factors at play.

And again, in this case, we would submit

that because of the very nature

of what was at hand here.

Contextually speaking, we had my client

who had been unaware of the quiet title action

had to, on an emergency basis,

appear, asked to be vacated,

and then also make a determination

as to how to proceed,

made the determination of how to proceed

as I'm going to file my own quiet title action

to vindicate the rights that have apparently

just been stripped from me.

Remind me, what was the appellant's explanation

for not naming your client in that original action?

I might let them say that.

I'm sorry, I don't recall exactly what was in the record

and I wasn't trial counsel at that point,

so I don't want to misrepresent the record, Your Honor.

I do believe that there have been

reasons articulated.

Our position would be that it was

not in good faith and fangirlated.

In other words, it was intentional.

That's correct, Your Honor.

Wasn't the argument made that it was frivolous

that your client's claim was frivolous

and that's why she wasn't included in the petition?

I don't know if there was a suggestion

that our client was frivolous.

I think there was a suggestion that any reasonable person

would have not incurred the fees and expenses

to pursue her position.

If there's a suggestion as to reasonableness

of our position, I would submit.

We only looked as far as the trial course decision

which indicated my client's rights.

So that would be our response.

I know my time is going to be drawing thin here,

so I'll just summarize by stating

that we would submit that the trial court's

decision should be affirmed as to its application

that was not by deed.

We do believe that other theories of easement

could have and should have been decided in our favor.

I didn't have time to address those today,

but they're detailed in our briefs.

I do want to...

I will say nothing more.

Thank you.

Thank you, Attorney Graham.

I'm going to go a little bit fast

to try and cover the different things,

but I think I can do it.

So starting first with the site, Your Honor.

The appendix number seven, and I apologize

for so many appendices

that are having trouble with the file size,

but at 103 has the request for attorney's fees

in the motion to vacate the order.

To answer Justice Donovan's question,

the reason why we didn't bring the by title action

against Laris at the time

was because she was never asserting

any claim to title of the property.

From our perspective, we said,

okay, we're only seeking title

with this adverse possession claim.

She's not a bees nest we have to kick.

Why wouldn't we kick a bees nest

for an emotionally unstable neighbor

and just cause her to be mad at us

and then create the fight?

It's a frivolous claim.

We saw no basis for it.

She hadn't even raised a stop of ID at that point,

which is arguably the best possible claim

she has for it,

but we have all the reasons that we think...

Isn't it true that after the quiet title order

in your favor in the original case

that you closed off access with signage?

So the reason that was because my clients

had just acquired title to the property

by adverse possession,

and I had explained to them at a certain point

that if somebody continues to walk

across your property for 20 years,

they will eventually acquire the right

to do so forever,

and they were concerned that Laris

continuing to walk across the property

that they had acquired would cause her to

adversely possess their rights on the property.

Hadn't Laris proposed to put a driveway

over the right-of-way before...?

She had before the germ.

So she was asserting the right to use that property

before you filed your quiet title action?

She was asserting it as a right-of-way.

She was asserting it as an easement, right?

We believed that because we were only

seeking title to the property

that we didn't need to bring her in that action.

Admittedly, the proposed order

was too broadly boarded,

and that is a mistake

that I will carry with me for the rest of my days

at Hotspeter this day.

I was during COVID.

I missed it.

It didn't mean for it to be as broadly

where it is it was,

but the moment that they reached out,

in fact, they didn't reach out this,

but two years of research in the case

and deciding what to do

in NeuroRack time records,

you see that they're teeing up a claim

for the best way to get fees.

The first thing I see is the motion to vacate

and the motion and the new case

all filed at once.

Immediately I got on the phone

and tried to tell them

that is not what we were trying to do.

That is not...

I see what you're saying with the proposed order.

We will agree to an amended proposed order immediately

and preserve your client's rights

to assert this claim to an easement

and we will fight that easement,

fight in the easement case.

But we would...

We never intended to do that.

We will immediately address it.

And ultimately what I recommended,

and I apologize I'm going past time,

but it's all spelled out in the briefs.

I just encourage your honors to look at the record

from what I have cited,

but it is all spelled out in the briefs.

And we literally...

What we had recommended

is the changes to the order

is what the court did.

Thank you.

Thank you councillor.

The case is submitted.
