This is case 2024-0239, the state of New Hampshire versus of Justin Sales.

Good morning, Attorney Barnard. I understand you reserved one minute.

I have. Thank you. Good morning. My name is Thomas Barnard. I represent Justin Sales.

I plan to address arguments 1, 3A, and 3C this morning.

And to make three points. First, the evidence was insufficient to support the charged variant of AFSA

because AA was not confined at the time of the sexual activity.

Second, AA's earlier confinement was merely incidental to the physical assaults

and thus did not justify a separate conviction.

And third, Sales' conduct supports only one witness tampering conviction

because he attempted to influence the testimony of one witness in one proceeding.

RSA 632A21E requires that the confinement be concurrent with the sexual activity.

It prohibits sexual activity when the victim submits under circumstances

involving false imprisonment, kidnapping, or extortion.

Here, the confinement had ended at the time the sexual activity took place.

AA testified that both she and Sales had started to chill out,

that Sales apologized, said he didn't mean to hurt her,

and that AA told Sales that she wanted to lay down and cuddle.

So what does the circumstances involving mean if not the broader circumstances of the assault?

It means that the door is locked. It means that the defendant is blocking the exit.

It means that the victim is somehow physically restrained,

or it means that the defendant...

So the legislature, instead of saying circumstances involving,

the legislature could have said wouldn't false imprisonment or confinement occurs?

I don't think... Yeah, I don't think there's...

I don't perceive a difference in those two phrasings.

I think that the phrasing that the legislature shows

indicates that the confinement has to be concurrent with the sexual activity.

It doesn't have to be a physical blocking of the exit.

It could be the defendant saying,

look, if you try to leave, I'm going to punch you.

That would be confinement also.

But there has to be some contemporaneous conduct or statement

that gives rise to that confinement, that constitutes that confinement.

Isn't there evidence though that every time she tried to separate herself

from the defendant that he began to choke her?

During the earlier physical assault, yes.

But isn't that evidence that when she attempted to get away

that he restricted that movement and violently assaulted her?

Why wouldn't she consider, believe that that would happen again

if she tried to get out of the room, leave the bathroom?

Well, we've got this break, this clear break

between the earlier assault and the sexual activity.

And it doesn't turn on her subjective belief.

But the question is whether objectively there was confinement

at the time that sexual activity took place.

And there was, here we have physical assaults

and then we have a resolution.

We have a...

Do we know how much time passed between the last assault

and the incident in the bathroom?

No.

No, we don't.

I can see that it was probably just minutes.

It might not have been a long time.

But that doesn't change the fact

that there was a clear change in the tenor of their interaction.

We have moved from this conflict to reconciliation.

And that reconciliation, we may consider that reconciliation

distasteful, but that's the facts

of what was happening in that apartment at that time.

But isn't that an awfully mechanical application

of the rule of law where sexual activity

or where the defendant creates a state of mind

of terror for the victim?

And just minutes later, are you saying that objectively speaking,

we could not conclude that she remained so afraid

for her safety that she was essentially intimidated

from attempting to escape?

Well, I'm saying that objectively there was no confinement

when the sexual activity took place.

Can't intimidation result in confinement?

It can, certainly it can.

And if we didn't have this change in the dynamics

of their interaction, then I would agree

she could still be confined because of what happened earlier.

But here we have this clear break

in the dynamics of how they're interacting.

We have this movement from conflict to reconciliation.

And that, and it's because of that clear break

that the confinement, any confinement that existed

during the physical assaults, no longer existed

when the sexual activity took place.

So you're really arguing that the state should have charged

them with a different variant of the AFSA structure?

If the state had charged a different variant,

the evidence here might have been sufficient.

There are variants that cover sexual activity

that take place when the actor...

Following threats.

Yeah, following threats.

When the actor threatens to use physical violence

or superior physical strength on the victim,

when the actor coerces the victim

to submit by threatening retaliation,

and this court has held that those threats

can be implied from prior circumstances.

Moving on to argument 3A,

AA's earlier confinement was merely incidental

to the physical assaults.

They did not justify a separate conviction.

AA testified that she was unable to flee

simply because sales was assaulting her.

She did not testify, for instance,

that sales blocked the door.

As in Miller, the confinement here

was incidental and inseparable

from the conduct constituting the assaults.

It was, quote, solely intended to enable sales

to accomplish his overall criminal scheme.

Under this court's merger doctrine,

because the confinement was merely incidental

to the physical assaults, sales could certainly

be convicted of the physical assaults,

but he could not, in addition,

be convicted of confinement as well

and sentenced on that confinement charge.

Turning to argument 3C,

sales' conduct supports only one

witness tampering conviction

because he attempted to influence the testimony

of one witness in one proceeding.

RSA 641.5 prohibits attempting to cause

a person to perform certain acts or omissions

affecting an official proceeding or investigation.

So the gravamen of that offense,

the unit of prosecution,

is each person and each proceeding

or investigation.

The state's argument here

that the unit of prosecution

is each attempt leads to absurd results.

Sales called or attempted to call

AA over 1600 times.

Under the state's argument,

he could be charged and sentenced,

he could be convicted over 1600 times

for witness tampering,

and he could be sentenced to a total sentence

that exceeds 10,000 years.

It is absurd to suggest that the legislature

intended that result

when it enacted the witness tampering statute.

This court should follow

the Supreme Court's opinion and haul,

hold that multiple attempts

to influence a single witness

in a single proceeding constitute

one unit of witness tampering.

What if there were different mechanisms

to engage in that witness tampering?

Phone calls versus text messages

versus written letters,

something like that.

I still think it's still one unit of prosecution

because it's one witness and one proceeding.

The statute covers

all attempts to cause a person

to testify falsely or withhold information.

It doesn't distinguish among different

modes of communication,

so I don't think there's a basis for saying

that each mode of communication constitutes

a unit of prosecution.

Wouldn't it be more logical

if it applied to separate charges,

for example, of calling her on day one

and asking her to testify

that she consented to sexual activity?

On day three, he asked her

to testify that she fell down

and that's how she got injured,

that he didn't assault her.

Doesn't that make more sense?

I can see two potential

basis for dividing up the charge.

One is that it happens on different days.

I don't think there's a basis in the statute

for saying that each day is the unit of prosecution.

A day is just an arbitrary time period.

Why a day instead of a week?

Why a day instead of an hour?

In terms of different requests,

testify to lie number A on one request.

About charge number B

and lie about something else

regarding charge number C.

Right, right.

I don't think there's a basis in the statute

to say that each charge is a...

can be a unit of prosecution.

The statute applies to official proceedings

or investigations.

If there's an investigation,

we have no charges at all.

But we wouldn't say,

well, he can't be convicted of witness tampering

because there are zero charges pending.

So the fact that there are ten charges pending

doesn't mean that the defendant

can be convicted of ten counts of witness tampering

in a way that might just reward the state

for overcharging to begin with.

What about witness tampering that escalates?

So it starts with a phone call

and next it's a threat.

If you don't recant, I'll break your leg.

And the third time,

there's an incident of some kind of physical assault.

Are you saying that all of those would be one unit?

I think there are different variants

of witness tampering.

A person commits witness tampering

if they attempt to influence

a person to testify or inform falsely

or withhold any testimony information document

or thing, that's what was charged here.

I believe there's also a variant of witness tampering

that covers crimes that are committed in retaliation

for a witness providing information or testimony.

And that's a separate variant of witness tampering

and I think in that case the state might have an argument,

a much better argument that that is a separate offense

and the defendant can be convicted multiple times.

If the court has no further questions.

What about the contempt and the court's authority

to order no contact in a bail order

as a condition of release?

So the court certainly has

I agree the court probably has inherent authority

to prohibit a defendant from contacting a witness

even if the defendant is detained.

But that authority does not derive from the bail statute.

It does not derive from RSA 597.

That authority is an exercise

of the court's inherent authority.

And when the court exercises its inherent authority

it has to do so on a,

has to be very circumspect about it

and very restrained about it.

It has to consider questions like

is there a compelling justification for this?

Is there no other reasonable alternative?

Here there is no indication that the court's order

was anything other than a run of the mill bail order

under RSA 597.

There's no indication that the court

acted in that circumspect or restrained way

or considered those questions of compelling justification

or alternatives.

There's simply no basis to look at the order here

and conclude that this was an exercise

of the court's inherent authority.

And in fact the order called the no contact provision

a condition.

Well if it's a condition it has to be a condition of something.

That makes sense if the defendant is released.

The condition of the release is that the defendant

have no contact.

If he does have contact his release can be revoked.

If the defendant is not released then it is illogical

to call the no contact provision a condition

because it can't logically be the condition of anything.

So although the court may have had

your position is although the court may have had

inherent authority to order this under certain conditions

the fact that it was ordered under 597

essentially renders it void.

Is the order just void an issue?

There's no authority for it?

There's no authority under RSA 597.

It would come into force if the court

modified its order and said

I'm changing preventative detention

to detention on $100,000 cash or surety

and the defendant were released

then that provision would come into force.

But as long as sales was detained

the condition of release did not apply.

He was not released.

Thank you.

Good morning and may it please the court

Adriana McCoola for the state of New Hampshire.

I want to start with something that you asked

Justice Gould when we were talking about

whether there was sufficient evidence

of the AFSAs in this case.

It would be a mechanical operation of the statute

that would require that this confinement,

this kidnapping or false imprisonment

or what have you be occurring

simultaneously to the sexual assaults.

That is not the way that the statute is written.

It is written as happening under circumstances

involving false imprisonment or kidnapping

or confinement which the trial court

broadly defined for the jury

as detention that restricts

a person's movement without their consent

and that includes confinement

that is accomplished by force, threat or deception.

The requirement that it be happening simultaneously

or contemporaneously or whatever other word

concurrently I think is the word

that the defendant used today in this argument.

The legislature does know how to write

statutes that do that.

In the capital murder offenses

or in the homicide offenses it does say

if you commit a murder while that person

is being kidnapped that simultaneously

if those two things occur

then that's a heightened penalty.

Here the language, circumstances involving

allows for the jury to look at

the entire criminal episode

whether it be in this case hours or perhaps even an hour

it's unclear how long this assault

really happened for

or over a period of days

because it is certainly possible

in there are cases out there that this court has decided

on other legal issues where the facts have been

that a person was kidnapped

or falsely imprisoned for days of time

and in that span of time

they were sexually assaulted

and that counted as this happening

under circumstances involving false imprisonment.

In this case there was

a plethora of evidence that she was

feeling as if she were confined

when these sexual assaults occurred.

Leading up to her being in the bathroom

she had been sleeping

after the defendant had gone out to the club

they had both been drinking.

She I think wanted to go to sleep instead of going out.

When he comes home he wakes her up

and the first thing he says to her

is to accuse her of cheating on him.

She says leave me alone

and she tries to get out of the bedroom

the living room to get away from him.

When she does that

she hears him break her phone

and then she feels him come up behind her

and begin to strangle her.

She is able to get away from him at that point

and then

when she fights back he strikes her everywhere.

She says on her face, on her legs

on her arms everywhere.

She does have broken ribs.

She has injuries all over her body when she goes to the hospital.

She then gets away

and is able to make it into the kitchen

immediately and then strangles her again.

This time she bites his thumb

hard to make him let go

and he bites her back numerous times.

I think there are multiple charges

for bites on her back and there were pictures

of those bites admitted at trial.

Then after she is able to get away

from him in the kitchen

she describes crawling into the bathroom

so that she could look at her face

wash it

and take a drink of water and figure out a plan

and it is while she is doing that

I think really honestly within

it may even be within seconds

he is in the doorway of that bathroom

while she is kneeling on the ground

after seeing herself bleeding from her nose

and her eyes are all bruised

one I think is swollen shut at this point.

He says, I want you to perform oral sex.

We don't know exactly what he said

that's how she described it at trial.

She says in trial

I think on cross examination even

I did not want to have sex

I did not want, I wanted to leave

before the sex occurred

but I also wanted to leave when he fell asleep

so that I could get my cat and get out safely

so her intention was not

to have sex with him.

She says to him in the bathroom

I just want to lay down in cuddle

after he apologizes in the hopes

that he will fall asleep

without anything else happening to her

so that she can leave.

It's in that moment that he demands

oral sex and she said

on direct that she was scared not to do that

that lasted seconds according to her

and then he demanded to have vaginal sex

with her. She again said I was afraid

not to allow that

that also lasted for seconds

and then he laid down on the bathroom floor

she rubbed his back until he fell asleep

and then she immediately picked up her cat

with nothing else and left.

So there is no doubt I think

for the jury to have found in this case

that she felt confined not only based on

what had happened leading up to those assaults

but her statements on direct

that she was scared not to

also her statements that

Is the victim's subjective belief

really relevant to whether or not

this element has been met?

Isn't it an objective standard?

So I don't know that the court has ever decided

like it has for criminal threatening

for example that you need both a subjective

belief from the victim that they are

really in danger and the subjective belief

that this is a real threat.

I don't know that this court has held that in this context

but I do think both are important

and if the jury did not feel coerced

to submit then it's entirely possible

that the jury would not feel

that this sexual assault had occurred

because she would therefore have consented.

So I do think both are important.

I think objectively the jury had sufficient

evidence to find that she did

really feel scared to not have sex with him

and I think the jury could also

sort of untangle her statements

on cross where she's saying

I freely chose to have sex with him

but I was scared to do so

on cross examination when the defense attorney

asked her to explain or reconcile

those two statements for the jury

she said if I hadn't been strangled

and beaten before it would be a different

story but I didn't know what would

happen if I had said no and so even

though she's trying to say to the jury

I made this free choice it's very clear

from her own statements and feelings

about that moment in the bathroom

that she did not feel that it was safe

to say no and that is

the coercion and the sexual assault

being under circumstances involving

confinement.

If there are no further questions on that point

I would move to the second argument

about the court's inherent authority

to issue a bail order

or a no contact provision even when

there's detainment.

Can you get to that? Sure.

What's the significance

in your brief on pages

16 and 17 you make reference

to a separate protective order? Yes.

And what effect

does that protective order have

on the issue of

sufficiency on the stocking

and contempt charges?

So I believe I'd have to look back at the charges.

I think the charges

for stocking and contempt

were based on the bail order that was

issued under 597.2 which I know

there's a copy. The other

protective order is a criminal bail protective

order that was issued

that also included a no contact order

and while I don't know that it was relevant

to sufficiency in terms of the jury didn't

receive that criminal bail protective order

that's not what the state relied on to prove

that order existed. However

if we're looking at the court's inherent

authority to issue no contact orders to

detained individuals at the bail hearing

which is only a 14 page transcript

the trial court after it ordered the defendant

detained told him

another condition is that you

not commit any crimes and that you also

not have contact with the victim

if released the court then listed several

conditions and then she also said

separate from the release

you also have this

it's called a criminal bail protective order

I'm not sure what the judge called it at the hearing

she may have called it a restraining order

or something else but this also requires

that you not have contact with the victim

in the same way that I've described as part

of this bail order that I'm issuing

and you have to comply with that as well

and the court certainly has statutory

authority and inherent authority to issue

those criminal bail protective orders

that I've met of which this case is

one and that requires

no contact regardless of release

the state didn't charge under

that criminal bail protective order

however the court certainly had

authority I think under both 597

2 and its inherent

authority to craft a bail

order that not only protected

the community from the defendant and

perhaps protected the defendant from himself

if you were a danger to himself

but also protected

the court's ability to administer justice

in a fair way

and ensure that both parties could come

to this court and come to this trial

and present their case fairly

I think those are intertwined

I think the set 597

2 does not say courts cannot

issue conditions for detained people

that statute does list out

the court's ability to

have some sort of combination of conditions

that would protect the community

and protect the defendant

and the court and the statute rather also

does not limit what those conditions are

while there are certainly conditions on the form

the court form that this court approved

there's also another section

where a court can add whatever conditions it wants

and even on

the first page of this bail order

it says above

where it says if released

it says the defendant is subject to the following

additional conditions and above that if released

the trial court listed this no contact

order so I think it's clear

that the court was using its authority

under the bail statute and its inherent

authority to issue this no contact order

to the defendant in a multitude

of ways and so it was very clear

he knew he could not contact her

while he was detained

if there are no further questions on that

issue I will move to the last issue

about merger

I'd like to start with the witness tampering

but I'm happy to start with criminal restrain

if you prefer the unit of prosecution

in a witness tampering case

those each attempt that a defendant makes

and it's based on

the specific words he's using

and I would direct this court to an unpublished opinion

from 2024

state v. Rivera where this court

in a very similar fashion it was

under a plan error this merger argument

was not raised down below this court

reviewed the issue of whether the defendants

for witness tampering convictions

could stand as they were

or if some of them had to merge

and this court found that two of them

were fine based on the calls

that were made but that two others

those charges were specifically

from the exact same phrases

that the defendant had used

I don't exactly remember the quote it's in the case

and I have the site

that I can grab in one second if anyone needs it

but it was essentially the same

four lines of statement that the defendant

had made through a jail call to another person

and the state had charged two variants

of witness tampering from that same statement

and this court said you can't

sentence him to two separate witness tampering

convictions for the same exact words

that are used and while this court did not

say in that unpublished case

that means then that the words are the unit of

prosecution I think that's what this court

was driving at that it's the words

that the defendant is using whether

they come in one phone call or 1600

phone calls that are

the unit of prosecution because

the state has to prove a purposeful

mens rea it is inaccurate to say

that the state could bring and prove a trial

1600 witness tampering charges

because not all of those

1600 phone calls were answered

so we have no idea what he intended

to say to her.

There are plenty of calls he made that

presumably no witness tampering occurred

not only based on the fact that there are only 19 charges

but in the sentencing transcript

the judge talked about how it was very clear

from the pendant the way the case had played out

that the victim and the defendant

were very much in love while this case

was pending and so it's very possible that some

of those calls were not witness tampering

they certainly maybe violated the no

contact order and perhaps the state could have

brought 1600 stocking

or contempt charges

but not witness tampering because they're based

on the words that are being used

and that's how these charges are

brought here I don't have all 19

out for you but some of them talk about

the defendant telling her to go in and say she has

amnesia some of them say

go make this false statement about

kinky sex gone wrong some of them

say you need to get me out on bail

because I need to be with my son

so he's using all different methods

of words and phrases

and motivations

on his part to witness tamper her

and each one of those statements is

the unit of prosecution

moving to the

criminal restraint argument

that does not merge

in this case with the simple assaults

the victim testified

at the trial in addition

to all of the statements she made about

being scared not to give him what he wanted

she had said that

she when she had tried to leave

as you pointed out just as Donovan he had pulled her back numerous times

and she also said

that she feared further harm

to herself if she left while he was

awake and it's that fear

of future harm that separates

this criminal restraint and prevents it from

being merged with these other assaults

how do you distinguish this case from Miller

so in Miller

that case where

the way the charges for false imprisonment

and unprivileged physical contact were brought

by the state where they both

charge the exact same actions by the defendant

which was pinning the victim down

by putting his hand on her neck

the state used that pinning down

as unprivileged physical contact

and as the false imprisonment

here the way the state charged this criminal

restraint it was that

she was confined by the defendant under

circumstances involving a risk

of serious bodily injury

that is separate from all of the serious bodily injury

that she very much did experience

during that assault because she testified

at least twice at this trial

that she was afraid of what would happen to her

if she left while the defendant was awake

and her

attempts to escape and his

pulling her back into the apartment

so those combined mean that

this is a not incidental to these assaults

he did not have to criminally

restrain her and that was not his only purpose

in committing these assaults

it was a separate offense on which

he can be sentenced at this juncture

if there are

I'm happy to address the one argument

that no one's addressed if anyone wants

but if there are no further questions I would rest on my brief

thank you

thank you

thank you I just want to address briefly the

allegations of the criminal restraint indictment

the indictment

for criminal restraint alleges

that sales

committed the offense under

circumstances exposing a to

risk of serious bodily injury

but then goes on to allege that he prevented her from leaving

the apartment during an argument that turned physical

where he subsequently straddled AA

on the floor and repeatedly struck

her in the head and face

it's the same exact allegation

that underlines the

assault charges

the second degree assault

the second degree assault and the domestic violence charges

unless the court has further questions

thank you

thank you very much counsel the case is submitted

the court invites

counsel in

in the matter of James

man to please
