This is case 2024-0303, state of New Hampshire versus sugar Hanamura.

Thank you for the record. The Chief Justice is disqualified. Penny Barnard. Did you reserve any time? I did. I reserve one minute. Thank you.

Prosecutor says at page 386 prosecutor says he was not qualified by the court to diagnose and then there's an objection

and after the

bench conference

the prosecutor prosecutor comes back and says so he was not qualified to diagnose bullish skin disorders

skin disorders

Which is to say the prosecutor never utters the complete statement the court never and

And so I does that make a difference in your argument? I don't think it does because the

The jury would have understood

The utterance before the objection and the utterance after the objection to be part of the same sentence

Well, they could have but couldn't the jury also have understood that there was an objection

It was sustained and the prosecutor came back with a different statement. I mean, isn't that equally possible? It's not because the court did not

Indicate in any way that the objection was sustained

The court did not strike but if the prosecutor statement or instruct the jury to disregard it

But at that point was there a statement to strike?

I mean the prosecutor got out a fragment of the statement before the objection cut it off, right? So

I mean it I don't think the trial the trial court wouldn't necessarily tell the jury that the objection is formally sustained or overruled

So that that wouldn't I think surprised me, but

Not not having gotten the complete statement out. Would there even have been a

Curative instruction to be given there there would have been had the court agreed that the argument was improper because

The improper portion of the argument

was uttered the improper portion is asking is

Arguing to the jury that they should consider

The fact that the witness was not qualified by the court and it doesn't matter what comes after the words by the court

Whatever comes after those words that is an improper

But there's a an objection and a bench conference in between right so it again the

Doesn't that doesn't that sort of cast what the prosecutor statement is after I mean another way of looking at it

Is the prosecutor might have decided on on the fly on the way back to counsel or on the way back to the to the podium from the bench

Conference, maybe I'm pushing it too far. So I'm going to recast

And and and and and so the complete statement

He gives doesn't have anything about the court qualifying the expert that would have been a wise decision by the prosecutor

If the prosecutor had made that decision, he would have stood back up before the jury and said let me start over

The witness wasn't qualified by his background training and experience to make this type. Okay, I understand. Yep, okay

The implication of the prosecutor's argument was that the jury could or should consider the court's pronouncement in

Determining the defense witness's expert's credibility and that implication blatantly misstated the law

Well, why doesn't the jury's at the trial judge's instruction regarding closing arguments is not being evidence

Why what is in that career problem?

Well, it still suggests to the jury that they should consider this matter that is not a proper matter for consideration

I'm not suggesting that the prosecutor while I am suggesting the prosecutor

Introduced facts not in evidence by making this argument because the court's pronouncement was was not

in evidence but

The reason the argument was improper is primarily because it suggested to the jury that they should consider an improper matter

If the prosecutor had suggested to the jury that they should consider the defendant's failure to testify

That would clearly be improper

It would warrant a curative instruction and the fact that the court gave a generic

Instruction that closing arguments are not evidence would not mitigate the prejudicial effect of that error

Did the defense counsel asked for a curative instruction?

No

Because the court ruled that the argument was not improper court ruled that it was quote fair argument

So it would have been futile for the defense to ask for a curative instruction at the court agreed and said yes

I agree that's a proper argument that point the defense could

Make requests about the remedy shutters such as striking the argument poor issue in a specific curative instruction

What can it get forgive me?

But would you agree with me that if the prosecutor had never said he was not qualified by the court to diagnose?

Which prompted the objection, but if all the prosecutor had said was so he was not qualified to diagnose

Bolaskin disorders, would you agree with me that that would be a permissible argument 100%? Okay? Thank you. Yes, all right

those three words

By the court is what rendered the argument improper and given that

judges

Authority in a trial those are three power forwards

When the prosecutor blatantly misstates the law the court is required to give a curative instruction the court's failure to give a curative instruction here was error

Now the state argues that the prosecutor's argument is proper

But it does so only by ignoring those three words by the court

Essentially the state presents the case as if the prosecutor had merely argued that Kurtz was qualified by his background

Trading and experience but as we've discussed that is simply not true

The prosecutor told the jury he was not qualified by

Was the jury ever told that the court had qualified this expert as

having expertise in emergency medicine and

differential diagnoses, you know the pronouncement was this

I

Ruled that the doctor may testify in the area of emergency room medicine and the process of arriving at a differential diagnosis

And he is an expert in those two areas and that was stated to the jury that was stated. Well, it was

It was pronounced by the court in the hearing of the jury

It's our position that that should play no role in the jury's deliberation, but certainly the jury

Thank you, and that is that's the statement that the prosecutor attempted to

exploit in closing argument by suggesting that because

Kurtz had issued an opinion that fell outside the scope of this pronouncement that somehow that

Enabled or perhaps even required the jury to discredit that

and do you

You consider the opinion that the expert gave on full of skin disorders

Is it your position that that's within the scope of differential diagnosis? I

Think it's arguable

That it is

There's not emergency medicine, right? It's probably not emergency medicine and the court qualified Kurtz

In the area of emergency room medicine at the process of arriving at a differential diagnosis

So I think the jury could look at that and say well, he can talk about how

doctors

arrive at a differential diagnosis

But he can't that doesn't mean that he can make the differential diagnosis or it doesn't mean that he can make a differential diagnosis

about

Organic skin disorders such as will you skin disorder?

Does the length of the bench conference?

IE the length of time between the prosecutors first partial statement and then the statement the prosecutor makes after the

sidebar to is that

And are there any circumstances in other words? What if they had broken for the day sent the jury home?

Hashtag the objection tomorrow morning they get back together the prosecutor then says so he was not qualified

And would that make a difference? I mean here the bench conference looks like it lasted about a minute

In the transcript. That's at least what it looks like right. Yeah, no that would make a difference. I mean I think that if

A lawyer is giving an argument. There's an interruption for an objection. The lawyer comes back

if it's just a few seconds that passed the lawyer can continue his previous thought without

Reverbalized that previous thought and the jury will put the two together

If more time passes then of course the jury is not gonna put those two together

The lawyer is gonna gonna re-verbalize that previous thought here

It it was less than a minute the sidebar begins at 223 and it ends at 223 turning down to the question of

harmlessness

The effect of the state's argument was likely substantial

The central issue in this case is whether a w was burned or whether she suffered from from an organic skin disorder

Kurtz's testimony went directly to that issue and the state's argument

The state's improper argument struck at the heart of Hannah Murrah's defense

The evidence of guilt was far from overwhelming

This was a battle of the experts and it was a close case

The jury twice indicated that it was deadlocked despite lengthy deliberations and the verdicts were returned only after the court gave a

Dynamite instruction and after hours of further deliberation

The harmless the harmless error analysis involves a totality of the circumstances and under the totality of the circumstances here

It is impossible to say beyond a reasonable doubt that the prosecutors improper argument

Uncorrected by the court did not influence that week before considered deliberations a length of deliberations in our harmless error

analysis

this court has not

addressed

Whether the length of deliberations are relevant in our harmless error analysis one way or the other there's a 1960 case

Patent be Newton. It's 102 New Hampshire 444

where the court

Stated that a short period of deliberation may indicate that members of the jury felt that the evidence was overwhelming in favor of the party

receiving the verdict and

courts from around the country have

Overwhelmingly held that the length of deliberation is a relevant factor to consider

in determining whether an error was harmless and in particular that lengthy deliberations weigh against a finding of

harmlessness

And I can if the court wishes I can provide these course these cases to the court and in a supplemental pleading

and also

Not just the length of deliberations, but deadlock courts have also held an indication of deadlock

Even more so than like the deliberations is a factor that weighs against a finding of harmlessness. I'll accept that offer

Thank you

If the court has no further questions

Thank you. Thank you. Turn your Baldrige May it please the court Robert Baldrige for stay in New Hampshire

State did not allege during clothing argument that the jury could not consider the opinion of the defendant's expert because he was not

qualified by the trial

Said the prosecutor stated that the defendant's expert dr. Kurtz had not been wasn't that qualified to diagnose

full of skin disorders

That assertion did not mistake the law

Any ruling by the trial judge or any evidence presented to the jury, but that's what he said after the sidebar, right?

Yes, and just the the put put it all in context

The trial court qualified dr. Kurtz as an expert in emergency medicine and in the process of

differential red sorry the process arriving at a differential diagnosis

He was never qualified as an expert in diagnosing skin disorders

He admitted during his crawl examination that he was not a dermatologist a geneticist a burn specialist or a child abuse

pediatrician

He did not provide any testimony suggested that his process of engaging in differential diagnosis was any different from when any other physician does

And they see a patient

We didn't find our brief

But if you go into the bench conference about discussion about what the qualifying expert has

Defense counsel actually admitted yet every every doctor engages in differential diagnosis

So the statement he wasn't that qualified as an expert

He was not qualified to diagnose bull of skin disorders was a literally true statement of the trial course ruling

So even if we assume that the jury heard the he wasn't qualified by the trial court

And then we then there's an interruption and then there's a statement. He was not qualified to diagnose bull of skin disorders

Even if we assume they put those two together to mean the trial court did not qualify him as an expert to diagnose bull of skin disorders

That would be a literally true statement of what was stated by the trial court

Now the transcript does say that statement was

Made right after the site bar ends. So I read that assuming the jury actually heard it

Pothwell just stated for the record, but even the jury heard that

Whatever the prosecutor stays in closing argument, it's just literally true and the burden for

Prosecutor misconduct is fairly hot. So at worst

It's not even improper. They stated what the trial court did

And there's a portion of the and this needs to be considered in the context of the whole tribe

There was a lot of testimony that brought out

That dr. Kurtz was not qualified in

diagnosed bull of skin disorders

But he was allowed to testify to it wasn't he was and if they had said something alleged like you could not consider this

This guy's testimony because it was not admissible that might have been an issue

But that was not did the prosecutor object to that line of questioning because he was not qualified to render that opinion

He did not object to him giving an opinion in the case which was

More nuanced than it was a bull of skin disorder

I believe the actual opinion was she presented with a manifestation of an organic

dermatological process

Such as bull of skin disorders and then the opportunity to differentiate that with myth because they did not perform a biopsy

So doesn't that supersede the trial courts ruling on on what he was qualified to testify to he actually

testified

to his differential diagnosis or the result of his differential diagnosis that this was a

Skin condition as opposed to burns

Yes, but the same was that he was not qualified to give any type of opinion

It was like he was not qualified to diagnose bull of skin disorders and closing statement

There's wide latitude to summarize the evidence and urge the jury to draw inferences from the evidence

If I may I would like to point the court to an exchange and cross that I did not sign of my brief

But I think it's important

It's the transcript from December 6th the bottom of page 223

The professor asked dr. Curse

Do you feel like you are qualified today to speak to the presentation?

Sympathology and treatment of these skin disorders that are in your report

Dr. Kirk's answer quote. No

The point of me characterizing them in my report is to drive home that there are other elements to be considered on this

differential in an important way given this patient's history

presentation before during and after and not to make a

Discrete diagnosis

And we'll continue on page 224 a little bit further down

But you're not qualified here today to say that are you answer?

No, that's my opinion as a generous as an emergency department physician

I'm qualified to make these diagnosis definitively

Now right, but the original question asked about whether he's qualified to treat as you just read it

It included the concept of treatment not just diagnosis, right? Yes, and if you look in the context of the actual testimony

emergency physician

Their their purpose in a differential diagnosis to provide emergency care not to definitively diagnose an actual skin disorder

And if you look through the trial

It was she first went to Elliot's there was is this

Steve is Johnson's or a burn that she went to tops where they felt okay

There's more it this appears more to be likely to a burns

the actual burn specialist

explained of he also treated

Patient for bull skin disorder because the treatment is similar and

Alice Newton of the state's expert who's the one who said after reviewing these things. I think with a burn

but of course, yes, he's

Qualified to treat a patient with these symptoms, but he never alleged that he was

Qualified to actually make a definitive diagnosis of the school of skin disorder. So to statement. He was not qualified to diagnose it

That's both

Fair comment on the evidence from his own cross-examination

And it's an accurate description of the trial force ruling who was qualified as an expert in emergency medicine and

the process of arriving at a differential diagnosis and

It should be considered in the context of the other evidence

There was both parties were attacking the conclusions the testimony of each other's experts

And it's clear this David. He's not qualified with more going to his credibility the weight, which is what attorneys do

They're closing arguments

Dr. Kirk's

Listed Steven Johnson's or 10s as a possible

Source of this blistering or a possible skin disorder

But as the states expert explain patient with Steven Johnson's would have blistering on the mucus membrane

that was not present on

the victim

Dr. Kurtz had never seen E.B. That was the other system. He suggested the apostle called it the blistering

And it was also pointed out most types of E.B. Are genetic

The doctor who diagnosed

The victim of the boogie spectrum said the testing that he performed would have shown she had E.B. And she didn't

So it's really clear not qualified

Was related to this is the testimony you heard

He is not credible to diagnosis. He does not experience the diagnosis

He made statements ain't he couldn't give a definitive diagnosis and as again

I say it's a literally an accurate statement of the track force ruling even if we make the assumption that the jury

Put two parts of the statements together interrupted by a bench conference and why is that an accurate statement?

Because he was recognized an expert in emergency medicine and

Differential diagnosis not in diagnosing any skin disorders let alone a

Bula skin disorder and it was drawn out. He's not a dermatologist. He's not a burn specialist

And then he was pressed further across examination. Can you give a definitive diagnosis? No

Defense points out in its reply brief that your harmless error analysis was lacking

Why should we find this harmless error if we think it that the statement was erroneous?

Yes, so

The truck so

It was clearly in contact. They were trying to go more towards the way even if you decide it was technically erroneous

Or you should not say anything about what the truck were qualified as which

Not aware of any case on this event definitively and the trial courts final instructions

Eliminating possibility of prejudicial error the trial court instructed the jury that closing arguments are not evidence

That it and it alone decide the credibility

In the way to give the witnesses and their testimony including expert witnesses

That they should they could use expert testimony if they find it helpful or they could disregard it

But you can't you're not saying that the state's evidence was overwhelming

Given that the given them that the deliberations lasted several days and

the jury indicated that they were

They could they couldn't come to a verdict on two occasions

We did not make the argument to what led regards to overwhelming guilt. This is also a ledge air that's

Not even clear in any case law. It seemed to be an accurate statement with the trial court said in trial

In regards to discussion with whether length of deliberation should factor into the harmless air analysis I

Am making this argument about the benefit of any case law, but I would weigh against that having much

importance in this case at all

For one, this was a long trial. So just going through the evidence probably took the jury some time

It involved

Technical medical issues that I know his attorney

I certainly had to read parts of the transcript over again and was tempted understood if I understood certain testimony correctly

That probably just took him some time to discuss

And the timeline of this case is actually a little bit confusing especially when you look at just how it's presented at trial

Not every doctor who saw this victim actually testified

So it was mainly referencing the doctors who saw a w later Robert Sheridan who was the burn specialist at Shriners

Which was the third half of which you went to and now it's Newton who reviewed other doctors notes that she explained

but she was

Not the latest one to see her a w also saw a dermatologist team I

Had a double check to see when the timeline was for that

So I don't think the length of deliberation and there was a lot of charges

And there was guilty on some not guilty on others

So the length of deliberation that could just easily be explained as

There's a lot to get through. We want to be careful. There's a lot of kick charges. We've got to differentiate

So I don't think the length of deliberation is particularly important. It's speculative

And I'm not aware of anything just did the court look at his own view of the evidence presented

And just to focus my brain time just on whether

There was an error

The statement he was not qualified to give diagnosed bull's skin disorders

Even if you look at his opinion, he's not given a definitive diagnosis of bull's skin disorders. It was actually

The manifestations of organic dermatological process such as a bull's skin disorder

And he also explained the opportunity to differentiate that was missed because there was no biopsy

So he's not given a definitive diagnosis. So he's not states not even contradicting anything. Dr.

curbs even said and

the burden

For prostitutes conduct is quite high the case normally involved disparaging defense counsel trying to vouch for women's credibility or rassity

Objectively misstating the law

That does not there was no air does not rise to the type of air would amount to prostitutes conduct

There was no prejudice

So at worst it was harmless air

But based on that they would ask that you affirm the convictions and affirm the judgment below. Thank you

Thank you, Tony Barnard

Thank you that

State argues that the prosecutors argument was proper because it was literally true

That does not mean that the argument was proper a prosecutor argues in our enclosing argument

That a judge found probable cause to issue an arrest warrant for the defendant literally true, but improper

Prosecutor argues points out that the defendant had the decision to testify a trial but chose not to

literally true but improper a

Prosecutor calls the jury's attention to the fact that the judge overruled an objection made by defense counsel literally true, but improper

The court has no further questions

Thank you. I just have one question. Does the fact that the stalker was allowed to testify as to his

opinion as to his diagnosis of the

Child's condition does that move this this challenge to the argument because

It why does it matter what the prosecutors said that testimony came in it came in but

The prosecutors argument implied to the jury that it

Was not a proper matter for consideration because it fell outside the scope of the court's pronouncement

And in its preliminary jury instructions

The court did instruct the jury that it is the judge that determines the admissibility

admissibility of evidence and that the jury should only consider the admissible evidence

So the prosecutors argument suggested that Kurtz's opinion was not admissible because it exceeded the scope of the court's pronouncement

Even though it was admitted it shouldn't have

Even though he testified to it

It suggested to the jury that it still was not admitted and we know as lawyers as judges

We know that's not true, but a ledger they may not understand that thank you case submitted courts and recess
