This is case 2024-0155 in the matter of Kerry Whitehead and Michael Whitehead.

Good afternoon.

Good afternoon, Your Honor. May it please the Court, my name is Andrew Peele. I'm with Shaheen and Gordon. I represent the Appellant Michael Whitehead.

This is an appeal from the Ninth Circuit Family Division divorce decree on property division and alimony.

We brought three issues before this Court. We are proceeding today on the first to only the third challenge to the Court's application of the Hodgins formula to a pension.

Obviously with the legal decision that issue is now decided.

Brief factual background. My client is a Canadian citizen.

Prior to the marriage he was injured in a one car motor vehicle accident in Canada. He was rendered a quadriplegic.

As part of the settlement he purchased or a annuity was purchased for him. It's called a structured settlement annuity.

It's essentially it purchased an annuity contract that's owned by a Canadian insurance carrier. It is paid in periodic payments.

The one at this case was 5,500 Canadian dollars a month. The structured settlement annuity is governed by Canadian law and is drafted to comply with Canadian tax law.

Is this the annuity that was granted to him?

The annuity that was granted to him was essentially a social security pension.

This annuity, the structured settlement annuity was divided by the trial court in half.

Half was given to wife, half was given to husband.

Do you agree that it was settled when the parties were married?

The annuity was purchased prior to the marriage but the husband received the income from the annuity during the marriage.

Whether it was a premarital receipt or post marital, I don't believe controls discussion in this case.

What controls our issue on appeal is what law determines whether an item is divisible marital property.

That's a question of law obviously from Chamberlain.

In this case I don't think there's any dispute that the structured settlement annuity is governed by Canadian law.

And it has an anti-hypothecation clause in the annuity that says it cannot be pledged, transferred, leased, etc.

So what analysis do we use to determine that Canadian law applies?

You would use the analysis of the law that governs the asset and this court has already decided that in previous cases.

The Flaherty decision at 138 New Hampshire and the Bolsheer decision at 131 New Hampshire.

In both of those cases the asset at issue and Flaherty it was a trust and Bolsheer it was a leasehold or property interest.

Both were specifically governed by Flaherty, Massachusetts law.

There was a choice of law provision in that instrument.

It was a choice of law question and in both cases because the asset at issue.

In Flaherty there was a choice of law provision in the trust.

In Bolsheer this court applied the so-called Flaher factors.

Correct.

You were advocating we apply those?

Absolutely judge for the following reasons.

As the court stated in Bolsheer this asset in this case with a Vermont leasehold interest was created in Vermont.

In property that was owned in Vermont the expectations of the parties was that Vermont law would govern what this leasehold interest was.

In this case the trial court did not do any choice of law analysis at all.

It simply said because an annuity is generally considered property I will divide it under New Hampshire law.

And as our position that inflates the analysis.

Because first you have to look at the law that governs the asset as to whether it's not a divisible marital property.

And once the court makes that legal decision as to whether it is or is not marital property it then certainly applies to New Hampshire divorce.

New Hampshire law to divide that property.

Is there a choice of law provision in the Canadian instrument?

I did not see a choice of law in the Canadian instrument.

I attached the entire instrument that I had that was introduced to evidence.

It clearly indicates that it was purchased in Canada.

It was to be governed as payments were to be governed on Canadian tax law.

The payments were to be made in Canadian currency.

The carrier that issued the policy was based in Canada I believe in the Ontario province.

The accent occurred in Canada.

It was a law suit to settle the case was brought in Canada.

I would suggest and this is not something that this court needs to decide.

If you decide a choice of law test has to be done that's a mixed law in fact question that the trial court would do in the first instance.

Isn't it a threshold question here?

I mean we need to decide which law applies.

Assuming there's a conflict.

I would say there is a conflict because under Canadian law.

Canadian or provincial law?

It is Ontario provincial law.

Under the Canadian legal system I'm certainly not a Canadian lawyer.

But as I understand it, the property division in the Canadian divorce is governed by provincial law.

Parenting and child support is governed by Canadian federal law.

Under the provincial law I've only found two provincial decisions.

The hunks case which was Ontario court of justice decision which was cited subsequently by a case called Neville Smith also Ontario.

And a Newfoundland family law case that cited hunks.

Those cases all interpret a property division statute.

We've come to the conclusion that a structured settlement annuity of the type that was purchased in this case is not a visible marital property.

It represents a stream of income to the recipient.

So it's our vision and our argument to you that if the trial court here in New Hampshire said this is a piece of property

and I will divide it like any other annuity or pension.

You would be asking a Canadian company to do something that under Canadian law it could not.

It is our suggestion that if you have a situation such as this where you have an asset that is governed by a foreign law.

You look first at the law of the jurisdiction that governs the asset.

And you determine under that law Vermont and Bolshevik, Massachusetts and Flaherty or Canadian law here whether it's divisible marital property.

That is the threshold question that you have to answer.

And there is a question previously judged a conflict.

But what if there was a scenario where there is real estate owned by one party in a foreign country.

And that foreign country clearly says that the name on the title is the owner of the property.

Would your analysis be the same that a New Hampshire family court judge who finds or determines that that piece of real estate

part of the marital estate would have to then stop and defer to the foreign country that has a completely different system.

The question that I would respond to Judge Conway does the foreign country or state indicate that marital property is determined solely by title.

If the foreign state is like New Hampshire which says the title on the property is irrelevant.

If it was an asset owned during the marriage is divisible.

Or if the foreign state says even if the title is owned by one person it divorces as occurring in that foreign state the property can be divided.

But my hypothetical is that the foreign country says it's only who's on the title end of discussion.

If the foreign country says that this is not marital property which is why I think the answer is it is not divisible marital property would not treat it as such.

I would suggest that the New Hampshire court has to defer to that choice of law divide remaining estate that is marital property.

It's no different than what happened in Chamberlain.

We have an irrevocable trust which exists.

There's obviously value in the race.

There's value in the interest.

But because it is irrevocable it had to be excluded from the family court's jurisdiction.

It is also no different than what became a clarity.

You had a subsequent decision called early in which you noted the distinction in that the Flaherty Trust Massachusetts allowed for a division of a trust that had a spendthrift clause.

And you mentioned early New Hampshire would not allow for the division of a beneficial interest that is protected by a spendthrift clause.

So I would say the answer to the question, Justice Cartway, is that a trust court would then have to either exclude it from the division of marital property or treat it in a manner in which the foreign court would treat that asset.

And in Hunks, which is the Canadian decision, it treats the structure settlement annuity as a stream of income.

As a practical matter, if you went to the annuity company in Ontario this order, what would happen?

I do not know, Judge. I know that you cannot lean, you cannot assign the interest.

Could you ask the annuity company, can you issue two checks, one to wife and one to husband?

I don't think you could.

The question is, it's not whether the annuity company might do it at your request.

The question is, can the trial court have the jurisdiction to even make that type of order?

And in this case, if the property is not marital property, because remember the family court has limited subject matter jurisdiction.

It cannot adjudicate and divide property that is not marital property.

Hence, Chamberlain. So the answer to the first question is not marital property.

It is not something that this court can divide.

Whether the annuity company would turn the other way and do something for you and divide it, I don't think is the answer.

And I don't know the answer whether this carrier would actually do that.

So you would remand and we would give everything back to the trial court, right?

Because unembarably they're going to reshuffle the deck.

Absolutely, Judge. This would be a reshuffling of the deck because the whole property division and alimony order which we are challenging

hung on how that annuity was going to be divided.

The trial court said I am not going to award alimony because I think you guys both have sufficient property interests to satisfy yourself.

The property court did a 50-50 division of all the other assets.

If the trial court says I am going to exclude from dividing the annuity as an asset, it then needs to consider it as a stream of income.

Do I recalculate the alimony? How do I divide the remaining pieces of property?

So yes, Judge, it's a reshuffling of the entire deck.

So again, it's a unique case, but one that I would suggest comes up to trial courts more and more frequently.

If you have foreign-controlled assets, can the trial court divide that asset in a manner that the law of the home state would not allow it to do?

Would it have been erroneous for the trial court to say that's a stream of income to the husband?

Therefore, I'll award the wife a certain amount of alimony netted out to being basically half of annuity.

If the trial court did that analysis, it could have, but the trial court did not do that analysis.

And the problem that we face on appeal is we can only review what the trial court did.

We might say that yes, the husband with the annuity is now receiving $9,000 of income, and wife whose monthly income is X,

then the trial court would have to go through the entire net alimony analysis.

You know, is there a need? Is there an ability to pay?

And one of the things that the second issue on appeal that we have brought up on the alimony analysis is unfortunately there was speculation.

There was speculation as to whether the husband could earn money as a product spokesman following his career

and as a wheelchair rugby athlete, his career ended in 2024 in the Paris Special Olympics.

The trial court says yes, he could make more money or he could make an additional stream of income through product placement.

No evidence was presented on that.

Our flip side is that he would be significantly greater medical challenges in life of his quadriplegia.

The trial court thought that that was speculation as well.

Right.

Was that not speculation?

The trial court said it was speculation on whether he would have future medical needs that would buy an award of alimony to the wife.

But the trial court also said without evidence there was possibility the husband could earn income through future endeavors,

product placement, motivational speaking, et cetera, et cetera.

In any case, we would submit that the critical issue is the property division.

If that structured settlement annuity is deemed not property but income,

we just have to say the trial court has to do a choice of law under the Clark line of cases or whatever.

The result is a remand back to the trial court to analyze what the law is and divide the Canadian attention appropriately.

I see my time is up.

I welcome any questions.

Otherwise, thank you for your consideration.

Thank you very much.

Attorney Sweeney.

Good afternoon.

I think you had a question, so I'm going to answer that question about what it is that the husband received with respect to the completely excluded pension.

If you look at page 44 of respondents exhibit O, the second pension which is not yet payable and is payable when he's turning 60,

he's about to turn 50 years old this November.

He gets a flat rate of $2,071.07 on a monthly basis.

That was $100,000 pension.

And then the second pension, although there was some intimation that that is a flat payment.

If you look at page 42 of respondents exhibit O, you will see that that pension already has a built in accelerated monthly payment that went from $3,452.02 all the way up to an endpoint of $5,663.40.

When is that annuity finished?

When is that done?

So the first annuity ends when the second annuity begins, which is 2035.

So 10 years.

Yes.

And that's what was split?

That was the one that was split.

Yes.

So that annuity came to effect during the course of the marriage.

I think it would really do a disservice to litigants and family division if our Supreme Court found that if you lit a New Hampshire, you make that choice, you litigate your divorce case in New Hampshire.

Yet you have assets in other jurisdictions, a lake house, a summer house, some other type of pension that those are not visible assets under the state of New Hampshire, then you would create significant inequity.

And that would cause far reaching consequences, I think, into our future.

In looking at and weighing, for example, on the alimony portion and the suggestion that the court erroneously looked at components of the husband's compensation package, which were speculative, both the husband and the wife testified.

And a court that's a trier fact has the ability to make the determination as to which one of the parties is more credible.

And in this case, if you look at the narrative order at page number six, the husband had a paid internship.

He had sales from selling rugby chairs through Esco Metalcraft.

He also had income from a rugby plan.

He had a base salary.

He received a special benefit of $1,000 a month for having quadriplegic disabilities.

He also received travel and reimbursement expenses.

He had an international play stipend.

In addition, he was receiving SSDI, and then he also had pension components.

So we weren't just looking at the lower court level of, okay, we have this annuity.

And how are we going to divide that in consideration that his income stream would be limited if the annuity were divided?

So then the next step in the alimony test is, if we conduct the mathematical analysis that the lower court conducted,

and we look at his stated income of $9,647 and measure that against his expenses,

because alimony, there's a host of statutory factors.

As you know, we consider the ability to pay age of parties, health parties, length of the marriage.

But if we then reduce that 96,47 of income by 100% of that pension at the time, it was paying $53.53 a month.

And then we credit on wife's side of the ledger, 50% of that benefit.

The husband will still receive a surplus of $402.50 a month,

even if we credit every single one of the expenses that he listed on his financial affidavits.

And there was some discrepancy which the lower court noted between the varying financial affidavits that he filed.

So if you already have a surplus, you haven't created an inequity from an income standpoint from the husband.

Just on the medical property issue, is it your position that it doesn't make any difference where the property is?

New Hampshire will just split it?

It doesn't.

It's not necessarily splitting it.

Or it will apply whatever analysis the trial court would otherwise apply to property division.

But it doesn't make any difference where the property is.

Not necessarily.

So I agree with Attorney Pila that there can be some cases where there is a non-transferable asset.

So for example, if it's an irrevocable trust issued under the laws,

and the trust provides that New Hampshire must apply Massachusetts law or California law to a particular asset,

what would a lower court do?

They're going to do just what you said, just a stone event and shuffle the deck.

They're going to say, okay, this particular asset is worth X.

I'm going to look at the entire overall marital state.

And if they decide to-

So what makes this case different?

If you accept the proposition that it's not-

It cannot be marital property in Canada.

Why is this-

I don't accept that proposition based upon the annuity instrument.

I don't see anything in that annuity instrument that tells us that if a New Hampshire judgment

required that annuity to be divided, that a Canadian court, whether it's a provincial court,

and I do agree it's the province of Ontario-

If you dispute the proposition-

I do.

Ontario provincial law-

Right.

Would preclude its treatment as marital property.

I do.

And can't believe-

Do you have other cases that you point to?

No.

Not on that issue.

This is a novel issue before you.

And the one case that was cited in the remand proceedings, which was the Hanker's case,

the trial judge found that that case wasn't applicable here and is not persuasive law

because it's from a different country.

It's not our laws.

In a New Hampshire divorce case, it's New Hampshire laws that apply.

There's nothing extraordinary about that issue in this case.

The annuities are not speculative.

They were readily identifiable.

The amounts and quantities on a monthly basis, both the excluded annuity and the annuity that

was equitably divided by our court, were known.

Those were quantifiable.

You can review them in the documents and instruments themselves under respondents,

because they did include both of the annuity instruments.

So when would the family court have to do a choice of law analysis?

What would trigger that?

I think it would have to be a really extreme case.

I suppose if you...

What if the annuity clearly said this annuity is governed by Canadian law?

I don't believe it says that.

No, but I'm saying if it did.

Would that trigger a choice of law?

I think it would...

Not necessarily.

I think what would happen is the New Hampshire court order exists.

It gets sent to the plan administrator.

The plan administrator would either say, yes, I'm going to pay it out or no,

I'm not going to pay it out.

If they're not going to pay it out, then someone would go back for a modification

to our courts and address that issue.

But there were no Canadian experts that testified at this trial on either side.

If the post side wished to advance that argument that there was a restriction,

then I would suggest the burden was on them at that time.

And the evidence that came out and the equitable division factors,

which I won't cite to you because you've, I know, read all of the briefs,

created a scenario where this was an equitably divided asset.

It was an asset the parties relied upon.

They made certain provisions in their daily life and living

over what the court said was a longer term marriage,

including that the wife be home for periods of time to foster

and encourage the husband's ability to travel.

He said he traveled 200 days a year.

She said he traveled at times 260 days a year.

They had a marital partnership.

They had young children that mom took care of.

I'm just, I'm not sure I understood your answer to Justice Conway's question.

But how does the family division, how should the family division

confront the choice of law issues involving assets?

I think it would have to be brought up at the time of trial by an expert

if a position was going to be rendered that some asset is excluded.

An expert, it's a choice of law.

It's a legal question.

I don't agree with councils read the materials that Canadian,

that the pension has to be treated under Canadian law.

I believe that this court's order would be honored by Canada.

They honor US orders all the time, as do many other countries.

But isn't there a threshold issue as to whether a piece of property

is divisible marital, a divisible marital asset?

Before the court can determine how to divide it has to define the pool, right?

I agree with that.

All right.

And so as I understand Justice Conway's question, she's asking you

in making that threshold determination, if someone is arguing

that the law of Canada controls whether something is a divisible marital asset,

doesn't the trial court have to do a choice of law analysis at that time

when it's determining what totality of the divisible marital assets is?

Not necessarily.

I think this trial judge rendered an overall equitable division of assets

based upon the credible information that came in.

Are you saying that because there's no choice of law provision

in the instrument themselves?

Exactly.

But if there were, for example, what if there were a choice of law provision?

Would the trial court then have to do that analysis?

It depends on how the choice of law is mechanically included

within the instrument itself.

How do you explain the Boucher case?

I...

It was for non-property.

I think in that case it was a little bit different

because the husband didn't own the home that was on the property.

It was a lease hold through family members.

And although during the marital partnership,

the family made some contributions to that property,

it was a speculative asset because the mother was still alive.

I don't think that...

There was still a choice of law analysis...

In that one there was.

Even though there was no instrument that directed the choice of law?

Except there's also...

It wasn't, I think, a readily identifiable asset.

It wasn't a quantifiable asset.

It was a speculative asset because certain factors had to happen

in order for the husband to ultimately derive that benefit.

And part of his argument is I may never derive a benefit

because we don't know what's going to happen to that piece of property in Vermont.

But in this case we have a readily identifiable annuity

with a structured stream of payments going over time.

And that was information available to the trial judge at the time

that the ultimate decision was rendered.

Any other questions for me?

Do you want to address your...

Do you make an alimony argument?

So my alimony argument is there's sort of a two-factor component.

The other side is saying if in fact the issue of the annuity is split

and that income remains with the husband,

then they're not going to pursue their alimony argument.

If, on the other hand, the instrument and the payment on the annuity remains as is,

then they would pursue their alimony claim.

From our perspective, alimony was based on need, ability to pay,

length of the marriage, that host of factors that I outlined.

And the husband's income stream was not just based upon these annuity payments,

but a host of other income components and varying opportunities.

So I did not read the list that was set forth in the narrative order at page 6

to be something that would leave the husband unable to support himself,

even if the annuity were reshuffled, so to speak.

He said at page 10 that neither one of these parties

would be unable to be self-supporting and meet their reasonable needs.

And I want to be really clear that although the other side has talked about

the pension itself as strictly an asset, I agree it is an income stream too,

but when you conduct the analysis of the income stream utilizing the 50% payment,

he is still able to meet his reasonable needs as measured on his own financial affidavits.

And that was something that the trial court also found.

Thank you so much.

Thank you, Attorney Sweeney.

This case is submitted.

Yes, Judge, thank you.

Okay.

We're going to clear the court.
