This is case 2024-0429, Christine Revis versus Nadia Cieco.

Mr. Attorney Darling, I understand you reserved two minutes.

Where are we about?

Yes, Your Honor.

Please proceed.

Good morning, Your Honors.

I'm Mike Darling.

I represent the plaintiff appellant in this matter, Christine Revis.

Ms. Revis is here with me today.

I apologize for keeping you waiting.

I didn't realize the doors had opened.

So I appreciate your patience.

This is an appeal from a personal injury case.

The plaintiff was injured in a motor vehicle accident

and a head-on collision with the defendant.

Her injuries include pertinent to this case,

her appeal, whiplash symptoms,

an exacerbation of her migraine condition,

and she was experiencing fainting spells after the incident

which experts related to the original incident.

One evening after the incident,

she suffered a fainting spell while descending a flight of stairs.

She fell and she broke her leg.

Let me stop you there, Mr. Darling.

When I look at your brief,

the requested relief is that the case should be remanded

for new trial-on damages.

And my understanding is that there was a defense verdict

on the question of whether the fall was attributable

to the car accident.

If we were to reverse and direct that there be a new trial-on damages,

then that would only pertain to the car accident itself

and not the fall.

I'm not understanding you correctly,

and the reason I ask is if you're seeking a trial-on damages loan,

then it seems to me that the first issue in your brief

regarding Dr. Lutkus is probably moot.

So could you address that for me, please?

No, we are requesting a new trial-on damages

including any and all issues relating to the broken leg.

The issue with the broken leg was separated in the verdict slip

because it was a second incident.

It did not involve the question of liability.

However, the first issue there is the question of causation.

But didn't the jury find that there was no liability for the fall?

I don't believe there is a specific question about liability

for the fall.

I believe the question on the verdict slip was causation.

But there was no causation and without causation

that resulted in a defense verdict on that part of the claim, right?

I'm sorry.

I'm not sure I understand the question part of me.

Well, if the jury found that there was no causation

for the fall from the accident,

then the result of the jury's verdict was

that there was no liability on the part of the defendant

for the injury sustained in the fall.

And therefore you're entitled to damages for that accident?

My understanding, my interpretation of the jury's verdict

is that they found the defendant, Waple, for the motor vehicle accident

and they found that Plano had suffered some damages

as a result of the accident.

But they found that she did not break her leg

as a result of the incident.

They could have reached that conclusion in a number of ways.

They could have found that the plaintiff was comparatively at fault

and the defense belated that point in their closing throughout the trial.

They could have found that she just didn't faint.

That's the first question.

Did she faint or didn't she?

If she fainted, then there's strong evidence that it was related

and that the toxicologist's opinion is most pertinent.

His opinion is only used to support the notion that she didn't faint

and that she fell down simply because she had consumed alcohol.

But what you're seeking on remand is a trial on damages

and the jury has already determined that there's no liability for the fall.

How do you hold a trial on damages including damages for the fall?

It sounds like you're not challenging the jury's verdict

that the defendant was not liable for the injury sustained in the fall.

We may be talking past each other, Your Honor.

What we're asking for is a new trial on all the questions

except for liability which we prevailed on.

The initial question of liability was was the defendant liable in the initial collision?

We are asking for a new trial on damages that flow directly from that initial collision.

We are asking for a new trial on the question whether the initial car accident

was a substantial cause of the fainting incident where she broke her leg.

We're asking for a new trial on the damages that flowed from that as well.

Thank you.

As I noted, it boils down to that initial question of did she faint or didn't she?

If she fainted, the evidence is that it's related.

If she didn't faint, the exact reason why she fell is less important.

Alcohol could have played some role in the incident that night.

It could have possibly contributed to the fainting incident.

Or if she didn't faint, it could possibly have been the reason why she fell down.

Dr. White, in his opinion, has several fatal flaws.

It's hard to say that one is more important than any of the others,

but the one that stands out is just his bald acknowledgment that he can't say

that this probably sort of fall all he can say is that it's possible.

How is it that the evidence regarding her blood alcohol content,

how is that irrelevant?

The blood alcohol calculation, and Dr. White has qualified to do that math,

but that calculation by itself doesn't prove anything.

It doesn't tend to make anything more relevant than another.

The idea that alcohol...

What if the evidence was that her BAC was 0.02?

Wouldn't that be highly relevant?

Well, not necessarily, Your Honor, because the blood alcohol content needs to...

You need to take that second step, which Dr. White just can't do,

which is to explain how it caused her to fall.

I've said in a number of cases where, for instance,

you've got somebody who's driving intoxicated and a car accident happens,

but they don't know what side of the road the accident happened on.

They don't know whether the defendant crossed the center line.

Didn't the evidence on BAC come in without objection in terms of the effect

that a BAC at the level that the plaintiff had would have certain effects

on her mentation and her coordination and so forth?

That evidence came in without objection.

As I understand it, your objection is to his testimony

that it may have been a cause of her fall.

But there was evidence in the record, as I understand it,

that her BAC would have caused a certain level of impairment.

Am I incorrect about that?

No, Your Honor.

I believe the testimony was that that blood alcohol content could cause impairment.

But he doesn't establish that impairment is the reason why she fell.

At no point do they explain how does the defense or any witness explain

how alcohol caused her to fall if it wasn't fainted.

But couldn't the jury infer from that evidence that she was so impaired

that it did contribute to the fall?

Without an expert opinion.

No, I don't think you can make that connection, Your Honor.

There are a number of possible causes.

There's testimony that she fainted.

It's a possible cause.

It's possible that she tripped over her shoelace.

It's possible that the stairs were defective.

It's possible that somebody pushed her off the stairs.

Are you saying that if the defendant, there was evidence that the defendant

had a BAC of 0.15 at the time of the accident

that that evidence wouldn't be admissible for the plaintiff?

If the plaintiff can't connect the dots,

can't demonstrate that the blood alcohol content that the driving law intoxicated

was a factor that contributed to cause the collision,

then I don't think it would have come in.

How can a jury not just draw an inference based on a number of admissible facts,

including a BAC level?

Well, for one, I presume that the blood alcohol content would be admissible.

But it's not a logical inference.

It's speculative to say, well, if she was drinking,

that must have been the reason why she fell.

There needs to be some reason to believe that among all those possible causes,

one of them was more likely than the other.

One of them was the most probable cause.

Finting is a possible cause.

There was evidence that among all those possible causes,

that was the reason why she fell.

The plaintiff's testimony supported that,

her husband testified that he found her unconscious.

Among all those other reasons, the best we have is that it's possible.

There's nothing additional that allows you to make the jump to.

That's probably the reason.

Can you explain to us how the defendant's closing argument

is about your case regarding the missing witnesses?

Sure.

So the whole point of the missing witness argument is to suggest

that if the witnesses had testified,

then their testimony would have been adverse to the plaintiff.

And that's why we didn't call them.

This goes to that same issue of it's possible.

There are any number of reasons why a witness wouldn't be called to testify.

One thing that I noted is that a lot of these witnesses are out of state.

They couldn't be subpoenaed to testify.

It could be that the witnesses aren't cooperative.

It could be that they don't actually have a good memory.

They don't have anything valuable to contribute.

But the defense made that argument nevertheless.

If they want to make that argument,

they have to be able to demonstrate, well first,

it's just a scooter pointed out in the Kirby Allard case.

It's meant to be a discretionary opportunity.

If it's going to be discretionary,

and the court needs an opportunity to exercise its discretion,

you've got to raise the issue ahead of time.

The defense decided it was better to ask for forgiveness

than to ask for permission on this one.

And if they're going to get permission,

if the court's going to use this discretion

and allow them to make this argument,

they have to show that it's a logical, fair influence

that's been made from the evidence.

They didn't lay that evidentiary foundation here.

They have to show that the witness is available,

that they're in the jurisdiction,

and that they're not just that they're available,

but they're available to their opponent,

but not to themselves.

And there's none of that in the record.

With regard to the cross-examination of the defendant's neurologist,

and I'm sorry, the leg is on in front of me.

Am I okay on time?

Yep, thank you.

With regard to the cross-examination of Dr. Alexander,

he testified that he didn't think

that the plaintiff suffered a traumatic brain injury.

And that's really all he said.

That begs the question of,

well, how do you explain the rest of her symptoms?

That's a major hole in his opinion,

because it does not give an adequate explanation

for the rest of the story.

In the ruling on the defendant's cross-examination,

your witness regarding in which the judge determined

that the cross went beyond the scope of direct.

What was excluded?

Unfortunately, some of the what was said at Sidebar

was inaudible apparently,

but the issue there was that they were trying to get into opinions

that he had not been qualified to give

and that he had not testified to on direct.

From the transcript it looked like

what the defense counsel was trying to elicit

was an opinion on the cost of treatment

for the $15,000 and that your objection was

that you hadn't raised that in your direct

and therefore it shouldn't be covered on cross.

Is that a correct understanding?

I believe that was the first question that elicited the objection.

My anticipation was that there were a number of other questions

that were going to flow from that.

So I have the red light.

Thank you very much.

My answer, otherwise, I'll leave it for a bottle.

My name is David Bedencourt.

I represent Nadia Cheko.

I want to start by addressing the arguments

relating to intoxication,

but first let me make it clear that I welcome questions at any time.

I think one of the central issues in this case

that we have to bear in mind as we're considering it

is that this is an unusual theory of causation.

You have two distinct episodes

that are temporally and spatially distinct.

You have the July 2020 car accident

where my client, Nadia Cheko, was directly involved in,

which leads to some minor injuries.

Jury did find a verdict against the defendant on that

and awarded damages.

And then the second incident in October of 2021,

so it's about 14 months later,

where the plaintiff, while leaving a party,

falls down a set of staircases and injures her leg.

And that, as the court noted in this questioning earlier,

resulted in a jury finding of no liability

on the part of my client, the defendant.

And we had raised sort of two,

there were two issues for the jury to decide.

The first one was the causation issue.

Plaintiff had the burden of establishing

my client was the cause of this second injury.

If they had prevailed,

then we would have gone to the second issue,

which would have been comparative fault,

because that was also raised as a defense in this case.

And the evidence relating to intoxication,

the evidence relating to the plaintiff's alcohol use,

was very relevant to both those issues,

both those issues of causation

and the secondary issue of comparative fault.

The event the jury had found that my client

was somehow at cause for the second October 2021 incident.

And just to-

Just to-

Yes.

With respect to the exclusion of the follow-up question

on cross to Dr. Alexander,

do you agree that the trial court's

vacation of law of the case as the basis

of that ruling would be incorrect under the law?

So, you know, I guess I would back a little bit,

because you have under Rule 611B,

the New Hampshire Rule of Evidence,

gave the trial judge a discretion

to determine the scope of cross-examination.

And that gives a trial judge pretty wide discretion,

actually wider than-

A lot of the case requires an ultimate decision on appeal

and then on remand the law as determined by the appeal

is controlling.

Isn't that the law of the case?

Certainly.

But I think in terms of the way of formulating it,

I think maybe that was an unfortunate use of phrase,

but I would say that the trial judge under 611B can say

we are going to limit in this case the scope of

cross-examination to what's testified on direct.

It's not mandatory.

It's a May under the New Hampshire rules.

And you'd agree with me that the reason that Judge Kennedy

did that is because he had ruled earlier during

this reasons cross that she could not ask questions

about the $15,000 cost of treatment.

Correct.

I think once the judge makes the ruling that he's going to

apply rule 611B to limit cross-examination to the scope

of direct, it would be fundamentally unfaithful

and would be an unsustainable exercise of discretion to say

I'm applying the rule differently to cross-examinations

by the other side.

I think the rule has to be applied consistently one way

or the other.

I think the judge was very clear when he made his

ruling and Barry was the plaintiff who asked to invoke

this rule in terms of limitation of the cross-examination

for scope.

You're not saying that because of the court rules that the

scope of cross will be limited in one instance in the

trial that the scope of cross will be limited to scope

of direct throughout the trial that that's what the law

requires?

I think that is what in terms of fairness was

required in this case because of the way the judge

issued his ruling saying that he was going to limit

cross-examination to the scope of direct.

I think once the plaintiff made that request by making

that scope objection and basing his objection on the

scope argument, then the judge, yes, in the interest of

fairness had to apply the rule consistently across the

board.

So I would say that, yes, the rule 611B would be

fundamentally unfair to apply it differently to one

side than the other.

I believe that the judge took it upon himself to apply

that rule consistently and say, look, my ruling is that

I'm limiting the scope.

He has the authority to do so under the New Hampshire

rules.

And I think it's the question for this court then was

that an understandable exercise of discretion because

that's the standard of review.

And because it's explicitly allowed by the rules, I

would say the answer has to be no.

It then is prerogative to make that decision.

He has control over the extent that he wants to permit

cross-examination.

And he exercises discretion.

You know, the defense counsel would have probably

crossed, well, we know they would have crossed beyond

the scope of direct because the defense counsel in

their opening statement represented to the jury that

the plaintiff's expert was going to make statements

that were inconsistent with the plaintiff's other

neurology expert.

And because the plaintiff's counsel limited scope

of direct to not elicit that contradictory statement,

we were unable to get that information out on

cross-examination.

So, you know, you have this rule announced by the trial

judge in terms of how he is going to apply his

discretion in handling the order and flow of

cross-examination.

And at that point, that's something that we argue

should have been applied consistently in order to

be fair to both sides.

Didn't Dr. Alexander testify and direct that the

migraines were a separate issue from the fall?

Yes.

And I think it's sort of the procedural issue relating

to the scope of cross-examination and the substantive

issue that there is really no prejudice here

because Dr. Alexander's testimony is that there

was no traumatic brain injury.

And at the point where he was testified, the only

evidence relating to the fall introduced by the

plaintiff had been this argument from his

neurologist, Dr. Warner, arguing that the

traumatic brain injury stemmed from the motor

vehicle accident had been the cause of the fall.

Dr. Alexander disagreed with that and testified

that he disagreed with that.

The migraine issue was sort of separate.

He did opon that there would have been some worsening

of the migraines, but that had nothing to do with the

cause of the second fall.

The plaintiff's own argument is that the cause of

the second fall was related to fainting a

syncopal episode.

I'm probably pronouncing that, so I apologize.

But a fainting that occurred due to this

traumatic brain injury was the evidence they put

on in front of the jury.

And that was evidence that Dr. Alexander

rebutted.

In fact, if they had asked Dr. Alexander additional

questions, the irony is his opinion, given in both

deposition and his report, was that the cause of

the fall was the alcohol use, the alcohol

intoxication, and that that was the most likely

reason for the second fall.

That wasn't elicited on direct by the defense,

and sort of the irony of the plaintiff's

position is that they're saying they should have

been allowed additional cross-examination of

Dr. Alexander.

That was his opinion.

But Dr. Alexander testified on cross from Mr.

Darling without objection that the headache was

attributable to other factors, that the

increased episodes of migraines were attributable

to other factors.

And then when Mr. Darling sought to ask him

whether that was a fact because of the injury

sustained in the car accident, that's when

the court cut off that testimony and said this

would be on the scope of direct.

Do I have that right?

That is correct.

I think if you look at the way we look at the

transcript, there actually were no questions

relating to migraines brought out and

direct by the defense counsel.

We focused purely on the issue that was

interviewed at the time, which was their

evidence of traumatic brain injury, because

that was what the plaintiff had presented.

The plaintiff's other expert evidence, the

physiatrist, had submitted a report indicating

that there were issues related to the migraines

and that wasn't introduced by the plaintiff

on direct.

Did you say was not?

Was not, no.

But the only evidence that was before the

jury at the time when the defense brought

on their expert testified was this

question of was there evidence of

traumatic brain injury and was that a cause

that be seen as a cause of the fall?

And that was what the director was

limited to that.

And that's when the judge exercising his

discretion indicated that anything outside

the scope of that direct examination would

be inadmissible because he was applying

rule 611B consistently.

Returning to your original question, in

the event there isn't a new trial on

damages, would fall be a subjective

matter in that proceeding?

I don't see any basis for any trial on

damages in the sense there was no appeal

related to the damages finding made by

the jury in the sense that the jury

made a finding of liability relating to

accident number one, made a finding

relating to damages issued a dollar

money award.

And then the only reason there would

be another issue on damages is because

the plaintiff is essentially asking for

directed verdict on the issue of the

second fall.

That's why they're arguing that they

should be entitled to a new trial on

damages.

I think what they want the court to do is

to set aside the verdict, the jury is

finding that there was no liability

relating to the second fall and

essentially argue that there should be

additional damages.

There's no issue, no dispute.

It's not an appeal that there was any

flaw in the damages calculation

related to accident number one that's

been briefed as a subject

to appeal.

I think the only way

I can interpret the plaintiff's request

is that they are essentially asking the

court to overturn the jury's verdict

and explicitly ask the court to set

aside that verdict.

We don't grant that relief.

We don't grant issue seven.

There was a new trial because there

was error in terms of the cross

examination and limitation of witnesses

or it was there for the trial court

to do so.

What would that new trial look like?

I think that new trial would look

like a sort of

repeat of the first trial in a sense

of we would be

arguing sort of liability related

to all these issues.

So both accidents would be

retried?

I think it would depend on the scope

of the court's order but I think

that depending on how the

remand worked at least the second

trial with sort of the modification.

I do want to address the

closing argument issue

very briefly just because

I do want to make a point that there

is a difference between an argument

that a witness

was not present and the plaintiff

did not meet their burden of proof

because of the absence of certain evidence.

Defendant is always

permitted to argue that the plaintiff did not meet their burden

and that in itself is an argument

that there is missing evidence.

And so an argument that

you didn't hear from X, Y, Z

is a relevant argument

when it's made to say

this would have been helpful to assist

the fact finder in meeting the burden of proof.

There's an extent

to which every time defendant argues

they didn't meet the burden of proof.

They're arguing that there is witnesses and evidence

that is missing and were not presented.

I think that is

how this closed argument was made.

I mean if you review the closing argument

it's like the defense council

says an accident reconstructionist

would have helped them reach the burden of proof.

This treating physician would have helped them reach the burden of proof.

Did it go beyond that and suggest

that the jury should infer

from the absence of the witness

that the testimony of those witnesses

would have been negative to the plaintiff?

So I don't think that

I would disagree that the defense did not

explicitly ask for any type of adverse witness instruction.

The argument

and then even as so

the existing

case law in New Hampshire under the

Courry-Allard standard is that that is allowed

unless there is some

evidence that the other side can produce

that it's a misleading argument

and that's why there's an opportunity

for the other side to say

that's an unfair argument this witness would have actually presented

favorable evidence

and there was no offer of proof made

when it was time for the plaintiff

to address that indicating

that there would have been this type of favorable evidence

and that the argument was therefore misleading.

So I'd say

two issues. I'd say that there's the one

in that argument that the closing argument

was not improper at all

because it was simply commenting on the absence of the burden of proof

then the second to the extent that

there is a

sort of adverse witness argument

that is permitted under the existing

case law there was absolutely nothing

misleading about it.

How many of those witnesses were deposed?

I don't believe

any of them were deposed. One of them were hypothetical

for example that the plaintiff

brought an accident reconstructionist into the case

for example. So

the argument that an accident reconstructionist

would have helped with the burden of proof

there was none.

But you'd agree that the defense could have taken the

deposition of the treating physicians for example?

I certainly think the defense

could but the defense also isn't under any burden

to try to build up, establish the

evidentiary record on behalf of the plaintiff

as the plaintiff's burden

entirely to establish evidence.

So I would argue

there is no requirement that the defendants

take a deposition

of a treating doctor.

I think the medical records

certainly

could have been submitted

via

experts if the plaintiff believed they would have been helpful.

I think there is some evidence

in the record if you review the trial transcript

of expert witnesses commenting on material that was in

the medical records

by the treating physicians. So the jury heard

about the existence of these

treating doctors who had treated the plaintiff

in some case I believe

her neurologist for over 12 years or so.

So the jury knew that this witness

was out there. I do think

the argument that the witness wasn't available to come to court

because he lived in

Massachusetts. I don't think that's

availing when we have interstate compacts relating

to penas and depositions.

I think

Massachusetts witness can be compelled to

send the jurisdiction if the party wants them

to be there. So I would argue

there was certainly nothing misleading. I think the plaintiffs

did not present any type of

records saying no, the treatment neurologist

would have provided

this evidence and it wouldn't have been helpful.

I see my

thank you. Thank you very much. Attorney

very important. Roboto.

Thank you Your Honor, just briefly.

The person regarding the verdict slipped I was able to

take a look at it while I was

waiting.

So the person regarding the

fall where she broke her leg

is phrased in terms of causation.

So the question is whether

the car accident caused

or was a substantial

contributing factor

in causing the subsequent incident

where she fell and broke her leg.

So this phrase in terms of liability

it's just in terms of

Are you challenging that on appeal?

Yes.

And all the issues that have been raised on appeal

could have influenced the jury's decision

in answering that question.

I think it was number five on the verdict

slip.

Dark or white guess

opinion

could be the reason why they got there.

They could have just disbelieved Ms.

Regis

because of some of the credibility issues that have been

raised that we've challenged on appeal

or could have been Dr.

Alexander's testimony

as it went in that influenced

the jury's decision.

Did you ever respond to the

point that attorney

Battencourt made about

a new trial on damages when you haven't

appealed the award of damages?

Well,

I think

the

I'm not saying that the evidence

at trial it didn't

support the number.

There's a way that the jury could have gotten there

if they didn't believe

the challenges

to all the issues

that came up along the way.

We're

challenging the ultimate verdict,

the damages award.

But we're challenging it because

of the issues with Dr.

Weikis and Dr. Alexander

and the redirect of the plaintiff

and the closing argument.

You characterize the limitation of Dr.

Alexander's

cross as reversible error.

But you agree

that a standard review is

actually an unsustainable exercise

of discretion, don't you?

Yes, Your Honor. I'm going to use that

phrase.

My light's on again. I'm sorry.

Please complete your answer.

The issue with

the cross of Dr. Alexander

is that the court has discretion

to limit the scope

of cross examination

if it goes outside the scope

direct.

I don't think the cross examination

that was proposed was outside the scope

of correct, but

even if it was, if the court is going to

limit that scope, it has to

through that balancing test.

But in any event, that's within the court's

discretion, it's not

per se reversible error.

Isn't that correct?

It's grounds for reversal.

If I use the phrase reversible error

mistakenly.

I'm sorry. Provided it prejudiced your case.

Yes.

And I think it certainly did.

If I've been allowed to continue

with cross examination, it would have been a

very different perspective on the case.

Thank you very much, Attorney Donald.

The case is submitted.

Take a brief recess.
