This is case 2024, 0625, state of New Hampshire versus Matthew Brousseau.

Good morning, attorney family, and I understand you reserved two minutes for a rebound.

I have.

Please proceed.

Thank you.

Good morning.

My name is Pamela Nielsen.

I'm here on behalf of Mr. Brousseau.

I've reached three issues.

This morning I plan to focus and talk about three points with respect to the conference

issue, but of course I'll take questions on any of the other issues that the court may have.

Regarding the confrontation issue, I want to make three points.

I want to address first and start with the plain language of our confrontation range and our

constitution and the plain meaning of those words.

Second, I want to talk about the importance of those words and what it means to the

truth-seeking process of a trial as described in our constitution.

Attorney family, can we sort of cut to the chase here?

The process that the trial court used in this case is identical, seems to me, to the process

that was used in Massachusetts in the Bergstrom case.

Is that right?

A two-way electronic appearance by the alleged victims of complainants?

I'm only pausing because I've read so many cases with one-way and two-way.

I can't be entirely sure that Bergstrom was two-way.

But Bergstrom is one of the closest cases to the situation that we have here.

And at least with respect to the technology that was used in this case, it was two-way

as opposed to one-way in State v. Warren, which the court decided last year.

But here, the technology did no better in terms of meeting the requirements of our constitution.

The plain language of our constitution, our drafters did not write that accused persons

have the right to see and hear witnesses.

They wrote me, witnesses, face to face.

And this court went through extensively in State v. Warren

what those words meant at the time our constitution was drafted.

And I think that they mean the same things they mean today.

Something very different than just seeing and hearing a witness.

And I know the court in State v. Warren used the dictionary from 1773,

the Dictionary of English Language at the time.

And the court pulled out some definitions from that dictionary.

You better understand what meet face to face means.

There was another definition I found in there when I was looking at that reference last week.

And that is when you're looking at other definitions for face to face

or to face in that dictionary.

Another definition was nakedly without the interposition of other bodies.

In other words, literally in the presence of an accused.

And that's what this court held in State v. Warren and that's what it should have hold here.

Did you have a question? I'm sorry.

No, I was just going to note that in that decision this court did say

that an individual accused of crime has the right to be in the presence of

and face the witnesses testifying at trial.

Absolutely.

The presence means something more than just the two people seeing each other

and hearing each other.

And at the time our drafters drafted the Constitution,

they understood a matter of human nature that we still understand today,

which is that it is more difficult to tell a lie about a person

when you are in their physical presence looking at them face to face.

Now, as Justice Scalia and other judges that are,

that have authored some of the decisions I referred to in my brief have noted,

we can't force the witness to look at an accused person when they testify.

But the fact that they don't or other mannerisms about their demeanor

and the delivery of their testimony tell the fact finder

something about credibility of what is being said.

In fact, in our instructions to juries,

we tell them not just to listen to the words of a witness,

but to watch the witness.

Everything a trier of fact may detect about how the testimony is being delivered

is part of the truth inducing effect of physical presence

and is part of the truth detecting process that the trier of fact has to go through

by having everybody in the same room.

And it's worth noting that Judge McLeod,

it may be obvious if Judge McLeod didn't have the benefit of the Warren decision

when he made his decision in this case.

Correct.

And I do want to note, I think it was Judge McLeod who was the trial judge,

but I think Judge Warren Steen had issued the pretrial ruling allowing the process.

When Judge McLeod took over the case for the trial,

he chose not to revisit the decision.

But you are correct.

At the time the decision was made and at the time of Mr. Perceau's trial,

State New Warren had not been decided.

The only thing the trial court had at the time of Mr. Perceau's trial

was the trial court's decision in State New Warren,

which followed the Sixth Amendment interpretation of confrontation

and the exception under the Sixth Amendment stated in Maryland v. Craig.

Is there any accommodation that would be constitutionally sound,

in your opinion, that could be made for a child victim survivor

who is traumatized to the degree as allegedly was the case here?

Well, I have several answers to your questions.

First, I don't know whether at some point there may be technology

that would allow something other than the physical presence.

The process here was not a proper accommodation that satisfied the constitution.

Well, let's set aside a technological accommodation.

Is there something that could be done physically in the courtroom

that could make an accommodation yet pass constitutional muster from your perspective?

I think in Commonwealth v. Bergstrom

or one of the other SJC cases out of Massachusetts

talked in one of the decisions,

talked about some things that can be done to help any witness

deal with the effects of having to testify in person

and whether that's having an counselor available outside the courtroom,

setting the courtroom up in a less formal way.

Definitely not doing anything that's going to interfere

with a witness though having to see the defendant

and be in the presence of the defendant

and testify not only under the gaze of the defendant

but also the trigger of that.

And I would also point out a couple things about trauma.

It can be traumatic to talk about something that actually happened.

It could also be equally traumatic to have to come into a courtroom

and tell a story you might not be sure actually is true

or tell a story that someone has pressured you to say.

It can be traumatic to come into a courtroom

and tell a lie that you know it's a lie.

So just because someone has a traumatic reaction

to what they have to say or what they're saying

doesn't necessarily mean it's true.

That's part of the truth-seeking process of the trial.

And trauma isn't something new.

Trauma for people or difficulty people

have testified in the physical presence

of an accused in a criminal trial

is something that existed at the time

our drafters chose the language that they did

in our Constitution.

And they also were making important decisions

about the fundamental principles

they wanted to stand in our Constitution

when someone is facing a loss of liberty.

And they chose very high standards

not just that witnesses have to testify

in the physical presence of an accused

but that there's a presumption of innocence

and the highest burden of proof.

And what those reflect is a fundamental understanding

and intent of the drafters of our Constitution

to make it very difficult to convict someone

who may be innocent

even knowing that there may be at times

the cost of making it very difficult

to prove a guilty person is guilty.

That is a constitutional choice.

That's been recognized by the U.S. Supreme Court

in other contexts.

And by this court, in State B. Howard

which this court cited in State B. Warren

this court said the interest the state might have

in protecting a certain class of people

must fall when it is up against

the rights that we have given a defendant

to defend himself in the truth-seeking process of a trial.

Attorney Thielen, I want to get to the records issue.

I want to get to the records issue.

If this case is remanded for a new trial

shouldn't we just ask the parties to re-litigate

that issue before the trial court

given that we now have a different standard

that's set forth in Zarella that wasn't applicable

at the time this case was tried

and whether or not the defense can establish

an essential need for records that were obtained

from private entities?

I think... I'm sorry.

I'm pausing because I think the issue here

was the court had already done an in-camera review

and I think Zarella dealt with the first phase

of an in-camera review process

which is whether third parties

whether there's a different standard for third-grades

to have to produce records to the court.

In this case the court already went through that process

and so this court in Zarella did not address

to my understanding or change the standard

for what the court should produce

after doing an in-camera review.

So I don't think necessarily by if this case is remanded

for a new trial that the court should go through

should undo whatever it did.

It had those records in camera.

But to the extent that the defense believes

there are additional records that should have been disclosed

or should be disclosed

why not let the trial court make that decision?

Certainly if it's going back

if the parties want to re-litigate

or make additional arguments

I think that would be the prerogative of the court

to entertain those.

I'm not saying...

I don't have a reason to argue what would be for those.

It just seems to me that we need a standard

for which there would apply for an appellate court

to re-review records that haven't been disclosed.

It's sort of speculative just to say

that the trial court may have aired

and therefore we should undergo that review

on our own.

Unfortunately because the parties

aren't privy to those records

the court here is the only body or entity

who can take a look at what the trial court had

and applying the standard outlining gag me

and that line of cases as to what should be disclosed

I think that this court is in its best position

as the trial court

and this court is in the best position

to assess whether the trial court

should have disclosed or that standard

any additional records.

So that would apply basically in any case

in which records were disclosed?

Or not disclosed.

Right.

Yes.

I do want to just point out

on a confrontation issue

just a couple things about what this jury knew

because I think it's important.

The jury did not know

what the complainant in this case

was even looking at at the time that she testified

all that we know from the record

and the jury didn't know this

but she was staring at a laptop.

The jury didn't know what she was seeing on the laptop

except when she was asked

at the end of direct examination

if she could identify the defendant in the courtroom

but who she could see in the courtroom

the jury had no idea.

The jury could only see her face on the screen

it's not clear that she could even see the jury

or knew that they were in the courtroom

and

I'm sorry, this is my red light.

Thank you.

Okay, thank you very much.

You reserved two minutes.

Thank you all.

Good morning and may it please the court

Adriana McCulloch for the same in New Hampshire.

I'd like to start by pointing out

another quote that this court wrote in State B. Moran.

This court held that although the right

meaning the confrontation clause right is not absolute

we have recognized few exceptions

and the two exceptions that this court

c-cited to were all of the hearsay exceptions

which includes Rule 804

which is when a witness is unavailable to testify

and it also cited to State B. Peters

which is about using a trial deposition

of a witness prior to trial

which is what they did in Bergstrom.

It was a prerecorded video

testimony of that witness

that they then played for the jury.

Frankly, and that was probably only technology

they had at that time because that happened in 1988.

In this case, on this record

this court can find that this witness was unavailable.

That argument was put forth by the State.

They talked about in their argument to the trial court

that this witness was essentially unavailable

to give in the difficulties

and the ability she would have to testify in front of the defendant

if she were in his physical presence in the courtroom.

Granted, they were operating under Marilyn B. Craig

because at that time as we all know Moran

this court had not issued Moran.

And so once the trial court found

it should be unavailable in some way

to testify based on her mental illness

based on the testimony over two days from her therapist

the trial court crafted a remedy for that unavailability

that it believed would be the most protected

of the defendant's confrontation clause rights

which includes the right for a life process examination

under oath in a way that the jury and the defendant

could observe her reactions in her demeanor

and in as close to his physical presence as possible

through live two-way video.

That is a better remedy even

than what Justice Scalia has written about

in Crawford, New Washington

which is at this point in our jurisprudence

the most stringent test for when you can admit

testimony of a witness that is not in the physical presence

of the defendant and the jury.

Under Crawford, New Washington

what Justice Scalia wrote about was

once a witness is determined to be unavailable

under rule of evidence 804

whatever that state's counterpart is

then you can use at that trial

a prerecorded testimony that you've been under oath

where there was an opportunity for cross-examination

here or in any other case where live two-way video is used

that allows for real-time cross-examination

and it allows for real-time observance

and judgment of that witness's demeanor and credibility

not only from the defendant

but from the jury and from the trial judge

and that is a better remedy

or more protective of the rights

because not only does that allow

the fact finder and the defendant

to see that witness in real-time

it also allows the parties

mainly in this case the defense attorney

to mold their cross-examination

based on what is happening in that trial

in that moment

based on what other witnesses have said at the trial

or in the trial prep meetings

because if you use a trial deposition that is filmed

months or sometimes years before the trial

you don't have that opportunity as the litigator

you can also use anything that the parties have said

in their opening statements

and you can use any evidentiary rulings

that the court has ruled on

for example, if something was motioned and eliminated out

that is now in a trial

based on opening the door through a statement

or another witness

but how does all of that accommodate

the face-to-face part of our Constitution?

it accommodates it because

this court has also held in Peters

which this court has not overturned

that there are times when

the accused rights under the Confrontation Clause

may in an appropriate case

give way to an important state interest

here is allowing this trial to be completed

meaning allowing the witness

to successfully complete a direct examination

and a cross-examination

so that there is no mistrial granted

because she's unable to complete her testimony

or unavailable to complete her testimony

how is that any different than Warren though?

it is different than Warren

because Warren was one-way video

where the defendant

or where the victim could not see the defendant

while she was testifying

not only because she identified him

but based on the way that the screens were set up

and there's a record of that in the transcript

I'm not sure the page number

and the jury could see her

so they could judge in real-time

her credibility and her demeanor

I agree I don't know that there's a record

of what the victim could see

she could see all 14 members of the jury

but there are plenty of cases

where they don't even have to look at the jury

when they're testifying

they could look at the defendant

to not allow for this accommodation

when the goal and the state interest here

is to complete a trial

with a witness who is completing

live testimony and being cross-examined

in real-time

I would like to point the court

to a case out of Missouri

called Safety Smith

and I want to point out that case

because I think this court at this point

given Warren

needs to adopt some sort of standard

for when it is appropriate

to have some sort of accommodation

accommodation excuse me

for a witness who is unavailable

to testify in some way

so in that case out of Missouri

which is in my brief

Safety Smith

I have this site here somewhere

that court talked about

how states use essentially

three different tests

states across the nation

and federal courts across the nation

the least protective

or least restrictive test

that they talk about is

the second circuit court

case

state or USV Giganti

that I'm sure I'm mispronouncing

but in that case

essentially second circuit health

there needs to be exceptional circumstances

that meet some sort of special

government or state interest

to allow something other than

physical presence in the courtroom

in that case they use live

two-way video

and that court said

I don't want this to be the norm

but in this case there are exceptional circumstances

that test is less stringent

than Marilyn B. Craig

which this court has sort of relegated

to just federal analysis

in this state

and in that case if we know

the standard there is to have to show

that the testimony outside the physical presence

of the defendant is necessary

and meet some sort of public policy interest

and that the testimony itself can be reliable

and then the other

third case I've talked about in this Missouri case

is Crawford v. Washington

and our pitch to this court

is that under any of those three tests

we meet the test

because in Crawford v. Washington

the US Supreme Court is talking about

when a witness is unavailable

it does not change the standard for how a witness

is made unavailable in that case

it just says when a witness is unavailable

you can use prior recorded testimony

of the trial as long as they had

an opportunity not even an actual

just an opportunity to be

cross-examined by the opposing party

this live two-way video

is even better than that

because if you're recorded testimony

whether it be a deposition or a trial deposition

or a prior testimony at a trial

that resulted in this trial

or in a remand from appeal

it's possible that sometimes the witness

was never cross-examined even though

they had the opportunity but in this live

two-way video remedy

to a witness being unavailable

they can be cross-examined.

Is there something that we should distinguish

when a witness is

potentially unavailable

as opposed to actually

unavailable to some degree

I understand there was testimony in findings

by the trial court but to some degree

we are speculating

that the witness was

unavailable based on the testimony

of her counselor

I see the court's concern

I want to point out just in this appeal

the factual findings of the trial court

on that point are not being challenged

however I think that

determination of unavailability

can stay the way it currently is

in the state of our law

which is it's the trial court's determination to make

I believe by a hundredth of the evidence

that that person is unavailable

and the trial court can use

whatever facts necessary to make that finding

I don't know that you have to hold

that it has to happen in the trial

because there are certainly situations

where a witness says to

the state or to the defense attorney

I'm not coming to trial, I don't care if you subpoena me

I'm not going to be there

and then they're not there

the trial court can decide based on the facts

that's presented to it

when that unavailability

is occurring and what the remedy is

at that time and if a party

wants to challenge that on appeal

and that factual determination is given deference

and that the legal determinations

if there are any are then challenged

so you don't have to

I don't think you need to distinguish

between potentially or actually unavailable

it just is unavailability

wouldn't it also in a scenario

like this be almost a question

by question determination

in which the

witness should have been placed

on the stand in the courtroom

ask for their name

potentially gotten into some

of the direct testimony

and then a determination

made as to unavailability

I guess the trial court could have done that

but again on this appeal

that is not being challenged

and frankly the parties down below

the defense attorney did not put that forward as an option

they did not say let's give it a try

and then if she can't we'll decide then

what to do about her testimony

they just put forth

she needs to be physically present

she needs to be physically present

and then they put forth all their objections

to this live two-way video communication

I think that's in the trial court's

realm to decide

and it's in their deference to decide

how or when they want to make that determination

but I think on this record

especially because it's not being challenged on appeal

there is sufficient evidence

to meet that preponderance of the evidence standard

that this witness was unavailable

she had talked about some of the sexual assaults

with her therapist

and even in those meetings

she had shut down, become catatonic

and had frozen up and not been able to speak

even in therapy

when she wasn't even talking about all

of the abuse according to the therapist

so I think the trial court

was within its discretion

to find that she was unavailable

even if it was before trial

especially given her young age

she was 11, almost 12 at that evidentiary hearing

and was 12 at the trial

so this was close in time

and given everything that the therapist had talked about

in the letter she submitted and at the hearings

so I don't think that this court

needs to distinguish between

or require trial courts

to make that unavailability finding at a certain time

I think over the history

of rule 804

that has been left to the discretion of the trial court

who is in the best position to decide

whether a witness

based on all the facts surrounding that case

is or is not unavailable

counsel

I assume that you would agree that

the drafters of part 1 article 15

did not contemplate

virtual confrontation

sure since it was ratified in 1784

I don't know what they thought

about technology in 2026

and so

Ms. Fallon has made the point that

for hundreds of years

the only way in which confrontation

could take place is in the presence

of the

of the accused

and face to face

in the same courtroom

what has

changed in terms of the constitution

that allows us

to begin eroding

that fundamental protection

that was

written into part 1 article 15

so what allows you, I don't first of all

I don't think that this court would be eroding

that protection because

even going back before

in property Washington

the US Supreme Court acknowledges that this right is not absolute

and that it can give way

in certain situations

and trial

this is the New Hampshire constitution

just as Gould is asking about

part 1 article 15

understood, my point is

that this court in the state

has also held the same thing

but this right is not absolute

that cannot be eroding

the Confrontation Clause

and my point is pointing to other

state courts and federal courts

these exceptions have been built in

long before technology

we can go back as early as

1988 and even though Berkshire was overturned

it was not overturned

because they used a videotape to trial that position

it was overturned because

there were nine specific problems

with that videotape

many of which prevented the jury

and the defendant from seeing the witness

which is what this court said was the issue in Warren

so this face to face

and exceptions to this physical presence

face to face have always existed

Warren did not overrule

Hernandez and Peters

Hernandez was the case where an undercomer officer

testified with a mask on

in trial in the presence of the jury

and even though that attorney argued

that violated that face to face

this court held it did not

and this court has not overturned

Hernandez who was in Warren

in Peters a trial that position was used

in Belanger in 2024

that was an unpublished case

but in that case the trial court

found the witness was unavailable because

they had been paralyzed from the waist down

and couldn't make it into court

they testified the live two-way video

on appeal they only challenged

the facts proving that that witness

was unavailable and so there was

no legal decision about the

confrontation clause rights but this court found

there was sufficient evidence that that witness was unavailable

and touched nothing about live

two-way video so to your point

we haven't been eroding it

we've had built-in exceptions to this right

in the same way that we have built-in exceptions

to every constitutional right

building on that a little bit

the discussion on pages

29, 30, 31

are your brief about other

states I haven't gone back

I confess but you cite

that 16 states have

face-to-face requirements

is the language

the textual language

in their constitutions the same

is this New Hampshire accepting Massachusetts

and that Middlesex County case

I mean are they operating

from the same textual basis

they are those 16

states specifically say

the defendant has a right

to face-to-face confrontation

they may use different words around face-to-face

but all of those 16 states have the phrase

face-to-face

the Iowa case I know

but Iowa states I did not cite

they just say that a defendant has

a right to confront witnesses

which is what the federal constitution requires

if my memory serves correctly

however I think even Justice Scalia

acknowledges that even where it says

right to confront that means

face-to-face and so while I think

states that have that same text

for you to analyze

I think at this point it's fair to say

that federally and statewide

we all acknowledge there is a requirement

of face-to-face but all of those states

and all of those federal courts

acknowledge that that right is not absolute

and that it can give way in certain situations

when there is a test to use

to determine that and that's what the state

is asking the court to do

I see my red light is on

thank you very much

a couple quick points

clear in state versus warrant

that our constitution does not state

a preference

for face-to-face confrontation

like the 6th amendment

all of the and I address this

in my reply brief

all of the face-to-face

states that the state cited

all of those

jurisdictions

those jurisdictions

decided that they

their constitutional right was the equivalent

of the 6th amendment

and they adopted and followed

the exception under Maryland

versus CREC

this court specifically rejected that

it said

not withstanding

that 6th amendment case law

that we do not

it is not merely a preference

and it does not comport with state law

and we further

consider the test set forth

that Maryland versus CREC

applies only to the 6th amendment

not to our constitution

essentially the state's argument

here is that we should have

some sort of test

for an exception to face-to-face

physical presence

and this court has already

specifically rejected that in the morning

the state says

in its brief and referred to it

in argument

that the complainant in this case

could see the defendant when she

testified

she says the only thing we know from the record

is that the complainant

was looking directly

in the camera

we all know when you're looking

at the camera button on a laptop

you are not looking at anybody on the screen

the jury had absolutely

no way to know

what she was looking at when she was looking

as she was testifying

and in fact

the records indicate that

there are other people in the room with her

a county attorney

a victim-witness coordinator

and a defense investigator

something was going on in that room

that the jury had no ability

to understand

and assess

when he was trying to decide whether

her words were credible

thank you

thank you very much counsel the case is submitted
