This is case 240032, state of New Hampshire versus James Schenkel.

Good morning, attorney Phalan. I understand you reserve one.

Yes, thank you. Good morning. My name is Pamela Phalan. I'm here on behalf of Mr. Schenkel.

I'd like to address three points today.

First, that the circumstantial evidence in this case was insufficient to prove that impairment or negligence caused the accident.

Second, that the error in allowing testimony that was late disclosed unfairly prejudiced Mr. Schenkel and was error and that error was not harmless.

Regarding the circumstantial evidence issue, not every accident is a crime and not every negligent act is criminal negligence.

The evidence here was not so overwhelming, the circumstantial evidence, because that's what this case insisted of.

That evidence was not so overwhelming as to exclude all reasonable conclusions other than guilt.

The state on the DUI charges had the burden to prove not just that Mr. Schenkel was impaired,

but also that his impairment directly and immediately caused the accident that resulted in the death.

Regarding the criminal negligent charges, the state had the burden to prove that there was a substantial,

that he took a substantial and unjustifiable risk and that that failure was a gross deviation from the conduct of a reasonable person under the circumstances.

Here, the evidence did not exclude the possibility that mere inattentiveness led to the accident,

that a passenger inadvertently had a foot on the throttle.

Wasn't it negligent to have a total of three people in the vehicle?

Criminally negligent, I would say no.

There needs to be more than just having three people in a vehicle to establish or to meet the burden of criminal negligence.

A vehicle designed for two with only two seatbelts.

I think again that that is circumstantial evidence.

We don't have a per se criminal negligent homicide statute.

Well, isn't it criminal negligence to consume ten beers and try to get three people into one of these vehicles?

Well, the images, I would just say the images of the vehicle do not indicate what your questions somewhat suggest,

which is that people were packed in.

But you meant to your client acknowledge consuming eight to ten beers during the course of that day?

He said eight to ten beers.

No one asked him any follow up questions as to when those beers had been consumed, whether they were consumed with food.

But there was testimony that his BAC was 1.35 at the time of the accident?

That was the expert testimony the state put on through the application of what's called the retrograde extrapolation analysis.

And regarding the BAC, one of the problems here again is that was circumstantial evidence of what his BAC may have been at the time of the accident.

It's circumstantial because of all the assumptions that had to go in to coming up with that calculation,

given the lack of more specific information about what was consumed, when it was consumed,

and other factors that are essential to determine whether at the time of the accident he was in a post absorption phase

or an elimination phase, and then also what would be his particular absorption rate and elimination rate.

All of the calculations done by the state's expert were based on assumptions from clinical data

that the expert relied upon to come up with ranges for what might be the appropriate ranges of elimination and absorption.

But the expert used the hospital blood, is that right?

She did use the hospital blood sample. There was only one sample, which is also significant,

because in doing the retrograde extrapolation, one of the things an expert has testified to once trying to determine again

is whether at the time of the accident someone was in a post absorption phase or an elimination phase.

And the way to do that is to have two samples taken a period of time apart.

Here there was just one sample that was taken, but yes, her expert opinion was based on that.

Did the jury know that he refused to comply with the search warrant?

Yes, there was testimony of that. And the court instructed the jury about whether that could be evidence of consciousness of guilt,

the refusal to comply with the request for a blood draw.

And the judge, as he instructed the jury and as is our law,

one inference from that information is guilt, but there is also inferences that are reasonable to draw consistent with not guilty,

not being guilt, not having a consciousness of guilt.

And that's clear in our law and that's what the judge instructed the jury.

I would also like to point out that the BAC testimony, the calculations done by the expert,

if the calculations are taken into effect,

she came up with two calculations assuming that Mr. Schenkel was still in post absorption phase at the time of the accident.

And she came up with a calculation if he had been, had just had one beer that was still being absorbed at the time of the accident,

put his BAC on the low end of that range under the legal limit, 0.077.

And then if there were two beers in his system still being absorbed,

that would have brought the lower end of that range to 0.05.

But as a charge, the jury only had to determine impairment to any degree, isn't that right?

Yes, but as the judge also instructed the jury on impairment, a BAC is not conclusive about whether someone is actually paired.

And we had other evidence in this case beyond just the BAC evidence about how he was acting, communicating,

and being mobile around the scene of the accident that is ambiguous as to whether he was impaired by alcohol,

or whether any difficulties he was having in that regard was related to having just been an accident,

having suffered potentially a head injury, and also clearly under the duress of having suffered a traumatic loss of what just happened in the accident.

And even though there was testimony from two witnesses that one witness said slurring slightly,

another witness said some of his words were slurring, everyone understood him.

He answered, he was responsive to questions, he wasn't incoherent.

They also noted his injuries.

Those witnesses also agreed that what they saw was consistent also with someone having been involved in an accident

and also suffering the mental duress of the trauma that they just witnessed.

We also have an EMT witness who testified she was the one who last treated Mr. Shankle at the scene

and then assisted him in getting into the ambulance and transporting him to the hospital.

This was during a time when people were still wearing masks because of COVID.

She testified that she specifically lowered her mask so that she could smell his breath to see if it smelled like alcohol,

and she did not smell alcohol.

But other people testified they did smell alcohol in his breath?

Yes.

One officer testified that he smelled alcohol, and then another EMT person also said that she smelled some alcohol.

But again, evidence, the circumstantial evidence of whether he was impaired was not enough to exclude the possibility

that he was not impaired to the degree that his impairment directly and immediately caused the accident.

The state's burden here is not just to show that an impairment was just the mere possible or contributing cause of the accident.

It has to be the direct and immediate consequence.

If you look at the BAC evidence and if you look at the other evidence we have that's consistent not only with being impaired,

but alternatively with having just suffered physical injury and mental trauma, which clearly he had,

it's inconclusive as to whether he was impaired and that impairment caused the accident.

If there are no further questions about the sufficiency argument, I can move to my additional arguments.

The other error I raised had to do with the testimony that was admitted at trial from an officer McDermott.

On the fifth day of trial, after the defense had already previewed a primary part of its argument against the state's case,

which was the lack of the state getting any accident reconstructionist to analyze the scene

and attempt to determine what happened and how the accident was caused.

So five days into trial, the state notifies, the state finds out from McDermott and during trial prep

that McDermott actually did call a accident reconstruction team sergeant from the state police

and that he called him from the scene of the accident and that sergeant Wheeler declined to come out to the scene

and then there was information about why he declined.

What was the information about why he declined?

It was because my recollection is it was because sergeant Wheeler thought because the bodies had been moved

he could not do an accident reconstruction of the scene.

So that statement came into evidence?

No.

So what happened is and there was a lot of confusion about this.

So the court allowed or after much argument, the court allowed two pieces of evidence to come in.

One that McDermott called the accident reconstruction expert from the scene

and that the accident reconstruction person declined to come to the scene.

Then what happens is and this and I have to correct what was in my brief.

I thought both pieces went in.

There was a lot of confusion about this evidence actually coming into trial.

And so the state is right.

The only part of that ruling that came in is that McDermott called from the scene of the accident.

He called the accident reconstruction team.

But even the admission of that evidence error.

So just to clarify, that's all the evidence that came in.

There was no evidence that they declined to come to the scene?

Correct.

However, I will say in closing arguments the state and again I think it's because everybody assumed these two pieces came in as the court ordered.

The state argued in closing that he called the accident reconstruction team and there was a declaration.

Was there an objection to that?

No, there was not.

Because again I think in the confusion about how this came in, which I won't further get into,

I think that everybody assumed it had come in.

But I think even the evidence that Sergeant McDermott called the accident reconstruction team from the scene itself is error.

I hear say no.

I think it implies hearsay.

And the fact that no one came out.

I mean that is evidence in the case.

There was no accident reconstruction evidence.

I'm trying the case as the defense that is.

But that's the state's negligence.

They didn't do the job.

There's no investigation.

And that's the argument that was made below, I'm assuming.

It was.

But now we have this phone call where presumably an expert,

an accident reconstruction expert person talks to someone on the scene and then never comes out.

An inference from that is that he didn't think it would be worthwhile.

And other inferences that was nobody available to do it?

Both.

Either.

But I think that that inference undermined the argument that the defense was presenting.

And the defense was not in a position at that point to pivot.

They didn't have their own accident reconstruction.

How would it have affected the pre-trial preparation?

Even if you've known that the CO called state police.

How would it have affected?

Well, I know just from the arguments made on this issue at trial that defense counsel talked about the fact that they might have changed their mind about whether to have an accident reconstruction expert testify.

Or have an accident reconstructionist do what they could try and form an opinion.

That is what the defense talked about.

The defense also pointed out to the court that they would have changed their theory of defense.

Or at least changed how they were arguing the issue, not only in the presentation of their argument during opening statements, but also in their cross-examination of the police officer witnesses that testified before McDermott.

But it's not.

The fact that the call was made is not inconsistent with the assertion that defense made that not a single accident reconstruction expert was retained by the state.

I mean, there's no inconsistency there.

I think on that point, yes.

But the defense was arguing that it was material, that the lack of an accident reconstruction person and analysis

did not allow us to know what happened at the scene.

In other words, if an analysis had been done, an expert had shown up, we would have more answers than we do today about what happened.

And that this is a material problem, not just that they didn't come out.

But now this evidence is saying that someone was called and that person determined not to come out was a reasonable inference to be drawn from that.

Yes, my time is up.

Thank you.

May it please the court?

Robert Baldwin for the State of Hampshire.

I'll try to address the arguments as they were presented just now.

Regardless of the efficiency of the evidence, proof that the defendant was impaired was direct, overwhelming, and more than sufficient to show it was the cause of the fatal accident.

The defendant's defense and trial was as UTV accelerated uncontrollably, the brakes stopped working, and then struck a tree.

Now that's not an accident reconstruction issue.

That is a defective UTV issue.

And the state's proof was that there was no issue with the steering or the throttle or the braking system.

So we're going to this argument that, oh, he was impaired, but that did not cause the accident.

No evidence suggests that the UTV itself was responsible.

And the jury saw pictures of the actual crime scene and the property a few days later.

These are dirt trails that seem to appear relatively maintained.

And the UTV drove straight into a tree.

An impairment was direct evidence from slurred speech, glassy eyes, smell of alcohol on the person.

His blood alcohol level even five hours after the accident was a.054.

The state's expert in retrograde extrapolation estimated with either.058 to I believe 233 at the time that the fatal accident would have occurred.

And even at the lower end,.58, she testified that even if you have a high tolerance of alcohol, that's going to affect things that happen in the brain.

Reaction time, constant coordination, concentration.

So evidence of impairment is overwhelming, and the only explanation of how you drove straight into a tree was there was a defect in the UTV.

State's evidence showed no defect.

Attorney Phelan referenced the rational conclusion that one of the occupants of the vehicle could have inadvertently put his or her foot on the accelerator.

What do we make of that?

Light most favorable to the state is no evidence to support that so the jury could disregard that theory.

When there's issues of state in mind and circumstantial and alternative explanations come in play,

but just other way to direct evidence, then the appellate court, if it doesn't support the trial court, what happened at the trial court,

then that's just evidence of the jury disregarded.

And if there are no other questions on causation or impact.

What about his estimate of the speed?

Can we consider that?

Yes, exactly.

So that also goes to negligence 40 to 50 miles per hour.

Because there's both negligent homicide and negligent handling DUI.

So that's evidence of driving too fast.

And there's also testimony that he went into the brush for a time before striking the tree.

So that suggests somebody who struggled to control the UTV.

And it's undisputed that there's only supposed to be two people in the UTV.

There's a warning about carrying passengers.

There was only two seat belts, and at least one of the passengers was not in their seat belt.

It was not actually in a seat.

So when did the defendant make these statements about consuming 8 to 10 beers and the vehicle being 45 to 50 miles an hour?

Was that custodial interrogation information, or was that something that he admitted to the police before he was arrested or before anything else happened?

Before any arrest.

I believe Officer Pellerin was the first police officer to speak with him.

And to Officer Pellerin, it was 8 to 10.

Then by the time he's talking to the EMT before the ambulance, it's 10 beers.

Then Fish and Game Officer Colorturno, he spoke to the defendant admitted to drinking 10 beers.

Now, regarding this issue that it was prejudiced by a live Officer McDermott to testify that he called the state police to do the accident.

Do you agree it was a late disclosure?

I disagree.

Late disclosure is the correct term.

I believe it's just whenever you find out a witness is going to say something that contradicts or is new information, you have a duty to disclose.

And they disclose right as they found it.

I believe in the quote on the record is, we're not following the state.

They told us as soon as they kid.

And it wasn't in his police report?

It was not his police report.

And how that incident occurred is unclear from the record.

But regarding to prejudice, this is not bringing material.

It they complied with World 12 B.

It's really just whether there's a four or three analysis.

So relevance stepped a police officer takes an investigation is only always relevant, especially when you've been attacked on steps they didn't take.

And we're going to unfair prejudice.

There was none.

The promise during opening statement was the evidence will show that no accident reconstruction is was retained.

That was true at the end of the case at the close of evidence.

The way a jury assigned to the lack of an accident reconstruction, especially in light of evidence of impairment.

And the evidence regarding that there was no defense in the TV was not impacted by which police officer or which agency was responsible for the reconstruction not occurring.

The jury had any reason to think an accident reconstruction would have caused it to have reasonable doubt about the state's proof.

Then the fact that officer made a phone call to state police that would just shift the blame from officer McDermott to the state police.

Whether wish officer was less than thorough or whether it was helpful wasn't an issue for the jury.

It was just the efficiency of the evidence.

And the fact that also McDermott testified to make the phone call which came up in very limited fashion and only in cross-examination.

No discussion why they didn't take up on it.

That did not prevent the defendant from pressing the state on actions that he contended should have taken at the scene.

The officer requested about not marking where the bodies were found, not marking where the tree was struck, not taking a picture of what gear the TV was in at the scene of the accident.

And I believe there is some discussion about not marking the tires and not taking better pictures at the scene as well.

And how it came out, the defendant was able to use that for the advantage in two ways.

One was one way to further impeach the credibility of Officer McDermott.

They pointed out the fact that he waited until trial to tell the prosecution this.

And if you look at closing and fortunately didn't notice a brief, but the defendant's closing highlighted the fact that two years after the trial,

day after the trial, Officer McDermott told the prosecution for the first time that he called an accident reconstruction.

And they spin that as a way to say, well, that showed he knew the importance of an accident reconstruction is arriving at this scene.

So are you saying that's harmless, Sarah?

There was no error from an evidentiary reason, but it's also harmless.

And I'll lay down the reasons why.

One, evidence of impairment.

And that's, we've talked about 10 years, his blood alcohol content, which I know the defendant has asserted that it relies on too many variables.

That's more of an argument excluding the evidence as a Daubert contention.

Seems more or not a weight of evidence.

Once that evidence is testified to the jury can view the light most variable to the state.

Circumstantial evidence as well.

He refused to take the blood alcohol test.

He actually threatened to fight the police when they showed up this scene.

There was threats indicating the risk of self harm that can be weighed into a factor of knowledge of guilt.

And it's sort of that this UTV accelerated uncontrollably was contradicted by the actual state's expert,

which the jury couldn't afford reasonably that was an effort to mislead the police that could wait for its guilt.

So yes, just kind of way, if this is an error, it is harmless.

And similarly, if the court construes this material as Brady material,

but also wouldn't make a difference in analysis, Brady analysis is whether a reasonable probability could have made a difference.

That same analysis would fold into the harmless error argument the state makes in its brief.

And the test for harmless error and Brady violations both beyond a reasonable doubt.

So we don't think this a brainy issue is just material becoming known during trial in the trial court trying to take steps

to reduce any potential unfair surprise.

But at the end of the day, it's either no error or reasonable error.

One perhaps final point to note for the questions.

This argument that when the jury found out that Austin McDermott made a phone call, they didn't arrive.

The jury would have necessarily inferred that the state police concluded

that they could accident reconstruction would not provide any useful evidence.

That's pure speculations and it's easy to think of alternative solutions

or explanation the jury might have inferred.

If they inferred any, they could have thought the state police were incompetent.

They were negligent. There was a miscommunication.

It was not a priority for the state police.

They then had the capability at the time.

Or maybe they thought that they committed the, they were guilty to the same mindset

as what they accused the Fish and Game of being, just assuming it's a clear cut DUI.

Was the call to the state police admissible evidence?

Like the actual back and forth?

No, the call that came in evidence that there was an all by McDermott.

That would create hearsay issues perhaps?

But why was, what was the purpose of admitting that evidence of the phone call?

Why was that admissible?

You have to explain the steps the police took in their accident.

And especially when the police are being pressed on.

That is the thing they didn't enjoy to seeing.

The show what?

Just to show that the police are committing a thorough investigation.

And the bar and elevates is a low.

Was the argument made that the state never even thought about getting an accident reconstructionist?

A statement made in an opening argument perhaps?

The statement is, I recall an opening argument, which is quoted in our brief was.

Accident reconstruction was not even retained.

Now suppose the jury thought, well, they didn't think to ask for one to, they didn't retain one.

That's largely irrelevant.

The issue was, what's the reason to think an accident reconstructionist could have provided exculpatory evidence?

Or any evidence that would provide a reasonable doubt?

Whether the officers didn't think of one or someone just didn't follow up on that?

What did not go to the actual issue before the jury?

Which was, was there proof beyond a reasonable doubt that defendant guilty of negligent DUI?

Did the defendant raise an relevant claim argument to the sentence at trial?

No.

If it is, I don't recall.

It was more along the lines of, this is new to us.

We're in the trial.

We promise them there was no accident reconstructionist.

They might think we are untruthful.

But they were able to eliminate worry about the jury feeling misled by just pointing out the fact.

You told us through the prosecution for the first time.

Days in the trial, two days later.

So they wouldn't have for the jury to fault defense counsel for not discovering this information.

If there's further questions, we'll rest on our brief and ask that you affirm the defendant's convictions.

I'd just like to briefly address a few points.

The state argues that this, there was a lot of overwhelming direct evidence.

Even the trial court in ruling on the motion to dismiss recognized, I think the court said it thought that this case was 99% circumstantial.

All of it was circumstantial evidence.

The estimate of speed, I would just point out, and you'll see it in the briefs and the transcripts.

But the question is the cause of the speed.

And also, Officer Pellerin, who heard this comment about 30 to 40 miles per hour,

also acknowledged that most people who have been in a traumatic accident are poor estimators of speed.

In addition, there was no examination by the state's expert about how the functioning of this UTV was.

There was no evidence admitted that he considered or even looked to see what gear the UTV was in.

But there was testimony that, depending on the gear it was in, if it was in a particular gear,

it couldn't even actually go above 20 miles an hour.

So I think that there's still a lot of circumstantial questions about cause of the accident, the speed.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Council, case submitted.

Recess?
