This is case 2024-0186, Adrienne Eau Claire versus Colton Harvey at all.

Good morning, counsel.

Good morning, Your Honor.

Please, the court.

My name is Chris Rete.

I represent the appellants, Colton Harvey and Benjamin Harvey.

Considering the plain and ordinary language of RSA 540A,

this matter must be reversed for the following reasons.

First, Mr. Eau Claire is not a tenant, as defined under RSA 540A.

He does not have standing to bring an action under that statute.

Furthermore, Colton and Benjamin Harvey are not landlords, as defined under RSA 540A,

and are subject to the prohibitions and penalties of that statute.

RSA 540A expressly requires a rental or lease agreement.

Landlord is defined as an owner who rents or leases residential property,

excuse me, premises.

Couldn't you have a scenario where there's not a lease agreement per se,

but there's some exchange consideration?

There could be a case in which there was a, I guess,

oral lease agreement or perhaps implied by conduct,

but there was no evidence presented at trial that there was any lease

or rental agreement at all, even by implication of conduct.

Were there payments?

No, there were no rent payments, either paid or asked for.

What support is there for the proposition that cable is a utility that must be protected?

We don't dispute that cable could be a protected utility in a landlord-tenant relationship.

What we dispute is that Mr. Eau Claire is not a tenant under 540A,

which is a very narrow standard as opposed to a much broader standard under RSA 540A.

In the case under 540A, there must be an express or implied lease or rental agreement,

and there was no finding that there was such an agreement,

nor was there any evidence that there was such an agreement.

So if it's not a 540A case, then whether it's a protected utility or not is irrelevant.

Well, wasn't there an implied finding by the trial court?

I mean, it wasn't explicit, but we wouldn't be going down this road

if there wasn't an implied finding.

Not correct, not exactly, Arno.

So in the motion to reconsider order, the trial court addressed that

and stated that when Benjamin moved out of the premises,

the shared living arrangement changed to a different status,

but she did not make a direct finding that there was a rental lease agreement

which is expressly required under 540A.

She did not explain how the status changed or what the new status was,

other than it was a 540A claim.

540A expressly requires a finding of a rental lease agreement,

and this court has held that in the past in the Evans v. J4 Realty case

where a client, let's give you an owner of a foreclosed property

was not subject to 540A because they did not have a rental lease agreement

with the tenant who was occupying the premises at the time.

But at the same time, the court held that that owner was subject to 540

under the eviction process because as I said earlier,

it's a much broader standard under 540A than under 540A, which is very narrow.

I assume somebody was paying for the cable.

Who was paying for the cable?

Initially, Benjamin was paying for the cable.

Also, Benjamin Coulton's mother paid a lot of their bills.

To be clear, some of the bills were paid out of money she was holding for Mr. Eau Claire,

but it was never a rental payment to Benjamin or Coulton who were the owners of the property at that time.

Were there direct payments by her to the cable company?

Correct.

And who did the cable company have an agreement with?

Well, that was in dispute in the trial court.

Benjamin produced a statement with his name on it.

His testimony was that it was his cable account, his cable equipment.

Opposing counsel produced another statement with Mr. Eau Claire's name on it

and there was no, I guess, evidence of why there was two different accounts,

but my client's position from the beginning was that it was his account and his cable equipment.

Is that irrelevant to your argument now?

Because you're not saying that cable is a utility that needs to be provided to a tenant.

It is. Our essential argument is that neither Mr. Eau Claire nor my clients are subject to 548

because they don't meet the definitions of that statute, which is very express.

So what was the nature of the relationship then with the grandpa?

Was he just a guest in his ex-home?

What is his status?

Yes.

What was an occupant of the property, I think, so that gives him certain rights under 540,

but no rental lease agreement either expressed or implied.

Not a tenant as defined under 540A.

So initially, the relationship was one of a shared living arrangement

that unfortunately went bad and then moved out of the home.

But there was no mutual agreement between the two of them

that Mr. Eau Claire was going to rent the property for a certain amount of rent

or any other arrangement that just never happened.

Did he claim some sort of a life estate?

He did. Mr. Eau Claire claimed that he had a life estate in the property

even though there was nothing in writing stating that fact.

And that was part of our argument that if it's a life estate,

that's not a tenant under 540A.

It's a very different status.

Has he?

Go ahead.

Sorry.

Understood.

In the record, there was a reference to parallel litigation on

there's a life estate.

Yes.

The status of that.

Correct.

There's a case in spirit court by Mr. Eau Claire

against Colton and Benjamin and their mother, Ms. Lavasser.

So that's pending.

It's pending.

And in that case, is he asserting a life estate?

He is.

And is that an equity action in the superior quarter?

It's combined.

There's also some damaged claims against Ms. Lavasser

for other reasons which are not part of this case.

I should state, since you're asking that question,

the House has been sold by agreement in Mr. Eau Claire

to vacate the property.

So what about the reference to landlord and tenant

in various meetings?

We addressed that under the difference between the 540 standard

and the 540A standard.

So under 540, the standardized form used the term tenant,

even though the statute used the term tenant or occupant.

So our position was that being named as a tenant

under standardized forms and the 540 eviction action

started earlier to this does not make Mr. Eau Claire a tenant

under 540A because it's a different standard.

Mr. Eau Claire, sell the house to his grandchildren

at fair market value?

I was not involved with the time.

He didn't sell it.

I don't know how they determined the value

to be honest with you.

Do you know what the sale price was?

I don't know off the top of my head.

It was significant value,

but I don't know what the value was off the top of my head.

With respect to the penalties,

you are giving the statute as ambiguous?

As far as the continuing penalties?

Yeah.

We're arguing, well, twofold.

One, that the district court judge essentially amended

or stayed the temporary order when she refused

to enforce the order during trial.

So it would be unreasonable to penalize my clients

for not following that temporary order

when the district court judge declined to enforce it

at that time.

And the second point is that the court has held that

each day, since it's called a separate violation

under the statute, must be reviewed in isolation.

So each day must have a finding of willfulness,

just like the initial violation requires.

In this case, as I said, the judge refused,

excuse me, declined to enforce that temporary order at trial.

So you can't say that my clients will fully disobey the order

when the judge declined to order it at the trial.

What do you mean by the judge declined to enforce?

So opposing counsel asked for the judge

to immediately reinstate the cable service

to enforce the temporary order.

She declined to do that.

There was a dispute about who owned the cable service,

whether he could reinstate Mr. Eau Claire's cable service

if it was his account.

We did not have access to the counsel.

There was various matters that were unknown at the time.

So the judge declined to enforce it at that time.

So how many days did it take to reinstall the cable service

after the court's final order?

I don't know exactly.

It may have been a month or so.

It was not immediate, but there was an attempt

by parties to resolve the case,

as well as the other matters that are part

of that other spirit court case now.

And Ms. Lavasser obtained a new cable account

and cable equipment for Mr. Eau Claire.

Could they not get access to the properties?

Is that why it took a month or did they just...

Well, we were trying to work out various matters.

Benjamin testified that he tried

to go back to the cable company to get more information.

He was locked out of the account.

He believed it was because of this case,

but we don't know that for sure.

Are we trying to see issues on cross appeal?

Yeah, so most of Mr. Eau Claire's cross appeal

revolves around a motion for a contempt

for holding a open house on the property.

Our position is twofold.

One, if this is not an RSA 548 claim,

then there can be no motion for contempt.

We would be moot at that point

because the court itself is not valid.

Second point is the trial court had ample evidence

supporting her position that it was not a willful

or intentional violation,

but they did not believe that the open house itself

would violate that temporary order

and would not intending to harm

or did cause any harm to Mr. Eau Claire.

Second part of Mr. Eau Claire's brief

revolves around enhanced damages

under Consumer Protection Act.

This court has held repeatedly

that it's not an automatic Consumer Protection Act claim

just for a 548 violation.

There has to be an additional finding

of a specific and intentional violation

of the Consumer Protection Act itself,

which requires a showing of deceptive or unfair conduct

in trade or commerce.

In this case, as I said earlier,

this was not a landlord-tenant relationship

or was not intended to be a landlord-tenant relationship.

Benjamin testified that he didn't even know

it could be a landlord-tenant relationship

as far as he know he was just living with a grandfather.

So if the purpose of 548

is to discourage unacceptable conduct of landlords,

it doesn't serve that purpose

if he didn't even know he could be a landlord in this case.

Similar to Consumer Protection Act,

he had no idea that he was even in commerce

because he didn't realize he could be a landlord in this case.

All he knew was he was living in a home with his grandfather.

So the court had ample evidence to support that position.

I believe that's the bulb of Mr. Eau Claire's appeal.

There was numerous counts that were very similar

based on the motion to reconsider.

Excuse me, the motion for conept.

Any questions?

So I think our argument boils down to the fact

that it just doesn't qualify as a 548 claim.

Either Mr. Eau Claire does not qualify as a tenant.

My client does not qualify as a landlord.

The situation herself does not qualify

because there's no lease or rental agreement.

So the entire case did not have statements

or anything that came from the case, including the temporary order,

all of the other items that came out of that case

should be void or moot because the case itself does not qualify under 548.

And if there's no additional questions, I'll rest in my brief.

Thank you, counsel.

May it please the court.

My brother at the bar just gave a presentation

and he talked about his client, Benjamin and Colton Harvey.

Benjamin has been passed away.

So it's Colton Harvey.

It's not a landlord and Mike and Adrian Eau Claire is not a tenant.

However, there's ample testimony that was presented at the trial

that Ms. Labasser was using my client's money to pay the mortgage.

The objection to our May 2023 motion for contempt acknowledges

that Adrian Eau Claire was paying some rent.

He's clearly a tenant.

There's no written agreement,

but he's a tenant by the action and conduct of the parties.

When you say he acknowledges that he's paying rent,

what's the specific?

It's hardly an acknowledgement.

It's a helpful assertion on this part.

In the objection to Mr. Eau Claire's motion for contempt,

the Harvey said that he was paying rent,

at least for a period of time.

Was the testimony at the final hearing different?

I'm not sure that the Harvey's acknowledged

that Mr. Eau Claire was paying rent when they testified,

but there was an acknowledgement that he was paying the mortgage.

Is the payment of the mortgage directly to the mortgage company?

We don't know.

Is it correct that your client is taking a position in other litigation

that he had a life estate?

He's taken the position that he had a life tenancy in that property.

He had the right to live there until he passed away.

Is there some sort of a stop-all that we should be thinking about?

Do you agree that arguing that he has a life estate is inconsistent

with arguing that he's a tenant?

No, sir.

Why aren't those inconsistent?

His argument is that he had a right to remain as a tenant on the property

until he passed away.

My understanding is that's also known as a life estate.

He had a right to remain there until he passed away.

Is this an oral agreement to a life estate?

Yes, sir.

Doesn't that need to be in writing given that it's a property interest?

The matter is a bit more complicated than what's been fleshed out thus far.

The house that my client sold in February 2022 in the closing statement

is in the appendix I transmitted.

The house was sold for a far lower market value.

I believe the testimony of the trial court was that it was sold at the Texas Est value.

The closing statement shows a substantial gift of equity

from my client's seller to the buyers.

The mortgage was paid off with this money,

but the proceeds for the house about $180,000 were signed over by Mr. Eau Claire

to Jennifer Lavasser.

Jennifer Lavasser used that money to pay the mortgage,

which is why I don't know if it was paid directly.

If it was paid through Benjamin, we just don't know.

So that's added a significant complicating factor to this case.

If we're going to apply any rubric, then that is in the statute.

So the parties acknowledged their landlords.

They accepted rent payments, they accepted mortgage payments.

My client testified he was paying for the cable that he was paying for the Wi-Fi.

This caused further problems because not only did Benjamin Harvey go into the house

to disconnect two utilities, but he also took the equipment back to the store

and there was a dispute over whose equipment this belonged to.

My client testified it belonged to him.

Mr. Harvey testified that it belonged to himself.

Can I just stop you for a second? You say your client testified.

What I took away from reading the briefs was that your client didn't actually testify

rather that there were offers of proof.

Yes, sir.

Is that right?

Yes, sir.

Was there a request that he be available for cross-examination?

No.

And you're saying that Mr. Eau Claire actually paid the cable bill?

Yes, sir.

He paid or his daughter paid it?

He testified that he was paying.

He submitted statements in his name.

Ms. Labasser testified to the account being transferred from Mr. Eau Claire to Benjamin Harvey.

And this is in our appendix that I transmitted.

This transfer statement, there's no testimony that it was actually filed with Comcast

to tell Comcast to transfer the account.

And so, as my brother said, there was an issue.

Who owns this account?

And this brings us to one of the issues I appealed.

Blue Fox Motel, the owner of the store where the equipment was taken,

they were dismissed from the subpoena.

They could have testified and cleared this up.

Whose account was this?

But this underscores one of our issues, which is that property was taken.

And so when Mr. Harvey took the cable box and the Wi-Fi unit and the remote control,

the problem wasn't so simple to solve.

It was just turning on the stuff again.

We had to get hardware.

But isn't it true that that equipment actually belongs to the cable company?

It's not clear.

My understanding is you can either rent or buy.

Most people rent, but there are not facts in the case to say whether it was rented or whether it was purchased.

But it was clearly property.

There's no dispute that this property was in the house.

And it was being used by Mr. O'Clair.

Mr. Harvey, he knew that.

There's no lease agreement that provides that the landlord will provide the cable or the internet.

Correct.

But the law very clearly states that irrespective of the presence of a lease agreement,

you don't get to terminate a utility.

He knew that it was a utility, whether or not it was a landlord,

and he knew he was a landlord, he knew it was a utility, he knew it was in use.

The testimony of the trial court demonstrates this.

Question three and four of the appellants brief were waived.

The finding of willfulness by the trial court was a finding of fact,

which was a court substantial deference.

It was never challenged.

In fact, the Harvey's alleged there was such an evidence to make all of the findings contained within the courts.

Final, no exception, no temporary objections to the finding of willfulness

or the amount of time found by the court, not until the notice of appeal was filed.

It would be unfair for those matters to be raised now.

Well, certainly during their testimony, they testified that if there were violations, they weren't willful, didn't they?

They testified, Mr. Harvey and Ms. Lavasser testified that they would go into Mr. Eau Claire's house all the time.

There was not testimony about willfulness.

There was testimony that they went into the house all the time.

The court found willfulness.

Well, I mean willfulness in regard to the cable box removal.

It seems that the only thing we know is that it was kind of a mess

and nobody really knew anything about who owned it.

Did the cable company own it?

Or did your client own it?

Or did the Harvey's own it?

Nobody knows, right?

Presently you're right.

And the statute provides an easy way to resolve that issue

rather than getting into a more complicated situation.

Two utilities were terminated.

We checked off the Wi-Fi, the internet and cable.

They're both utilities.

Case law does not seem to have explicitly say that internet is a utility,

but the forms provided that Mr. Eau Claire filed indicate two utilities.

Two utilities were interrupted.

The damage awards for one utility.

The damage award does not include the fact that Mr. Harvey removed

the cable box and the Wi-Fi.

And I understand that the court may be looking at this like this.

There are a lot of damages anyway,

but the purpose of the statute is to deter unacceptable landlord conduct.

And if no damages are awarded against the Harvey's,

except for one utility being terminated,

when the facts demonstrate the facts found by the district court

demonstrate that two utilities were demonstrated

and two pieces of property were removed.

And I acknowledge, we don't know who told those pieces of property,

but we do know they were in the house and they were in use.

And the statute seems to say that you don't get to terminate that.

You don't get to interrupt it.

What's your response to the argument that the trial court

didn't enforce the temporary order at the beginning of the final hearing?

My reading of the testimony is not the same.

He knows this approve, right?

Correct, Judge. Yes.

I disagree that the judge declined to enforce her own.

In this case, the riser fall on whether or not it's come within the scope of 540A.

If we conclude that it doesn't,

then your client doesn't prevail, correct?

Right, he'll be without the remedy.

Until we showed up for court on that first day in May,

in the objective of what they say, where the landlord sees the tenant,

they don't draw this very particular distinction that's being drawn today

between 540A and 540.

Are you saying that the definition of tenant is the same

under 540A as 540?

No, I'm sorry if that was the impression I gave.

No, the harvest held themselves out as landlords

until they showed up in court and made the oral motion to dismiss.

And you're saying that by virtue of that filing the 540 petition?

I'm saying that in the context of the pleadings they filed in the 540A matter.

They filed an objection to the 540A, I believe,

at the end of May 2023 saying,

Mr. Eau Claire is the landlord, Benjamin Colton,

or I'm sorry, Mr. Eau Claire is the tenant, Benjamin and Colton are the landlords.

They said the same thing in the objection to motion contempt that

we filed our motion for contempt, I think on May 16th of 2023,

Harvey's objected saying we, the landlords,

object to the tenant's motion for contempt.

And by the way, the tenant was paying the landlord rent.

That's in the objection, that's in his leaving.

So they held themselves out as landlords, they acted as landlords.

Is that binding on them if they take a different position at the final hearing?

I'm not sure, but they did not take a different position.

They used different words, but it was not a different position.

But they argued that they're not landlords under 540A?

Correct. They made that argument despite the motion's practice

that hasn't been explained otherwise.

Gamesmanship should not be encouraged.

If you write something in a pleading and you're going to take a

diametrically opposed position at trial, that should be discouraged.

My client has no remedy if there's no 540A remedy.

A district court has found as a 540A remedy

and the question is not whether this court would substitute its judgment

or come to a different conclusion, but whether what the district court did

is sustainable. It is sustainable with respect to the finding

that two utilities were terminated for a period of 105 days.

The finding is not sustainable with respect to the amount of damages.

The amount of damages is the amount that would be

for one utility being terminated for 105 days.

Is there anything that prevented your client from calling up

the cable company and saying hey, I'd like a cable?

He did that.

I think that's in the testimony judge, in the offer of proof judge.

And what happened?

As I recall, and this is just my recollection,

but as I recall Mr. O'Clair was saying that Mr. Harvey had to do

something and Mr. Harvey was saying the accounts all locked up.

So the parties were pointing fingers at each other, which is why

it's important for the court's temporary order to be

given effect, rather than the parent position

that the Harvey's took. The judge

refused to enforce her own written order and wrote

nothing to that effect. Did not issue a new written order.

The Harvey's didn't file a motion for clarification.

I think given all of those facts, my client, the tenant

is entitled to rely on this temporary order.

My time's up. Thank you very much.

Thank you, Your Honor. First of all, to address the

titles in the 548 case pleadings, in a 548 case

the parties are called tenant and landlord, they're not called plaintiff and

defendant. So filing a pleading, referring to one person as a tenant or a

landlord, is not an agreement or an acceptance of their legal status

under statute. It's just a form that identifies who the parties are.

Was Mr. O'Clair paying rent? And if so, how? He was not paying rent.

So what opposing counsel was referring to is that

his stepdaughter, Jennifer Lavaster, his both Colton and Benjamin's mother

was holding money on his behalf and paying bills for him.

For a while he was paying a portion of the mortgage for this house.

At some point that money ran out and

he was no longer paying at all because he didn't pay

anything himself. Whatever was paid was paid by

Jennifer Lavaster directly to the mortgage company.

Approximately over $100,000 and Mr. O'Clair's money was paid

bills for the house?

There's a lot of other things that were paid out of the account

which is subject to the case that is penned before this period court. Was that account

in Mr. O'Clair's name and Mr. Lavaster's or just hers alone?

Initially I believe it was a shared account and then it was moved to another account

that was held by Mr. Lavaster on his behalf.

Time, I should just address that all these matters were raised before the trial court.

They're verbally or through pleadings.

Continuing damages were not found in the final order of the trial court.

It was only after the motion for reconsideration where the trial court

added continuing damages. They were addressed at the objection

to that motion for reconsideration at that time so there was no crime or

to file our own motion to reconsider when it was not part of the

final order. Thank you very much council. The case is submitted.

We'll take a brief recess.
