040304, state of New Hampshire versus Adam Montgomery.

Good morning. For the record, Justice Hans Marconi is disqualified in this case, and Attorney

Fielin, I understand you reserved two minutes for rebuttal.

Yes, I have.

Please proceed.

Good morning. May it please the court, my name is Pamela Fielin, and I am here on

behalf of Mr. Montgomery. Today I'd like to talk about three issues. First, the

court aired in joining the July 2019 assault charge with the homicide-related charges. Second,

the court aired in admitting as intrinsic evidence, evidence of other assaults in the weeks prior

to the homicide, and a blocking communication between H.M. and her mother. And lastly, these

errors were not harmless beyond reasonable doubt. I did raise another issue in my brief,

and I'm happy to answer any questions about those, but I'm going to focus on these.

The principal concern with these issues is that a defendant be tried on the merits of

the charged act, and not on propensity and character inferences that may be drawn from

evidence of other acts and wrongs. On the first issue, the cases simply should

not have been joined for trial. They were not logically and factually connected in

a manner that does not solely rely or demonstrate the accused has a propensity to engage in criminal

conduct. Does it make any difference that the defendant

had joined and the states have sent it to motion for a joiner in the first instance?

No, I don't. And the reason I don't is because my recollection is that parties agreed

to join her early on in the tendency of the cases. And then as they neared trial, the

defense moved to sever them for trial. The state did not test that the defendant

had a right to do that and to have the court look again whether it should be

severed. I guess my question is if it was in the essence of justice at the

moment, the defendant agreed to join the cases. What changed? What changed is,

I think through the defense counsel said through the development of the case in

preparation for trial, an additional information was coming out about how the

state was intending to present its case. And the defense specifically referenced

new discovery or new information in swicker letters being produced to the

defense. Are the swicker letters part of the record? Because I looked at the

motions after it references the swicker letters, but I didn't see them in the

appendix. No, they are not. But defense counsel talked about what was in them and

states council when they argued the issue about whether the charges should be

severed for trial. And at that point, the defense was primarily concerned not

only from what was coming from the swicker letter, but in how the defense

was perceiving the state's theory of the case going into trial, that this

was going to be a trial about demonstrating a pattern of abuse. And

that was going to be the prejudice that was going to result to Mr. Gummary by

having the charges continue to be joined for trial. And that was the

principal concern that the defense had and articulated to the trial court

below. Did the new information include any information provided by Kayla

Montgomery? I believe one of the swicker letters did include information

from her. I can't remember exactly which witnesses were involved in those.

What's the significance of the two different states of mind between the

July assault and the murder, the reckless murder?

I'm not sure what in terms of this analysis, does the state of mind of

the two different criminal acts have any bearing on our analysis for

Joinder? I don't think so. I haven't thought about it in that way. I've

thought about it in going through the Brown factor analysis. This court has

articulated as well as the tests that the court uses to determine the

interests of justice. I think the concern when you join those two cases

together in this case is that you have evidence of the July assault,

which as you note did have a different mental state, a known mental

state. But that evidence rested on several different witnesses who did

not have credibility problems, whereas the homicide case rested on the

testimony of Kayla Montgomery. And she had significant credibility

problems. So to the extent that evidence came in through Joinder of

these two cases for trial, about and through witnesses, third party

witnesses without credibility problems, the July assault was much

stronger. And to the extent that the jury likely had significant

doubts about what Kayla's version of events were for December 7,

which is when the homicide is alleged to have happened, the jury

could very likely have relied on the strength of that assault

charge case in resolving doubts against Mr. Montgomery on the homicide

charge.

Council. Yes.

So is it fair to say that the Zwicker letter changed the defense's

calculus with respect to the best interests of justice prong of the

analysis, but that when there was a stipulation to join the two

cases, that the defense had concluded they were sufficiently

related that they ought to be they ought to be joined. In other

words, you're challenging relatedness. And my question is,

doesn't the Zwicker letter only go to the issue of best interests

of justice?

I don't think so. My recollection of the hearing on the motion to

join or the motion to sever, which was also the final pre

trial conference. I don't know how in depth I can't remember

how in depth council for the state and the defense went in to

the original calculation or the original analysis of Joinder.

There wasn't a prior hearing on Joinder. And so I don't know if

we can be very clear or have a clear understanding that the

defense at some point thought there was a relatedness. Or the

defense might have thought just like the state, there may be

some efficiencies in trying them together. But as cases got

towards the trial date, it was clear to the defenses, they may

clear to the trial court that they were concerned about the

effect of a potential pattern of abuse being used primarily to

affect the juries working of evidence on the homicide charges.

At the time that the state initially agreed Joinder, was

there a decision made or on the motion to eliminate to prohibit

the intrinsic evidence that came in?

There to I don't know if I think over a year earlier is when

the cases had gone joined and started towards trial. I don't

know at that point whether there was any written agreement

or stipulation about evidence and or whether it was tied to

the admissibility of other evidence in the case. And the

issue that I want to address this morning has to do with that

ruling about some of the evidence the court determined was

intrinsic. I don't think that was the any there was any

agreement that tied the intrinsic evidence issue to the

Joinder issue.

So the admission of the but you would agree, I assume that

the admission of this intrinsic evidence of assaults and

abuse and neglect that occurred in the weeks before the

murder that that affected the admission of this assault in July

that it may be compounded.

Correct. Yes. I mean, I think that I think both issues create

are intertwined in the in the prejudice that resulted to Mr.

Montgomery. And it's even if we're looking at the Joinder

issue, if to your point, the prejudice is not just to his his

trial on the homicide charge. It's also potentially to the

trial on the assault charge. Because as you point out, the

intrinsic evidence came in as intrinsic to the homicide

charges. And certainly it was there in the case for the

jury to use in assessing both charges, the assault charge

in the homicide charge.

So I want to give you an opportunity to address harmless

error. But why don't you proceed with the second argument?

Yes. So with respect to the intrinsic evidence issue, there

were two pieces of evidence that I focused on in my brief. And I

believe it was there. They were not intrinsic to the homicide

related charges, which is what the trial court found. It was

the assaults in the weeks leading up to the homicide and

then the bar of communication. With respect to the assaults, the

state even on appeal says that those assaults prior assaults

were necessary and essential to proving reckless intent on the

homicide. That simply isn't the case. If you look at the state's

evidence on homicide charge, it's the evidence demonstrated and

the state argued that it demonstrated that Mr. Montgomery

acted recklessly by repeatedly punching H.M. until she was

unconscious. You don't need additional evidence of prior

assaults for which there is no allegation was connected to

cause of death to prove that reckless mental state.

Show the extreme indifference. I think the charge itself shows

extreme indifference. They the evidence on the charged act, if

you believe Kayla's testimony, that in and of itself is more

than sufficient to establish recklessness. And I will also

point out that this was not a mental state defense on the

homicide charge. This was a defense that Mr. Montgomery was

not the one who caused the death. It was Kayla Montgomery. And

so intent on the homicide charge was not a matter in

serious dispute. And I would also like to point out is if

you're talking about other act evidence being relevant for

intent, that's 404 that's 404 b evidence subject to a 404 b

analysis. That's not an explanation for being intrinsic

to the charge. Wasn't it the the trial court noted isn't the

jury entitled to some context about events leading up to

December 7th? I don't know why I mean context has to be

tied to the actual chart the the charged act. I don't know. And I

guess this is a question for the state. But what about their

evidence and proof on the homicide? Is it has a whole or a gap

in it that is impossible for a jury to understand and

reasonably assess with out having these prior assaults?

Justice Donovan's point, you're at yellow light on if you

want to get to a harmless I get to harmless error. I think that

as I mentioned before, the homicide related charges rested

exclusively on Kayla Montgomery's version of what happened on

December 7. She had significant credibility

problems. She gave multiple inconsistent statements to the

police before she eventually gave a statement that led to the

basis of her trial testimony. She only gave that story after she

had been arrested, jailed and was facing additional bail

time. She had theft and other kinds of convictions on her

record that raised substantial questions about her

credibility. She according to the state lied to the grand

jury about what happened. And by the time she got to testify in

this case, she was serving a prison sentence on perjury. She had

significant credibility problems. The admission of all of

this other evidence either through the jointer of the July

assault and the prior act evidence leading up to the

assault. Excuse me, the homicide. All of that gave

rest on other evidence. And it gave the jury a reason to even if

they likely had substantial doubt about what Kayla said happened

on December 7. They could fill in that doubt by relying on the

improper admission of the July assault evidence as well as the

prior evidence leading up to the homicide.

Thank you, attorney feeling you've reserved two minutes.

Tony Gagnier. Good morning, honors, and please the court, Sam

Gagnier for the state of New Hampshire. The honors, the trial

court committed no error. They denied the defendant's motion to

sever, admitted intrinsic evidence, or when it admitted the

body came video. But even if it were to be assumed that the

trial court did commit an error, any error was harmless

beyond a reasonable doubt, given the nature of the

error is alleged this appeal and the overwhelming strength of

the state's case, which consists of eyewitness testimony,

worse witnesses who corroborated that witness testimony and a

mountain of physical evidence, the summit of which held only one

conclusion and the jury reached it. Do you agree with the

defense that the murder conviction rested dominantly on

Kayla Montgomery's testimony? Not necessarily, your honor,

certainly her testimony played a large part. She was the eyewitness

to what happened on December 7th, 2019. There was no specific

evidence to corroborate exactly what happened in that car as

far as I was testimony. But to the extent that could not be

corroborated and Kayla has credibility issues, so much of

what Kayla testified to was corroborated by other testimony

and physical evidence that she might not even have been

aware of, that it would have become very easy for the jury

to later credit her testimony about what happened in that car.

So the exercise that July about what evidence corroborates

Kayla Montgomery's testimony?

Sure. So beginning with the blood in the ceiling of the

fit shelter, Kayla testified that the defendant hid a

harmonies body in a diaper bag and placed her in the ceiling

of the shelter at families in transition. When the police went

to investigate and cut out that part of the ceiling, it was

visibly stained with bodily fluids. The DNA tested positive

for Harmony Montgomery's DNA profile, which was built using

her toothbrush. The defense fingerprints and palm prints

were all for the vent of that ceiling. The only other

fingerprints that were found were of the man who installed

the ceiling.

But that only shows corroboration of the post homicide

actions of the defendant.

Sure. My ultimate point here is that all of these pieces

corroborating evidence of Kayla saying he hid her in the

ceiling. He put her in the freezer at Portland Pie Company.

He used a U-Haul to drive her and dispose of her body. He

went to he used lime to break her body down. If all of those

things could be corroborated by physical evidence to show that

Kayla was lying about those things, it becomes a lot easier to

credit her testimony when she says, the look of an evil man

in that car is why I didn't do more to stop him from raining

blows on her face. That becomes a lot easier to buy once

the rest of her testimony is credited in very, very much of

her testimony was again through physical evidence and then

through the testimony of other witnesses such as Travis

Beach, a friend of the defense. He testifies that. Yeah, I

helped procure U-Haul truck. I couldn't get it myself. My

friend Brendan Harris could. Brendan Harris said the same

thing. And then the U-Haul records show that Brendan

Harris indeed did procure U-Haul truck. Massachusetts

told show that the defendant went over the Tobin bridge in

that U-Haul truck on March 4th, 2020 at 45 a.m. And he

crossed back over going northbound at 5.25 a.m. The

records show that there was about 130 miles put on that U-Haul

truck and by the state's calculation that would have

lined up just about with the trip from the U-Haul back to

the Econolodge down to about where the defendant allegedly

started, disposed of his body and back up. So there were

significant amounts of corroborating evidence on top

of that outside of the Econolodge. Travis Beach says

that he's outside with the defendants smoking a

cigarette and the defendants pacing back and forth

repeatedly saying I effed up, I effed up, I effed up. And

Travis asked him, you know, what are you talking about? And

he wouldn't clarify. That's the same night that he disposes

of harmony's body. So the evidence just built upon

itself over and over and over again. And that that's even

before we get to consciousness guilt evidence of the

defendant himself. He tells somebody on a jail call

that the efforts to find harmony's body is just a waste

of taxpayer money. One could draw an inference from

that that I dunked that in a place you're not going to

find. Additionally, before he was arrested, but well after

the murders, the defendant can rise and somebody who calls

themselves a close friend is that he hated harmony to his

very core, because harmony reminded him of crystal. That

makes it really easy to start believing that this

person took on an evil demeanor and rained punches on

this five-year-old girl's head until she was dead.

The one of the predicates for the period courts decision to

allow the pre-December 7th abuse and neglect of harmony in

was that the court would give a robust instruction to the

jury so that it did not take into account those prior acts

in, you know, in order to establish a propensity. Did the

court give that robust instruction? I looked at the

instruction and it did not seem to fit that description. Do

you recall?

So what I recall, your honor, is in closing, excuse me, in

final instructions to the jury, the court did instruct the

jury as is routine that each indictment must be considered

separately and it was directly instructed to the jury that

a finding on one indictment should not influence a finding

on the other.

But there was no instruction on this particular evidence, the

intrinsic evidence or the July 2019 assault.

I do not recall that, your honor.

I didn't see it.

I do not recall that from the record. Speaking of just to

pick up on that, there was some discussion of the

intrinsic evidence causing July 2019 assaults to bleed into

murder charge, creating that concern of propensity

evidence.

Well, how do we reconcile the fact that the trial court

limited the intrinsic evidence of abuse and neglect to a

very specific timeframe of two weeks prior to November

29th and the timeframe between late November and

December 7th, yet allowed in, obviously, by not severing

the July night, July assaults, how do we reconcile that?

So I think they can be reconciled.

First, I would know that there are certainly two different

issues.

One's a joiner issue and one's an intrinsic evidence

issue.

And I think the trial court took the exact approach.

The trial court was cognizant because the state moved for

months of abuse and neglect evidence.

Months takes us from November 29th.

If months is plural, that's October, September at

least, then it could start getting into August.

The trial court recognized, wait a minute, my

decision on joiner is somewhat implicated.

These are joint charges.

And if the evidence of abuse and neglect starts to reach

back into September, August, God forbid, July, these

cases might start to bleed together.

So if the gender order is to remain sustainable, a

sustainable exercise of discretion, the court had to

separate those enough such that the jury would be able

to evaluate them intelligently and separately.

And the trial court did that by limiting it as it did.

Can you respond to the defendant's argument, but none of

the evidence and that with respect to the two weeks

prior to December 7th is material to the crime

chart?

Yes, Your Honor.

At first, I note that Attorney Fielin mentioned she

did not understand why any of that was important.

The easiest way to respond to that before getting

into the more substantive reasons is as this

court says time and time again in intrinsic evidence

cases, events don't happen in a vacuum.

This murder did not happen in a vacuum.

The whole story is not told by simply recounting the

event of December 7th, 2019.

If that's all that is told, all you get is that in a vacuum.

I'm not saying this would have been the defense or it

could have flown, but you can start to maybe try to

create the story that what happened there is actually a

loving father, but he was under unimaginable

circumstances, homeless, drug addiction, his children

living in his car, no steady employment.

He was under so much stress and he just snapped in the

most unimaginable way.

That comes a much harder argument to even start

making if you don't let this story be told in a

vacuum, if you get the context.

Three weeks leading up to Harmony's death show that

the defendant did have extreme indifference to

the value of her life.

He did not treat her the way that a father is

supposed to treat a five-year-old daughter.

He treated her like an object of inconvenience and

that evidence showed that beyond that, as I kind of

just wrapped up, it completed the story and it was

necessary to complete the story.

The state has a right to present its case.

The jury has a right to hear evidence that does

complete the story because, again, events don't

happen in a vacuum.

If that's the case and why was the video from

two years later, why was that admissible?

What's the relevance of Manchester Police's encounter

with Mr. Montgomery two years after the murder?

So that does continue to tell the entire story of the

case, John, because that is the, it's really the

beginning of the story from the law enforcement

perspective.

That's how the investigation starts.

That's the first interaction law enforcement has

with the defendant is relevant that when this

is reported to the police, what they know is

that Harmony's missing and they say, okay, let's

find the defendant because he has custody of Harmony.

And it's relevant for the jury to know when police

located the defendant looking for Harmony, where

was he?

Who was he with?

Harmony wasn't there.

That's certainly relevant.

There is relevance to that.

Now, I'm not going to say that the probative

value is through the roof on the body cam

video, but it was relevant.

And the reason it was properly admitted is

because the risk of unfair prejudice did not

substantially outweigh even small probative value.

I contend that it was more than minimal probative

value.

But even if that's what it was, the risk of

unfair prejudice did not substantially outweigh

that the prejudice that the defendant has set

forth both in the trial court and in this court

is really a tenuous risk of prejudice that is

based on mere conjecture and speculation.

This video was had no audio.

The defendant could not be heard at

Defendants Brief page 41.

The defendant says the video shows the

defendant seemingly answering questions.

In that circumstance, and the defendant

argues that the risk of prejudice is that

the jury is going to infer somehow that he

was not cooperative with police or that

his term in silent was implicated.

But the fact that he, there's no audio,

he's shown answering questions and that

Defendants carry into trial a presumption of innocence.

There was no rational basis to speculate that the

jury would take that video and just

implock from it that the defendant was

being not cooperative with police

in that moment while they were just

looking for harmony.

Was there any objection to the testimony about

that encounter, separate or apart from the video?

I don't want to say definitively, your honor,

but I don't believe that there was,

as I stand here, but my recollection of that

is not good enough to answer definitively.

Looking quickly to the severance charges,

excuse me, the severance issue, the state

votes that, as Justice McDonald pointed out,

the defendant initially moved to join

these charges in an assented two motion

and later had a change of heart, which

he was entitled to do.

The state notes that the case summary,

which I don't know is part of the record,

but the state could supplement if the court wished for it,

seems to show an appearance of another

defense counsel between the joiner

and the motion to sever.

And all of this is really to say that it seems odd

that defense counsel, at one point in time,

could have reached this conclusion reasonably

and then changed their mind and perhaps

reached a different reasonable conclusion.

But then argues that the court clearly was unreasonable

and untenable in reaching the same conclusion

that they had reached early.

Now, Justice McDonald also asked what changed

as the state argued in the trial court,

as far as substantive information, nothing changed.

What changed was that some of the stuff

is now coming from Kayla.

That, it's lost on me as Justice Gould pointed out

how that could impact the relatedness factors.

Perhaps it speaks somewhat to the interest

of justice issues, but it does not speak

to the relatedness factors.

Secondly, the July 2019 assault evidence,

it's difficult to game this out

because it's sort of hypothetical,

but if these charges were severed,

it's certainly possible, if not likely,

that the July 2019 evidence could come

into the murder trial under Rule 404B,

depending on what the defense

and what the state of the facts were.

The theories could have been most operandi,

lack of mistake, half of the defendant

and the way he disciplined the child,

excuse me, harmony, common planner scheme.

There's a number of theories

that may have come in under it anyway.

The trial court may have been cognizant of that

and thought that was another reason

not to try the case twice.

But even into the Brown factors themselves,

the trial court's order is manifestly reasonable.

If you go through the five factors,

the state conceded and the court found

there was no temporal and spatial relationship,

so that pebble goes on the defendant's scale.

The commonality of the victim and the defendant

can't be disputed here.

That clearly goes on the state's scale.

The similarity in the mode of operation.

In July 2019, the defendant gets angry at harmony

and he punches her in the face.

On December 7, 2019, he gets angry at harmony

and punches her again in the head.

I see my red light is on here on our end,

so we would ask the court to affirm

the trial court's orders and rest on our papers.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Attorney Gagné.

Do you have any feelings?

You have two minutes.

Thank you.

Time.

I'll cover three points.

Regarding the corroborating evidence,

Justice Gould, the state answered your question

and talked about substantial,

in their view, substantial corroborating evidence.

As you pointed out, Justice Gould,

the corroborating evidence is all about post-homicide conduct.

And Mr. Montgomery at trial did not contest the charges

and agreed to the charges of falsifying physical evidence

as well as the abuse of corpse information.

So the fact that there was corroborating evidence

about those events doesn't mean

that Kayla's version of what happened on December 7

was any more true.

She had substantial reasons herself

and credibility problems to not be telling the truth

about what happened.

Regarding intrinsic evidence,

the state used a lot of words

in answering some of your questions.

The evidence was necessary to complete the story,

to give context, to tell the whole story.

This court has been very clear,

whether it's talking about intrinsic evidence

or 404B evidence,

that those are usually passwords

or that court has to carefully construe

whether those words are passwords

for getting in propensity evidence

for a propensity purpose.

Evidence has to come in for context

when it's necessary and essential

to proving the charged act.

The events leading up to December 7

in those prior weeks were not essential

and necessary under the test

this court has applied for considering

whether it's intrinsic evidence.

Why isn't it relevant to whether

the defendant snapped on December 7th?

Well, that wasn't the defense, that trial.

And until and unless the defense

opens the door to that kind of evidence

under that theory, it's not admissible.

And as we know as the trial played out,

there was, the defense was not

that this wasn't a lack of intent.

The defense was, he didn't do it.

Thank you.

Thank you very much, counsel.

Case submitted.

Court can recess.

All rise.
