Somebody left a bag at the the appellant table. That's your sir.

This is case 2024-0257, state of New Hampshire versus Craig Kevill.

Good morning attorney Phelan. I understand reserve two minutes.

I have. Thank you.

Good morning, may it please the court. I'm Pamela Phelan. I'm here on behalf of Mr. Craig Kevill.

The issues I raised in the brief before the court all relate to sufficiency of the evidence.

Today I'm going to address those arguments by breaking them down into three parts.

The first part is addressing the first degree homicide convictions.

The second is addressing the sufficiency of the evidence for the falsifying physical evidence related to a gun.

And then lastly, the sufficiency of the evidence related to falsifying physical evidence convictions on the bill of sale and the gun case.

Regarding the homicide convictions, it's the state's burden to present sufficient evidence to foreclose rational conclusions consistent with innocence.

Just because there's no evidence of alternative scenario does not mean the state has met that burden to prove its theory of what happened did happen.

And that's the problem here.

The state emphasizes in its brief several times about the quantity of evidence presented to the trial.

But as we tell jurors and as the court told the jurors in this case, it's not the quantity of evidence that matters.

It's the quality.

And contrary or what the state also agrees in its brief is that this was a highly circumstantial case.

But not a solely circumstantial case, is it?

In what way?

There was some direct evidence.

Direct evidence to what?

Placing your client at the residence of the victim.

Placing him outside the residence.

There was no direct evidence that he ever entered the residence and if he did, what happened when he was in there?

And the state concedes that this was a circumstantial case.

It talks in its brief about all the dots that had to be intricately put together in its case.

And it contends that it did that.

And there's a lot of citations in the state's argument section of its brief about conclusions it drew or it wanted the jury to draw from the evidence.

Quotes from closing argument.

But those aren't evidence in the case.

That was counsel's argument about what the evidence might show.

It did not foreclose the possibility that another scenario happened where it wasn't Mr. Kevel who went in the home or Mr. Kevel who caused the deaths of the two individuals inside.

There was no forensic evidence even collected from the scene like fingerprints that put Mr. Kevel in the home or even entering the home.

The video evidence that you referenced, Justice Donovan, merely showed a vehicle pulling up to the house and someone getting out of the vehicle.

But it does not show who went in the house.

Notably when I was going back through the evidence in this case and the trial testimony.

I noted Mr. LaBelle, one of the victims in this case, somehow he got to the house.

There's no evidence in the case about whether he had a vehicle at the house.

The state surmises in its brief that Mr. Kevel arrived at the house and saw Mr. LaBelle's vehicle.

There was no evidence that the state presented that Mr. LaBelle's vehicle was near the house.

And that indicates a limitation on this video evidence that you're referencing, which is it doesn't show everything that happened at the house.

It certainly doesn't show what happened in the house or who entered it and when.

Is it clear in the record when the defendant was swabbed for gunshot residue?

Yes. So he, I believe it's clear in the record, at about 2 o'clock, 2.50 in the morning is when he went to the police department.

At that point he met with two police officers and he was basically in their custody for the rest of the night through the next day.

And it was sometime during that period of time that he was swabbed for gunshot residue. His clothes were taken.

They looked and tested to see whether he had any blood splatter on him.

They also searched his vehicle, which was in the parking lot of the police station.

And they found no gunshot residue on him or in his vehicle on his clothes.

They didn't find any blood either.

I think there were a few spots they noticed that looked like reddish brown spots on his shoes, but those were not tested to be, those were tested and determined not to be blood.

And the only statement attributed to your client was something to the effect you need to go to the victim's house.

Correct. That is it.

And none of this evidence forecloses the possibility that someone else had done something in that house.

He realized something was amiss there and went to the police and asked them to go to the house.

The police, like I said, did not collect any fingerprint evidence from the house, which would seem to me to be a pretty basic piece of evidence to try and collect.

They didn't investigate Mr. LaBelle, who, as far as the evidence showed, was a stranger until that night to Miss Banks.

They found from his wallet that he had been at a location, a bar, I think, in Massachusetts before he met Miss Banks up in Berlin.

But they didn't do any investigation into where he was that night.

They got his phone, I believe the evidence showed, they got his phone and they got, I think, either consent to search or warrant to search his phone

and did not do it to even determine who might be associated with him and what their interests might have been and what his activities were that night.

Is there a point in time, or not a point in time, but is there a tipping point, I guess, where his own conduct casts light on the reasonableness of the alternative scenario

inference that you say precludes sufficiency of the judgment in the circumstantial case.

And by that I mean events both before and after the murder, you know, the text to his mother, kind of the driving around, going to the police station saying go to their house,

the events that occurred at Fagans earlier. I mean at some point is there enough sort of indirect conduct evidence of guilt that it forecloses the reasonableness of the alternative scenario

that you say that the facts could support?

Speaking in terms of the circumstantial evidence in this case, I would say no. Theoretically, could there be that situation? Yes, I think so.

But here the problem is the evidence that the state is focused on is itself subjected to alternative interpretations that can be rational and that are consistent with innocence, such as the mental state evidence.

The state makes much about interpreting, and this is a lot of the quotes in the state's brief, is from closing argument about how the messages and the communication between these two people showed some intent to possess misfakes.

There's no evidence of that. That's one interpretation that could be drawn from communication between two people, but not the only interpretation.

Shouldn't he send a message to the victim about his own actions that night saying something to the effect that I'm going to do something bad?

I think that message was I may have been. I may have done something bad. He also sent messages that said I love you. The last messages exchanged between them that came into evidence was

them each asking the other for photographs of each other, and Miss Banks checking in with him to see if he was okay.

The message to his mother. A lot of evidence came in that all night long his mother was incessantly trying to contact him.

The message ultimately sent to his mother that came into evidence was I'm sorry. It could be I'm sorry I haven't been getting back to you.

And so there are different interpretations that the state's evidence does not foreclose from all of that circumstantial evidence here.

And that's the problem here. What's your argument about falsifying as to the gun?

Well, this case is similar to state versus Harris, which I think either the court decided earlier this year or late last year, where there was the court found insufficient evidence to support the falsifying with respect to the gun.

This is very similar that the state's argument is that Mr. Kevel must have done something with the gun because, well, one, they're concluding that he used a gun.

But two, that they didn't find a gun where they expected to find a gun. But this case is weaker than state versus Harris.

In state versus Harris, there was no question that Mr. Harris had been seen with a gun that day.

In this case, there was no evidence that Mr. Kevel owned a Ruger 9E handgun on the night of the homicides.

There was a bill of sale found in his house, which for that kind of a gun, but that was in the name of somebody else.

The police, the evidence showed the police tried to reach that person a couple of times and then gave up.

Do we know that person actually exists?

I think they did find a relative that they attempted to talk to in Maine of that person, Mr. Tattu, T-E-T-U, and then they stopped trying to reach Mr. Tattu.

And with respect to the falsifying convictions related to the bill of sale and the gun case, the police went into Mr. Kevel's home while they still had him at the police station.

And they searched his home and they saw this gun case and they saw this bill of sale and they took photos of it.

East Mr. Kevel from the police station, they allowed him to return home and it was after that point that they went back to the house with a different warrant.

And at that point they saw the bill of sale ripped up and the gun case in the trash can right in the kitchen.

So did the original warrant authorize the police to take those items?

There was inconsistent testimony from the police at trial.

One officer I think suggested they didn't think the warrant was broad enough to take those items.

Another police officer I think said something different, but the point is they photographed it, they documented it.

They knew about those items. There's nothing about what happened later that one impaired their availability for the police investigation.

But even when they went back to the home, they were still there.

And at that point they didn't put any restrictions on Mr. Kevel.

There wasn't any indication that he knew that they still had some interest in these items.

They didn't take them the first time they were there.

So for those reasons we're asking the court to find the evidence insufficient.

Thank you, Attorney Phalen. You reserved two minutes.

Attorney Gagné.

Good morning, Your Honor. May it please the court.

Sam Gagné for the State of New Hampshire.

Your Honor, in listening to the defendant's argument, I would like to begin by just really orienting us all back towards the standard here.

Whether the case is circumstantial, direct, or otherwise, the sufficiency standard is the sufficiency standard.

It is not changed because of how you articulate it. This is not different than any other sufficiency case.

And the analysis, as this court has explained,

quote, the proper analysis is not whether every possible conclusion consistent with innocence has been excluded,

but rather whether all reasonable conclusions based upon the evidence have been excluded.

This is not whether we can grab theories out of the sky and say, oh, you can exclude that one.

This is based on the evidence on the whole what is reasonable.

But on page 24 of your brief, you say that the standard is that the defendant, I'll give you a second to grab it.

Sorry, Your Honor, apologies.

That the defendant has the burden of demonstrating that no rational trial or fact could have found him guilty of the crime charge beyond a reasonable doubt

based upon the evidence introduced at trial.

And then there's a site to state versus germane.

And as I read germane, it does not say that.

It reiterates the standard that you just, or that Attorney Phelan has been referring to,

which is we got to exclude reasonable alternative explanations of how the crime occurred.

Sure, Your Honor.

And then germane went on and explained that to say that the evidence is sufficient if a reasonable trial of fact could find

that the evidence established guilt beyond reasonable doubt is not substantively different from the way that Attorney Phelan has articulated the standard

in that germane cited two commonwealth versus Hudson, a Virginia Supreme Court case,

explains that quote, the statement that circumstantial evidence must exclude every reasonable theory of innocence is simply another way

of stating that the state has the burden of proof beyond a reasonable doubt.

The importance, I think, of the circumstantial evidence line of cases is really that the court wants the jury to be instructed.

That there is this extra step when looking at circumstantial evidence,

but it does not alter the state's burden of proof at trial.

It remains beyond a reasonable doubt.

So is it your argument that the case is solely circumstantial?

No, Your Honor.

It is not the state's position that the case is solely circumstantial.

It's the state's position that this is a mix of direct and circumstantial evidence.

And to the extent that there is circumstantial evidence, that circumstantial evidence was quite overwhelming.

And just to stay with the standard for just one more moment, a lot of times during the defendant's argument,

it was referenced that there could be different interpretations of certain evidence.

Well, if there are two reasonable ways to interpret the evidence under the sufficiency standard,

the inference must be drawn in the favor of the state.

But is that, that's not the case of its circumstantial, right?

If it's circumstantial and there are competing version or, you know, competing reasonable interpretations of it,

in a totally circumstantial case, that would preclude conviction, wouldn't it?

No, Your Honor.

I would leave this as cited in the state's brief, but even in the circumstantial scenario,

the standard is the same that the evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the state.

Yes, I agree.

And reasonable inferences must be drawn in favor of the state.

But if, even after doing all of that, there remains a reasonable possibility that cannot be excluded based on the evidence,

then you fail to meet your burden.

But the inferences do not start to be drawn in the defendant's favor because you're under the different...

No, I think that, I think I understand your distinction,

but it is nonetheless also the...

It's nonetheless the law that the state basically has to...

The evidence has to not allow, in a circumstantial situation,

the evidence has to not allow for a reasonable conclusion that would point to innocence, right?

And I guess what you're saying, it's really the same difference.

Reasonable doubt is reasonable doubt.

That's just how it's articulated in a circumstantial case.

Yes, Your Honor.

Yes, I understand.

I am circulated this way.

Even in a case that is 100% direct evidence, if after that direct evidence,

there remains a reasonable conclusion consistent with innocence,

then you haven't proven anything beyond a reasonable doubt.

What is the direct evidence?

The easiest one is to intent, to my mind, Your Honor,

this is one of the rare cases where I think there is evidence of intent.

The text message to Holly first at 11.19pm,

you're going to get people hurt, Holly.

Later around midnight, the statement was not,

I may have done some bad things.

It was, I was ready to do some really bad stuff tonight.

That's in response to Holly texting.

Excuse me, he texts Holly, are you okay?

Excuse me, Holly texts him, are you okay?

He says no.

I was ready to do some really bad stuff tonight.

I think that is direct evidence of what the defendant intended at that time

and the situation that the defendant was upset about when he sent that message

only escalated.

And so I believe that is direct evidence of his intent on that night

to do the really bad things that he referenced.

How did the evidence regarding the defendant's mother's attempts to contact him,

how did that evidence come in?

Was it testimony from the mother or was it just evidence from the defendant's phone?

Is that the specific text messages?

I'm sorry, and I love you or the other ones about the...

Well, our attorney failed and explained that the defendant's mother was trying to

reach him incessantly that night.

What was the evidence of that?

Because I found those texts to be somewhat compelling evidence.

I don't recall exactly as I stand here

how the other messages about earlier discussions that they were having got in.

And I don't even recall exactly what they were arguing about.

What I do recall is that what struck me is based on the time that they were arguing

and what they were arguing about,

it would not have been rational or reasonable to text,

I'm sorry and I love you at 1.55 in the morning and then renew it at 2.50.

Are you talking about arguments between the defendant and his mother

or arguments between the defendant and the Spanx?

The defendant and his mother is what I recall.

But even if I recall more of the substance,

again, what I recall is that the idea that those messages would have been

to apologize for that earlier argument,

that sort of reasonable conclusion was excluded by one, the timing,

it was the middle of the night,

and I'm sorry came about an hour before I love you

and then how closely they coincided with the events that were going on.

The message I'm sorry comes within one minute of the defendant exiting Holly's house.

I love you comes right before he walks into the police station.

And given those circumstances,

the reasonable rational inference is the consciousness of guilt inference.

So there were nine gunshots fired

and the theory was that the defendant fired all of them.

Was the jury provided any explanation

as to why the defendant did not have gunshot residue on his hands or his clothes?

I don't believe that they were, Your Honor.

I don't recall the state even addressing that in closing,

but I don't think that would have prevented a rational juror from concluding

that the defendant was the one that committed these crimes.

I don't think the state had the evidence to say maybe he washed them off,

but there's hypotheses the state could have put forward,

but not necessarily evidence that would have supported it one way or the other.

Was anyone else tested for gunshot residue?

I don't believe that anybody else was tested for gunshot residue, Your Honor.

But I don't think that lessens the state's case.

I think the evidence showed that the defendant clearly had the means,

the motive, the opportunity and the intent to commit to this crime,

beginning with the events at Fagan's Pub.

This reads just like the story of the angry ex-boyfriend

who at the beginning of the day is asking Holly to come over.

The tone is sort of playful and then Holly mentions

that she's talking to some Russian guy and then the tone changes

and that escalates into I'm going to come find you.

He does track her down at the bar, things are heated there

between the defendant and Keith. Holly is clearly scared.

And then the surveillance video from Fagan's onward

sort of tracks the defendant's movements consistent with his cell phone,

his cell site location data.

So what was the state's theory as to how he acquired the murder weapon?

As to how he acquired the weapon?

When, how, where, for example.

As I read the briefs, there was no evidence that he possessed or bought it.

That type of firearm.

Are you relying on the sales slip that was at his house?

In somebody else's name?

That's part of it, Your Honor. Yes.

I don't know that there's evidence to say exactly how or when he acquired it.

But I do think there's circumstantial evidence sufficient for a rational tryer

fact to conclude that he did possess a Ruger-9E.

It begins with the bill of sale.

The bill of sale is for a Ruger-9E.

It is found intact in an internal pocket inside of an empty gun case

that is on the defendant's kitchen table.

The gun that killed Holly and Keith was undisputably a 9mm pistol.

It was hard to say exactly which brand of weapon fired the gun,

but the analysts using an FBI database were able to narrow it to certain brands,

one of which was Ruger.

The ammunition that was fired out of the gun was FC 9mm Luger ammunition.

The defendant had no gun that was compatible with that ammunition,

but one live round of that ammunition was found in his storage unit,

as was a manual for Ruger firearms.

Holly Banks's Ruger SR-9C was definitively excluded as the gun that fired those firearms.

And I think taking all of those things together,

and this is all against the backdrop of the other evidence

that would have certainly allowed for a strong inference

that the defendant was present at the murder scene,

that he killed Holly and Keith,

that he took an inexplicable half-hour ride south

before coming back north to go to the police station.

I think putting all of those things together,

drawing the inferences in the state's favor could cause a rational juror

to conclude that you possessed the murder weapon

and the best conclusion on this evidence

is that the murder weapon was the Ruger 9E

that was referenced in that bill.

I just want to get back to Justice Gould.

Here you have a lack of physical evidence that's pretty remarkable.

You have nine gunshots at close range,

eight in one victim, one in the other.

There's no evidence of gun residue.

There's no evidence of blood.

There's, in a 45-minute span,

or 46 minutes between the time he leaves the house

and the time he shows up at Gourmet PD.

Isn't that part of the calculus here?

I think certainly it can be considered, Your Honor.

But it is not at all fatal to the state's case.

And that hour that went on there,

I think it's clear from the evidence

that the defendant thought about this plan.

He's at Polly's house from about 11.30 to midnight.

They continue to fight.

He goes back home and he's there for about an hour

before he goes and he does this.

All of what he did in that hour between 1.55

when he leaves Polly's home in 2.50

when he arrives at Gourmet Police Department,

nobody can say.

I think there is a good argument that as he's driving south

he gets rid of the murder weapon,

but there's no reason he couldn't have also

brought a change of clothes,

that he couldn't have stopped at a rest stop

and washed his hands.

The fact that that evidence is not here,

it does not diminish from the evidence that is here.

Was there any evidence introduced

as to how Polly obtained her Ruger 9mm?

I don't believe there was a testimony as to

which store she bought and allowed anything like that,

but there was evidence that that gun was found

in a backpack in her home and that it was registered to her.

That could have been the gun that tattoo purchased,

couldn't it?

No, Your Honor, I don't think so,

because that bill of sale referenced a Ruger 9e.

Polly's was a Ruger SR9C,

so the bill of sale would have been inaccurate

if that were the case.

Thank you.

So it states theory that between the hours of 1.52 a.m.

and 1.55 a.m. that the defendant

committed these two murders?

I think that's what the evidence establishes, Your Honor, yes.

So he shot eight bullets into two victims,

placed a towel underneath Polly's head

in the manner in span of basically five minutes.

Three minutes.

I don't know that's exactly how it played out,

how exactly the towel got there.

It was unclear from the evidence how the towel got there,

but even if I were to just concede that's how it played out.

Yes, I think that can happen all in three minutes.

I think the evidence,

Holly and Keith were found naked when they were killed.

I think that,

and given the backdrop of what happened at Fagans,

I think it is rational to conclude that

the Holly and Keith were engaged in intercourse

when the defendant found them upstairs.

That's where he ended Keith

while he was murdering Keith.

Holly ran away from that scene downstairs trying to get away.

The defendant chased her down.

He didn't have the exact same feelings

of animosity towards Holly that he did towards Keith,

and so that was less gruesome,

but yes, I think once the defendant

gets to that bedroom,

the rest of it probably unfolds in about a minute, two minutes,

and you get out of there as quickly as you can,

and the guilt set in immediately.

The defendant immediately messaged his mother that he was sorry.

We ask this court to affirm.

Thank you.

Just to answer a few questions raised,

with respect to Holly's,

Holly's Ruger,

and the live round of ammunition,

the single live round of nine millimeter ammunition

found in Mr. Kevel's storage room,

I would suggest, not suggest,

there was evidence that the two of them lived together,

and Mr. Kevel had just moved out of Holly's home,

and a lot of the stuff in that storage room

was stuff he had moved from her house and moved in there

as he was moving into a different apartment.

Just one live round was found.

It could have been related to,

or ammunition that had been hers

that was picked up in his belongings.

Was the gun case branded?

No, and the state tried,

throughout trial kept saying that this was a nine,

a Ruger nine millimeter gun case,

but the defense made brought out the evidence

that lots of different handguns can fit into that gun case,

and Mr. Kevel did have a lot of other handguns

and other guns, which the police recovered during the searches.

Nobody else was investigated,

either for gunshot residue,

for where their whereabouts were

after they left Fagin's pub,

who was associated with Mr. LaBelle,

who was a stranger to everybody until that night.

Nobody else was investigated

to exclude the possibility that someone else did this.

The mom's messages,

my recollection is there wasn't argument going on

throughout the night between Mr. Kevel and his mother.

His mother was sending messages to him that were unanswered,

and I think all of that evidence came in

through the text messages that were gotten off

of Mr. Kevel's phone,

and my recollection is his mother did not testify.

But at one point his mother also texted

or said she was going to reach out to Holly

in her messages to Mr. Kevel that night

because he wasn't responding to her,

and I think there was a corresponding message

sent to Ms. Banks,

and Ms. Banks, her phone indicated

that she was telling Mr. Kevel

how his mother had reached out to him,

so I think that there are alternative conclusions

that can be drawn from it.

Until the case is submitted.
