This is Cate's 2024, 04, and 6th state of New Hampshire v. Dennis R. Cormier.

Where we hear the first argument, I want to acknowledge the presence of new members of the public defender's office.

And we welcome you here at the Supreme Court. We look forward to visiting with you afterwards.

So with that, turn it called here.

Thank you, Your Honor.

My name is Anthony Galdieri, and I represent the state of New Hampshire.

The trial court aired in dismissing this case for loss of personal jurisdiction for four reasons.

First, as a textual matter, the examination timeframes in RSA 135-17 are neither mandatory nor jurisdictional.

Second, the examination timeframes in the statute are deadlines, not deadlines, by which hearings are to be held.

Third, the timeframes are designed to hasten the process toward a contested competency hearing if one is ultimately required.

And fourth, construing the examination timeframes as jurisdictional would defeat the remedial purposes of 135-17 in 17A.

As a textual matter, I think looking at this statute from a thousand-foot view reveals that its structure and its text contemplate a flexible process by which an evaluation is ordered.

There are timeframes to keep things moving forward, but those timeframes are subject to extensions of time.

They're subject to...

How do we know it's extensions? It says an extension.

Well, I think we know that for a few reasons. The first is it says an extension of time by the parties.

So I would assume that would contemplate at least each party gets to request an extension of time.

I would also read that statute, though it is in the singular, to be modified by the principle of the canon of statutory construction.

I think you find that in RSA 21-3 that a reference to the singular implies the plural.

So we should apply 21-3.

The court should apply 21-3. I think the recent amendments to this statute reflect a legislative intent that more than one extension can be authorized

because those amendments put forth some additional grounds to win or put forward some grounds as to when you can get an extension,

such as if the medical records haven't come to the OFE, when they're supposed to,

or the defendant hasn't shown up for evaluation.

I think it would be absurd if both of those things happened or don't happen at different times,

and you couldn't ask for more than one extension.

Is there any limit on the number of extensions?

I think there's a limit with the discretion of the trial court.

But beyond that?

Beyond that, I don't think there is.

But I think we have a process in the statute that allows people to seek alternatives to the OFE producing the evaluation.

And that would be what, a review of the bail situation?

Well, that is one potential alternative.

But I think an alternative is a defendant can ask for an alternative evaluator to be appointed and paid for under RSA 604A6.

In this case, didn't the state request that alternative evaluation?

The state did.

So the state requested the evaluation.

The evaluation was granted, and it was the state who was attempting to ask for the extension of time or request the alternative evaluator

because it appeared that the defendant was not going to do that.

But there are alternatives to this.

If a defendant believes they require or need an evaluation for the defendant to seek it,

and it would seem odd if a defendant believes they want an evaluation and they need an evaluation,

that they wouldn't seek it through an alternative channel that the statute allows when they've given timely notice of it.

The statute doesn't give them a right to only have an evaluation produced from the OFE on these time frames.

Well here, the defendant had a medical opinion regarding potential concerns about competency.

So that doctor, the treating physician, could have testified, I suppose?

Well, I think that's correct, Your Honor.

There is indication that there is evidence at the disposal of the defendant

that the defendant can use at a contested competency hearing in their defense.

Now, primary protection at that competency hearing is that the burden is on the state

and the state would have to prove competency by a preponderance

and the defendant seems to not be without evidence to rebut that.

Do you think the state could ever meet that burden without professional evaluation?

I think there are circumstances under which the defendant could meet that burden without a professional evaluation.

No, the state meets the burden.

The state, yes.

Yes, I think there are.

You know, for example, in this case, I don't know that it's out of the question

that if the competency hearing were held shortly after competency was raised

that there wasn't information in the record through the waivers of arraignment,

through the notice of self-defense, perhaps through police officer interaction with the defendant

for the state to meet its burden by a preponderance of the evidence.

It would then be on the defendant to put in some evidence of which right now

there was none in the record of incompetency.

Even with respect to the bona fide doubt motion wasn't supported by evidence.

It was supported by representations of counsel, but no actual evidence in the record.

Where the case was dismissed without prejudice,

what would stop the state from simply refiling soon after knowing that the OFE would be able to do the evaluation?

I don't think anything would stop the state from doing that.

It would be dismissed without prejudice.

I think the state could have recharged, re-indicted,

and the defendant would go back in the queue for an evaluation.

The defendant would hold his place in line for the evaluation,

which is why it doesn't make a lot of sense,

but this is an issue that the state has seen not just in this case,

which is important, I think, as a matter of statutory construction for the court to resolve.

And if there are other constitutional rights at stake at issue,

I think the analyses for those are different and separate.

The question here is, is this statute jurisdictional?

Is it mandatory and jurisdictional?

Just as always, any dismissal for lack of personal jurisdiction is without prejudice.

That is my understanding of the case law.

It is without prejudice.

And I think that puts it in a different, maybe even in a different posture

than other cases in which you have to hold an adjudicatory hearing by a particular time.

And if you don't hold the adjudicatory hearing, jurisdiction is lost.

But even in the McCarthy case, I think the court indicated that the petitions could be refiled.

So the loss here, and this is happening in the criminal case,

the charges dismissed, cases dismissed without prejudice can be recharged.

Do you agree that if we construe an extension to mean a singular extension,

then there is a jurisdictional issue. It is mandatory.

No, I don't agree with that. I don't agree with that.

I think even if the parties could only ask for one extension,

the nature of that extension being unbounded in time

and subject to the discretion of the court means it is qualified.

Now, that's a stronger case for the court to find if it wanted to do that.

It is a mandatory restriction.

But even if it is a mandatory restriction, that doesn't mean it is jurisdictional.

The jurisdictional analysis depends then, it's really a matter of legislative intent.

Did the legislature intend to statute these time frames

to operate as a hard stop where jurisdiction is lost?

Or did it intend for there to be other work around to this?

If jurisdiction is lost, the alternatives to seek evaluations in an alternative way,

the regular bail review hearings, I think are superfluous,

they're rendered essentially nullity.

The purpose of those provisions, particularly the bail review provision,

would be to revisit if the examination doesn't occur within the time frames,

the restrictions on the defendant's liberty and to perhaps tune them down if it's appropriate.

And again, reflecting a flexible process within which the defendant's liberty interest

can be accommodated in the interest of the court and the parties

in generating this piece of evidence.

Because that's what it is.

It's a pretrial process, pre-competency hearing process,

to develop a piece of evidence that is somebody in the process believes

is needed or necessary to go forward at the contested competency hearing.

Is there any kind of separation of powers analysis in which we have the executive

that is conducting the evaluation, the legislature has set the statute,

the court is ordering the evaluation, and we have the executive branch saying,

sorry, we can't do it, we don't have the staffing.

Well, there may be a separation of powers issue,

but I think the statute obviates it because the statute provides alternative modes

for seeking this piece of evidence.

And the only way it doesn't is if the parties just sit back and refuse

to go get it through the alternative channels.

So if the OFE comes back promptly and they come back promptly to their credit,

they have to keep the process on track so the parties could exercise alternatives

and the parties say, we don't want the alternatives.

Or a defendant says, I want this examination,

but I don't want to move to extend the deadline and I don't want to exercise the alternatives.

You might have a question as to whether then the defendant has to withdraw the request

for the examination.

Whether it's a waiver.

Or whether it constitutes a waiver and you just go to a competency hearing

and the state bears the burden of proof.

But the defendant can't have it both ways.

The defendant can't request it, say they need it,

even though other channels exist for it to get it or try to get it, refuse to activate them.

Ultimately, consturing this is jurisdictional.

Defeat the purposes of the statute, the remedial purposes,

not just of 13517, but of 13517A.

The state would submit the most analogous case is State Ex-Ral McLean

where this court found that a pre-sentence timeframe for the mandatory filing

of a pre-sentence psychiatric report was not jurisdictional and that that case controls.

And so accordingly, this court would find, we would ask this court to find

that the trial court aired and dismissing this case for lack of personal jurisdiction.

We'd ask that it reverse the trial court's order and demand for further procedure.

I think you made reference earlier to the fact that statute's been amended.

Yes.

Which version of the statute should we apply?

I think you have to look at the statute that was in effect at the time.

I think your analysis of what the legislature intends that statute to do

could be informed by the amendments to it.

So instead of going and amending the statute to make it clear that these are hard

and fast deadlines, the legislature has seemed to pull it off the existing framework

and amplify it by providing additional grounds for extension,

making it clear that certain things extend to non-incarcerated individuals.

So I think your analysis can be informed by the new statute, but I think the old statute...

So for instance, the new sub-paragraph GA, which provides an additional means of extension,

would be relevant to our analysis about what the legislature is after here.

Yes.

Yes.

I have nothing further. Thank you, Your Honors.

Good morning. May it please the court?

Matthew McNichol for Dennis Cormier.

When a defendant's competency is questioned,

the trial court has to make a threshold determination of whether a pretrial evaluation is necessary.

After that, there are two scenarios that emerge.

If the court believes that an evaluation is unnecessary,

then the court proceeds to a competency hearing.

And in that scenario, the 135-17 time limits that we're discussing today are not triggered and do not apply.

The alternative scenario is the one that is in front of the court today.

That is, when a court determines that an evaluation is necessary and orders that evaluation,

then the mandatory time limits are triggered.

That means that the evaluation is the necessary predicate to the hearing

and that it must be completed within the required time limits.

Can the trial court consider having it pursuing an alternative remedy,

providing an opportunity for a competency hearing without an evaluation by the OFE?

The court has discretion to decide whether it believes an evaluation is necessary.

What's in front of the court today is when the trial court did determine that an evaluation is necessary.

Alternative remedies like going forward with a hearing without an evaluation

would require the judge to make the decision that an evaluation was not necessary.

And the question on appeal is not whether the judge incorrectly exercised his discretion to order an evaluation.

But if the trial court believes an evaluation is not necessary,

and that incorporates the Chief Justice's question about subsection G,

then the parties could proceed to the hearing without the evaluation.

But here, the evaluation was ordered and that triggered the time limits,

and those time limits are mandatory.

If the time limits are mandatory, wouldn't paragraph D in the prior version of the statute just be superfluous?

Why would you need monthly evaluation of bail for an incarcerated defendant

if there's a mandatory deadline that's been breached?

I think there's some flexibility in the statute.

The flexibility comes from the court's ability to grant an extension for the evaluation.

So are you saying that the court could say I'm going to grant a one-year extension?

I think there still has to be some sort of reasonable basis for the length of the extension.

I think that would come from the OFE's report or prediction about how long the evaluation might take

or how long records might take.

And I think the trial court would have to justify the decision for the length of the extension.

But once that decision is made, that is the final deadline that exists.

And here the court did exercise discretion and extended the deadline by 90 days,

and that was the extension that the court had discretion to impose.

And I think the monthly bail hearings that provision contemplates that extension already happening.

During that time, the court can consider bail statutes while the extension is pending.

Does the statute limit an extension to one extension?

I think it does.

I think the plain language of the statute supports that.

And the overall purpose of the statute to protect the defendant's liberty interest,

to protect the defendant's rights, and combining the language of an extension

with the specific timeframes that are delineated, actual dates that are delineated.

So you don't mean the length of either party as inferring at least two extensions?

That's what I would agree with that.

It could complicate each party requesting an extension.

But I don't think either party gets to request more than one extension

or that the court has the authority without those extensions or without those requests.

Could you discuss state suggestion that we construed the statute in light of RSA 21.3?

I think you have to look at the statutory language of 135.17,

which has the language of shall, which is presumed to be mandatory.

The overall purpose of the statute, the reason that these timelines exist in the first place.

And I think that is the evidence that the court needs to see

that the purpose of the statute is that a single extension per party is within the court's discretion.

What about the scenario that happens very commonly in practice

where a defendant can't get a ride to the evaluation?

So perhaps the defendant has had their one extension

and the state has had their extension and it's finally scheduled

and the defendant doesn't show up. What would be the remedy there?

So I think that goes back to the question of waiver

and who is responsible or at fault for the evaluation not occurring.

And in an event where the defendant is responsible in a way that delayed the evaluation,

I think an extension could be permissible.

In that scenario, the defendant is not invoking his rights

or the interest that the statute seeks to protect.

It's simply a failure on the defendant unfortunately in those circumstances to get to the evaluation.

And at that point I believe that the statute would allow the court to extend

the deadline for the evaluation to actually occur.

And wouldn't the analysis be a little complicated

if can we say that a person whose competency is uncertain

has waived knowingly, intelligently, voluntarily a statutory right?

I think there are a lot of unique things about statute

and the circumstances that prompted its creation and its enforcement.

And certainly the defendant's state of mind is one of them.

I think that the trial court would be in the position to judge

whether the waiver was actually a proper one that authorized the extension.

I want to point to the actual time limits themselves,

which is that it's a 45-day time limit for defendant court

and 90 days for defendants who are not detained.

I think the fact that there are two time limits is important to this analysis.

I think it recognizes the legislature's conscious consideration

that there is a difference in degree of liberty restriction

for defendants who are released and those who are detained depending trial.

But in both circumstances there is a time limit that's created

which recognizes that whether detained or not detained

there is still a restriction on their liberty

and that liberty interest is what animates the purpose of the statute

and the time limits.

The direct scheme exists in the juvenile education statute

where the court has found that the time limits are jurisdictional and mandatory.

In that scheme a juvenile who is detained,

the hearing must occur within 21 days

and for a juvenile who is not, it must occur within 30 days.

And in the cases that analyze the juvenile delinquency statutes

the liberty interest is the reason why the statute is jurisdictional

and I think that the representation of detained or not detained

demonstrates that the legislature was thinking about a defendants liberty interest

and the restriction on liberty when creating these time limits.

Should a trial court look at the bail conditions specifically on a case by case basis

so in your case there was a no contact order?

Does that change the analysis?

I think the presence of a time limit for bail conditions

when somebody is released demonstrates that any bail conditions

are restriction on liberty and therefore invoke the mandatory time limits.

Well, how is it a restriction on liberty if the bail condition just says

be of good behavior and show up to court?

How is that a restriction on liberty?

I think the good behavior provision probably would be insufficient

but I'm not sure how many bail orders only have that condition.

Right and no contact provisions certainly would implicate a liberty interest.

Right and McCarthy specifically says that a no contact order

it says it hardly bears mentioning that a restraining order restrains one's liberty

and infringement on liberty is preventing somebody from aging in behavior

that is otherwise lawful.

So any restrictions beyond just requiring them to be on good behavior.

I do respond to the state's argument that we should consider the amendment

to the statute to discern a legislative intent.

I don't think that the legislative intent alters the analysis of the statute

particularly in the posture that we are in with this case

which is after the court orders an evaluation to occur

and believes that the evaluation is necessary

and that discretion is not been challenged.

I think that again reviewing or the opportunity to have status hearings

to review bail every 30 days for an incarcerated defendant

reinforces the view that this is a statute designed to protect a defendant's liberty interest

rather than defeating that purpose.

I also want to say this has to be read consistently with the bail statute

which has the factors that a court can only consider

defendant's risk of flight and dangerousness

and of course there could be circumstances that change every 30 days

if somebody is receiving treatment or something like that

where bail could be reconsidered

but simply because bail may be reconsidered by the court

because somebody is being detained while pending an evaluation

that fact alone would not be sufficient under the bail statute to secure their release.

Do you agree that trial courts dismissal was without prejudice?

I agree with that. Yes.

And I think that speaks to the concern that

vindicating the purpose of the statute to protect a defendant's liberty

might defeat the purposes of the statute or the other purposes of the statute.

And in cases where the court has found statutes to be jurisdictional

and the time limits to be mandatory

it is recognized that there are other important interests

that are in tension with dismissing the case

but here would be a temporary diminishment of those other interests

because the state would have the ability to seek re-indictment.

I think it's important to look at what those other cases say when they find

that a case or a statute is non-jurisdictional.

In those cases they find that there's an absence of any effect

on liberty interests or defense rights

and say that there is merely a general interest

basing adjudicatory decisions.

For example, it's Martino which is a worker's cop case

in which the deadline was for the disposition

and the court said there's no liberty interest implicated here

it's simply just for the benefit of all parties involved to reach a disposition.

Same with disciplinary hearings in Smith versus psychologists.

Liberty interests are not implicated in other cases

for child abuse and neglect cases, parental right decisions

but most they say the liberty interest is not present

and the disposition is for or the purpose is for a speedy disposition.

How do you respond to the state's reply brief

that emphasized that those cases involved hearing dates and deadlines?

So two points about that.

The dispositive factor is not whether there is a hearing scheduled

or if the time limit is attached to a hearing or a court order

and there are a few cases that demonstrate that.

For near is the case where they found

that the time limits were violated

and required dismissal for the sexual violent predator evaluation

in that case the hearing wasn't at issue

the time limit was for when the court had to make a decision

on probable cause which was on pleadings not at a hearing

but again look at the cases where they're found non-jurisdictional

there are cases where they're non-jurisdictional without a hearing

so logic that wasn't these are not jurisdictional

because they're not attached to a hearing

it goes back to the dispositive question

these are not jurisdictional because they don't implicate liberty.

Martino is an example of that again

there have been a hearing

and the time limit that was violated

was the court issuing an order after that hearing happened

and the court's logic in that was that

the time limit did not implicate liberty interest

this time limit was not attached to a hearing

same with NRADO

which was an appeal for a deadline for an appeal

and child abuse neglect cases

and the court again said there were no liberty interest here

and the deadline was not for a hearing

the deadline was for filing an appeal

I want to make one point about the language of jurisdiction

if you look at NRA NT and Royal v. New Hampshire real estate appraisers

they say jurisdiction

this court has said jurisdiction is not the precise term to use here

but it's sort of a functional term that's been used in its reuse

so I think a lot of baggage that comes without label

but they say the dispositive question again is a legislative intent

and whether the purpose of the statute was to protect a defendant's liberty

regarding the point about the alternative provider

the statute says that a defendant has the opportunity to request that

this is a mandatory requirement that the court must force a defendant to do

I think that and the other points that we're making about a defendant

invoking the rights of the statute or invoking their constitutional rights

as evidence that the time limits don't apply is misplaced

I don't think it's proper to say a defendant is both invoking and waiving

either statutory or constitutional rights through the same action

and I think certainly requiring the court to follow through

with a request for an evaluation is not a waiver

of having their constitutional statutory rights vindicated and honored

I'll say one point about...

I'm sorry

Thank you very much

We serve one minute, Tony Volier

Defense Council opened with a comment about the pre-trial evaluation being necessary

I'm not aware of an order in this case from the Speer Court

saying that the pre-trial examination was necessary

In the state versus Gagney case

this court indicated that a hearing maybe should be held to decide

whether or not an evaluation is necessary and if one is to order one

but 13517 doesn't require a finding of necessity before one should be ordered

and I'm not aware of such a finding being made in this case

I would also say that the reference to the Fornir case is not very useful to the defense

I mean the statute in Fornir is laden with deadlines

and there were specific deadlines for probable cause to be found

and for a merits hearing that were ultimately not met

and it is not unremarkable that all of these cases where jurisdiction is found lacking

deal with hearing deadlines

Thank you

Thank you very much Council

The case is submitted

Court
