This is case 2024-0448, a state of New Hampshire versus Madison T. West.

Good morning, Attorney McMichael. I understand you're reserved two minutes.

I am, yes, thank you. Good morning, may it please the court.

I'm Matthew McMichael for Madison West.

Today, I want to focus on the state's improper impeachment of their own witness, one of the alleged victims.

The rule is that the state cannot use impeachment by prior statement as mere subterfuge to evade the hearsay rule.

Two conditions must be met before the state may impeach their own witness.

First, the witness's testimony as a whole must be instrumental in building the state's case.

And second, aspects of the witness's testimony must conflict with the state's account and theory of the same events.

And neither condition was met here.

And importantly, prior to trial, the state knew that the witness wouldn't meet those conditions.

So before turning to the testimony, I just want to quickly highlight the state's own expectations in their own words before the testimony.

A week before trial and pre-trial hearing, the state said that this witness was not going to testify that any of these acts occurred.

At most, she will say that she does not remember.

During this hearing, the state said, during testimony review, this witness said that she doesn't remember.

And I think the point about testimony review is important because that indicates that they were reviewing her prior statements.

And if they could not get her to refresh her recollection during testimony review, the likelihood that she would be refreshed during trial is almost non-existent.

Next, during opening statements, the state said that they expect the witness won't remember, quote, this at all, the incident or the defendant himself.

I think this demonstrates that this impeachment was pretext to introduce the prior statements and to introduce them for the jury to consider them substantively.

Therefore, this is an example of impeachment being used as mere subterfuge to avoid the hearsay rule.

Given the fact that J.C. testified to the assaults explicitly, assaults on her and on this other witness, how is her client prejudiced?

Well, there was sort of, J.C.'s statements in her account wasn't bulletproof either.

And I think introducing this witness's statements through the direct impeachment and completing the impeachment through her father constructed a parallel narrative of J.C.'s,

which reinforced J.C.'s narrative about what happened to her and what happened to this witness.

So that gave J.C.'s account more credibility and also introduced this witness's own account of the events in the first place.

And so there was sort of a relationship or interaction between the narrative that was established through the impeachment of the allegations against, made by this witness and by the other witness.

And one important fact about the impeachment here that was completed by this witness's father was that it mentioned J.C. also being a victim.

So introducing this then reinforced the allegations that involved J.C.

Did the defendant object to the prosecutor's use of this impeachment evidence substantively during closing?

I don't believe they objected to its use during closing.

But I think the state's use of this information substantively during closing demonstrates the primary purpose of introducing the evidence in the first place.

But if there's no objection, how is the prejudicial to the defendant?

I think it's still prejudicial even if the state is arguing it in closing because the prejudices arise from the evidence being introduced in the first place.

And I don't think, as the state argues, that a curative instruction or a limiting instruction, excuse me, not a curative instruction, but the limiting instruction was sufficient here.

Because I think the limiting instruction sort of leads the jury into a dead end by saying you can't consider this for the witness's credibility, but there was no substantive testimony in the first place.

Well, the state argues that this witness provided substantive evidence regarding playing with J.C. on occasion.

So that relationship would be, how is that not substantive evidence about their relationship?

So substantive evidence is an important part of the test that is required to impeach one's openness, which is that the evidence has to be instrumental to building the state's case.

And I think some discrete facts that were sort of introductory information that this witness provided were undisputed and introduced by other witnesses.

Where do you draw the line with corroboration? So I recognize it's a fine line, but where would you say that line is?

I think looking at the several cases that consider whether prior impeachment of one's openness is permissible, two words that have described that testimony is the quality and quantity of that other evidence.

And in Smith, which is a 2003 case, the corroborating evidence was the bulk of the witness's testimony. Other cases describe it as crucial or critical, of course, instrumental as a word.

So I think the line is where there's a substantial amount of information or a significant or meaningful amount of information that's provided by the witness.

Here this witness did not provide any information of that sort. And I dispute some of the state's characterization that some of the evidence or testimony that this witness provided was substantive.

I think some of those came after the state said we are explicitly moving now to the portion of the cross or the direct examination where we're impeaching this witness.

In order to affirm the trial court, do we need to find as a matter of law that her testimony was inconsistent with her prior statements?

I think in order to affirm the trial court to answer your question, no, I think there has to be a finding that her testimony overall was instrumental.

That there are instrumentals in the state's case to build it and that parts of her testimony were substantive or in conflict with the state's case.

Right, but the trial court allowed the statements in because there were prior inconsistent statements.

Right. And I think it was premised on the idea that this was inconsistent with what the witness was testifying to.

And I don't think that there was an inconsistency here because she was not providing anything substantive. That's where I think there was error.

In cases in which there was an inconsistency found, the inconsistency was explained by the prior inconsistent statement.

In Kutchman, which was a case in which there was a co-properter of an assault, that witness gave substantial testimony about committing the assault with the defendant.

And there was one aspect of the witness's testimony that was in conflict with the state's case.

And the prior statement that was introduced as impeachment explained why he deviated from one fact from his testimony in the state's case.

And it was to protect the defendant. And one aspect of the defendant's case, which was his mental state, no sort of deviation existed like that here.

And that's why I think this test is important. It's not just about an inconsistency like examining whether this was a question on cross-examination.

But the test is for whether impeachment is permissible on direct examination.

In State v. Soldi, which is the 2000 case, was established this rule or recognized this rule.

This court explicitly said that they're departing from the common law rule, which required a party to be surprised by their own witness's statement.

But by departing from that rule, they introduced this additional rule, this new rule, that there has to be substantive evidence that's instrumental to the state's case and aspects that conflict with it.

And if we say anything that a witness says, if they're not able to remember or if they don't know or they lack memory, if that itself is a conflict and they provide no other information,

then that would swallow the rule that was announced in Soldi when there was a departure from the common law rule.

And I don't think that that would eliminate the rule and I don't think that that's the correct holding.

Why wasn't this her testimony instrumental? She was allegedly the second victim.

And her testimony was either, generally speaking, I don't know or I don't remember as to the facts.

Why didn't that cast doubt on JC's testimony, given that they were the same age when this happened?

It happened in the same place. And both of them were apparently involved in the events that gave rise to the charges here.

And yet she's testifying, I don't remember this, I don't know. Doesn't that suggest that JC is perhaps fabricating?

I think that's probably what the defense wanted the jury to believe, but I don't think that's instrumental to the state's theory.

I don't think the state wanted to advance the theory that JC was not credible.

Right, it might be instrumental to the defense theory, but not instrumental to the state's theory.

Is that your argument?

That's correct. I think a useful way of looking at this is asking what position was the state in before they engaged in the impeachment?

Were they in a worse position than they would be if she hadn't testified in the first place?

I think the answer is no. She was not testifying in the first place and prior to her impeachment she had not admitted any substantive testimony.

But when the state went on to impeach with prior statements and therefore introducing a whole narrative of these prior acts,

that did put the state in an unsustainable but better position by alerting the jury that there are these prior statements,

that they were admitted in context that would be seen as credible, namely the CAC and her own father.

And that's not the purpose of impeachment when it's against one's own witness.

Are you going to get to Dr. Merz's testimony?

I wasn't anticipating it, but I'm happy to answer questions about it.

I think why that testimony should have been admitted is that it was general knowledge

or general educational information about whether a declarant understands the truthfulness

or the requirement of truthfulness for a statement.

Based on Raymond?

That's correct.

What was the scope of his record review in this case?

Yeah, I think by the time he testified to this portion there was no testimony or evidence that he had reviewed

these witness statements or knew anything about this case.

I think maybe that came later during cross-examination.

But for the purposes of the general education information that the defense was elisting at this point,

there was no mention that he had reviewed the discovery in this case or had any knowledge of the witnesses.

I think the state's argument that this information would have been inadmissible

because the jury could then connect it to an individual witness

is what makes that information relevant and invisible in the first place.

Was there any proper in response to the court's ruling?

There was a proper insofar as I recall they said.

This was asked at the deposition where both parties were able to ask them questions about this subject matter

and the indicators or the signifiers that a witness understands the obligation to be truthful

and how to examine a witness's answer to see if that witness is being actually truthful

or just repeating what's been asked.

One point I would like to make about the statements to the medical, I see my time is off.

Thank you.

We reserve two minutes.

Attorney Ganya?

Good morning, Your Honour.

May it please the court, Sam Ganya, excuse me, for the State of New Hampshire.

My plan this morning is to begin with the impeachment issue, move into the hearsay issue

and then address the expert testimony issue, but I welcome the court's questions at any time.

Beginning with the impeachment issue, as a threshold matter, Your Honour,

the argument advanced on appeal is not preserved for a pellet review.

This is not the argument that was advanced in the trial court.

The defense never made the argument that the state could not impeach RM's prior and consistent statements

because she offered no substantive or relevant testimony or because the state was engaged in

a sudden refuge to end run the rules of evidence.

Instead, the argument was that the state could not impeach with prior and consistent statements

because RM's answers to questions was I don't remember

and that can't be impeached because there's nothing to contradict it with.

After sidebar discussion with the trial court, it was clarified that the answers were both

I don't know and I don't remember.

The trial court clarified that I don't remember could be addressed by refreshing recollection,

which the state did.

I don't know could be impeached with prior inconsistent statements

that showed that the witness had knowledge at one time

that they now claimed during their testimony that they did not have.

That exchange takes place at the transcripts page 366 to 72

and it appears to resolve amicably to all parties.

There is never this argument about sudden refuge, no substantive testimony

and therefore it would be fundamentally unfair for this court to hold that the trial court

erred by not adopting an argument that it was never confronted.

We could find it's plain error.

I don't think that the court could find that it was plain error, Your Honor,

because I don't think there is any case law that this court has

that would alert to anybody that this is clearly plain error,

that this case clearly involves sudden refuge of the state trying to end run hearsay

and to the extent that one might try to argue that it was plain error

because there was clearly no substantive testimony.

I think even the court's questions have pointed out

that that really isn't the case even if RM came up and just denied everything.

That's still substantive testimony.

It's not helpful to the state but that's not what makes it substantive.

If the victim of a crime takes a witness stand and says no,

no, none of this ever happened,

that is substance for the jury to consider in reaching their verdict.

There was certainly substantive testimony here and it went well beyond RM's denials

but even her denials were substantive testimony

and it was relevant because it went directly to the charged event

and certainly she was instrumental to this case.

I highlight that the case law does not say that the witness

must be instrumental to the state's theory.

It's instrumental to the case.

The victim of a crime is instrumental to the case.

Even if they come up and they say no, none of it ever happened.

The state sometimes prosecutes cases with non-cooperative witnesses

and sometimes non-cooperative victims.

That does not mean the victim's testimony is not instrumental to bringing the case.

Her testimony certainly was instrumental

and that's why even if the court reaches the merits of this argument it fails.

Rule 607 allows the state or any party to impeach its own witnesses.

This court has explained that that is true even if the impeachment statements

directly inculcated the defendant.

Even if the state knew how the witness was going to testify ahead of time.

The state can still do this so long as the primary purpose

is not to place otherwise inadmissible substantive evidence before the jury

and that was not the purpose here.

And even if somehow it could be concluded that it were

there simply was no prejudice here.

The trial court issued this limiting instruction at every turn.

Before trial the court was instructed that they might hear certain evidence

that could not be used for a substance only for assessing credibility.

When the state sought to impeach with regard to the CAC interview

whether or not RM knew why her mom was mad the trial court again instructed.

When the state sought to do the front half of the impeachment

regarding her father the statement RM made to her father

the court again issued the instruction.

When the defense sought to impeach RM on cross examination

with a prior inconsistent statement the instruction was issued again

and again when the impeachment was completed with RM's father.

There was no risk that the jury was going to misuse this evidence

for its substantive purposes rather than its impeachment purposes.

Turning next to the hearsay issue.

The trial court sustainably exercised its discretion

in admitting JC's statements to Dr. Roy under Rule 8034

statements made for the purpose of medical diagnosis for treatment.

This case is nothing like state versus weight.

In state versus weight the statement said as you were quote

Daddy Billy had hurt her and rubbed her private with his hand.

There was no testimony from the doctor about the setting

in which the medical exam in that case took place.

There was no testimony from the doctor that they introduced themselves as a doctor

the child seems to respond to that based on the record that this court had

this court correctly held that nothing could be inferred or understood

except the doctor's understanding for why the child was there

why the child was making statements.

The statements that issue indeed could fit just as well

in a forensic interview transcript as at a doctor's appointment.

Contrast that with this case.

Dr. Roy testifies that at the beginning of the appointment

she explains to JC that she is a medical doctor

and JC appeared to understand her role as a doctor.

Dr. Roy testified that the exam took place in a traditional medical exam room

outfitted with autoscopes, tongue suppressors,

Johnny's in outpatient bed and the like.

And then the statement itself.

Dr. Roy asks what brings you to the doctor today

and the victim says the defendant made her put her mouth on his penis.

Dr. Roy says is that causing you any concerns?

She says yes, I'm afraid that it's making me sick

because I'm starting to sneeze.

That statement is exactly right for the circumstances.

Prior to this JC had already been to a CAC interview.

She knew what that looked like.

She knew what information was being looked for in that setting

and here she did not respond to is this causing you any concern

by saying yeah, because it was really bad

and we need to hold him accountable?

She could have done that.

Indeed she testified that she disclosed to her father

the exact same night the assault happened

because JC knew what happened in that closet was wrong.

Nevertheless, that's not the answer she gave to Dr. Roy

when Dr. Roy said are you concerned?

She gave an answer that was appropriate to the circumstances,

the medical setting in whom she was speaking to.

That affirmatively showed that JC herself understood

that she was talking to her doctor

and that her statements were for the purposes

of medical treatment or diagnosis.

In turning finally into the expert testimony issue,

your honors, at the outset this case is nothing

like state versus Raymond.

In state versus Raymond Dr. Hampton reviewed no discovery

and he testified generally providing general education

testimony about counterintuitive behaviors

of domestic violence victims,

not opining at all on the facts of that case

or how his opinions should apply to that case.

Indeed some of the counterintuitive behaviors

he testified to were not present in that case.

Here Dr. Martin did review the discovery

and he did testify at a high level

about child forensic interviews

but he also testified very specifically

to the interviews that were done in this case

and whether they were done well or not.

The expert testimony in those two cases

are simply worlds apart.

If Dr. Martin were truly called

to provide a general education

on interpretation of vocal inflection,

it's entirely unclear why he would have

needed to review discovery

and even less clear why he was not qualified

as an expert in interpreting vocal inflections.

Further, wrapped up in the entire context

the use for this question becomes seemingly clear.

Well before this happens of course JC testifies

and after the state's case

defense moves to dismiss on the ground

that no reasonable juror could find JC credible

because she testified with upward inflections

at the end of her voice

offering her answers more as questions

than assertive statements.

Therefore they couldn't be credited

beyond a reasonable doubt.

When Dr. Mart's testimony came

the defense council began,

this is at 665 of the transcripts

by requesting to ask Dr. Mart

specifically about a scenario

dressing it up in hypothetical language

but then explaining this case.

She asked about a scenario where a child goes to a CAC

makes no disclosure

then goes to a medical appointment and discloses

and then discloses as a subsequent CAC.

That's this case, that's JC.

And then that goes on questioning about that

for a little while.

The concerns surrounding suggestibility on that

and then they drill down to the rules of the CAC,

the Stratford County CAC.

Not the best practices generally

of child forensic interviews

but the Stratford County CAC

where JC was interviewed.

They start drilling down on the rules there

and there are a handful of rules

that the children are given at the beginning of the interview.

I believe it was four of them.

One of them is that it's important to always tell the truth

and they stop on that one

and they zero in on that one.

And they ask Dr. Mart what would an upward inflection

signal to you about a child's understanding

of that particular rule?

And immediately the state jumps up and objects

says this is going to JC's testimony

and it might not come through as well

on a cold record

but everybody in that courtroom

would have understood that they were being oriented

toward this case.

And then even during that argument

Defense Council herself states

that Dr. Mart's testimony

was not intended to go to credibility

but it goes to reliability

of JC's testimony.

Excuse me, Dr. Mart's testimony.

Dr. Mart's testimony

essentially opining on JC's testimony.

It's not intended to go to credibility

but it does go to reliability.

This is trying to get away from the idea

that Dr. Mart would be opining on her credibility.

The state submits that there's no distinction.

That's a distinction without a difference here.

If JC's testimony is credible

then it's reliable.

If it can be relied upon it is credible.

So if Dr. Mart's opinion

is intended to go to JC's

credibility or her reliability

then it runs afoul of pressy.

And Defense Council's closing argument

makes it clear that that's what it was intended to go to.

Defense Council's closing argument included

nothing about general

understandings of how to interpret vocal inflection.

But it did include the following.

JC was not credible

because she, quote,

ended her answers with a question mark

and a high inflection. That's transcript 721.

All in context

it becomes clear that

that question to Dr. Mart

which might not have even come out

if JC didn't testify with that high inflection

was intended to

gloss that closing argument

with the imprimatur of an expert

and allow it to land that much

more forcefully with the jury

than it would have if you just asserted

that she ended her answers

with an upward inflection and therefore this child

cannot be trusted.

The trial court appropriately precluded Dr. Mart

from commenting on JC's

credibility in even a generalized

way. And the trial court should be

affirmed. If this court has no further

questions the state would rest on its brief.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you, Attorney Gagnier.

Roboto? Thank you.

Counsel, the case is submitted.
