This is case 2024-0393, Taylor community versus city of Laconia at all.

Morning, Attorney Carrier. I understand you reserved two minutes.

That's correct, Your Honor. Please proceed.

May it please the court. My name is Evan Carrier. I'm from Shee and Finney Basin Green.

I'm here on behalf of the appellant, Taylor community.

There was an appeal of a trial court determination on summary judgment

that there was an occasion to lay out cul-de-sac located on Taylor's property

at the end of Cottonwood Drive in Laconia.

Our written materials set forth various basis for appeal

and I would be happy to answer questions regarding any of those arguments.

Otherwise, I'd like to focus on three points.

First, the trial court held that the owner of property that has been dedicated

but never accepted by the municipality has no right to use that property for its own purposes.

There is no legal support for this holding and where it actually, the law,

it would raise some significant policy concerns which I'd like to address.

Where does it say they can't use the land?

They could drive across the cul-de-sac.

The public or the property owner?

The property owner.

Corrected.

My review of the law, I don't find anything saying that the property owner is not allowed to use the property.

But the trial court didn't say they can't use the property, didn't it?

The trial court said that Taylor has no right to use the property for its own purposes.

But they could drive across the cul-de-sac, of course.

Okay.

I think they could.

I'll just go through my other points.

I will get into more detail on that point as well.

The trial court also failed to analyze the public interest in the layout as required by the law

because it concluded that Taylor doesn't have any interest in the property.

The trial court said, well, you know, I need to analyze the public interest

because even a scant interest, public interest, is going to outweigh Taylor's essentially non-existent rights to the land.

And finally, if I have time, I'd just like to address Taylor's latch's claim briefly.

Before any of those, I just wanted to make a quick note on the standard of review.

This is a review of a trial court decision from a grant of summary judgment.

I know the court is well acquainted with the standard that applies there.

There is another standard referenced in the briefs,

which says that the court will uphold a trial court's determination

regarding whether there's an occasion for layout if it's supported by some evidence

and is not legally erroneous.

Another case says that that kind of a decision regarding a layout

should not be overturned absent gross mistake or fraud.

But in none of those cases, none of those cases involved summary judgment.

So Crowley versus Town of Laven, Rockhouse Mountain Property Owners Association versus Conway,

Hinsdale versus Chesterfield, all of those cite that standard.

Those were not summary judgment cases.

So I'm assuming you're raising this because there are disputed issues of fact.

That's part of the reason.

And just because it's a different standard.

And where are the disputed issues of fact?

Is that in the balancing analysis?

So when we're talking about the trial court's conclusion regarding the occasion,

I think we get into.

So again, the trial court did not do that analysis of the public interest.

I just agree.

In the motion to reconsider, the court clearly said that the city's interest

and the cul-de-sac is clear and that it affords the most safe and efficient traffic route

for the city's vehicles providing emergency and other public services.

Isn't that balancing the city's interest?

In a truncated manner.

But actually, when you look at the standard that applies to a layout

and you look at the public interest, the courts have actually established eight factors

that courts will consider in determining whether or not they're

and determining the strength of the public interest in a layout.

The court addressed a couple of those factors,

even the factors that the court addressed when we talk about, I think they said,

ease of existing traffic flow and improvement of convenience of travel.

When you look at case law on those, again, we're talking about a dead-end road,

a cul-de-sac at the end of a dead-end road.

Crowley, the case that I mentioned earlier, in that case,

the court found that improving a dead-end road, quote,

would not improve the convenience of travel or existing traffic flow

since it is a dead-end road, end quote.

In Rockhouse Mountain Property Owners Association, the court held

that a superior court decision to lay out roadways was the product in gross mistake

in part because, quote, evidence was introduced that many of these roads are dead-ends

and they do not interconnect with other town streets

and that only eight or nine houses do not already front on the public roads.

City Inspector Morgan doesn't accept that character, that distinction.

In her brief she says, this is not a dead-end road, this is a cul-de-sac.

What's the difference?

Yeah.

So again, from the city's perspective, we're not talking about whether a cul-de-sac

versus a hammerhead is more convenient.

We're talking about whether a dead-end road versus a cul-de-sac is more convenient

because if I'm recalling the brief correctly, essentially the argument is,

well, if there's no public right to use this property,

then Taylor could just say, oh, no public can turn around in the cul-de-sac

and there's going to be more for anyone to turn around.

So there are a couple of problems with that argument.

First, both the city and the intervenors have argued, again,

if the cul-de-sac has been dedicated, even if it hasn't been accepted,

there's this public right of access.

So the city can't argue that Taylor's required to allow public access

while at the same time arguing that Taylor's ability to bar public access

gives rise to this public interest in the layout.

It's one or the other.

And there's also facts in the record that when Taylor sought to modify the cul-de-sac,

it was planning to give easements in order to allow the public would still use that area.

Second, the city's argument would require the court to construe material facts against Taylor.

Again, there are disputed issues of material facts regarding the extent to which the cul-de-sac,

as opposed to another option like the hammerhead that Taylor proposed

when it went before the planning board,

there are material disputes in fact regarding whether one of those

ensures the ease of traffic flow or the community travel better than a cul-de-sac.

But you consider the 1987 approval for a cul-de-sac,

setting aside whether that was to remain private or to be dedicated.

Isn't there some deference owed to that subdivision approval,

to pick an actual cul-de-sac, and the fact that that was then constructed?

How can they change that?

Yes, I do think that it matters.

It does matter that the dedication took place.

Obviously, if a property owner dedicates the property and then changes plans,

that happens fairly commonly.

But don't they have to go back to the planning board if they're making such a substantial change?

Yes, they do.

And that's actually what they did six years ago.

It also kind of plays into this idea that Taylor can't really tell the public not to use this property.

Any change that they would make would involve going back to the planning board,

like they did six years ago, to present a plan to change this area.

So this idea that Taylor, if we don't lay out the cul-de-sac,

that Taylor's just going to cut off all access to the cul-de-sac is not really realistic

when you think through how that actually works under the law.

Do you agree that the issue of whether a cul-de-sac or a hammerhead,

which one of those ways is most appropriate, that's not before us, is it?

I think it is to a certain extent because that goes to the public interest analysis.

When we're talking about the public interest in laying out the cul-de-sac,

I think the idea was, well, we have to preserve the cul-de-sac,

because if we don't, then Taylor can go and modify.

And if the cul-de-sac is so much better than the other options that are presented,

then we need to preserve the cul-de-sac in order to preserve the public interest.

And that's where I think we get into some disputed material issues of fact,

because when you look at the record, particularly the record when Taylor went

before the planning board for that site plan review,

there's a lot of evidence that supports that the town was fully on board

with that conversion into the hammerhead.

So we have the...

First, the town did assist Taylor with that process,

and I know that the city points out that municipality has an obligation to assist.

That's absolutely true.

But I think that what happened here went well beyond what a municipality typically does.

Typically we're talking about procedure.

You have to make sure they know where the application form is,

what information they need to support the application, when the meetings are,

you know, help them through the abutters process.

In this instance, we have the planning director sending a memoranda

to an abutter, intervener Edelson, basically saying,

so Taylor dedicated this property in 1987, but that never went through.

And now we've sort of changed our mind.

You know, the city's been using the property by an informal agreement for some time,

and now we've all decided Taylor's going to retain the property,

but don't worry, you're going to have easements.

I do a lot of land use work, and that has never happened, that kind of support.

Well, tell us more about the petition to quiet title,

because my understanding of the record is that the planning board denied

the transfer from cul-de-sac to Y for Hammerhead.

And then there's a petition to quiet title.

How does that play into this matter?

Yes, so I think that's relevant for a couple of reasons.

So you're correct.

The planning board denied the second plan application.

Because there were some questions about whether or not Taylor owned the property,

again, we're talking about the steadication and what does that mean.

So the petition to quiet title, a lot of the arguments centered around

whether or not there was an implied acceptance.

So everyone agrees there was never an explicit acceptance.

We don't have a town vote here.

But the question is whether there was an implied acceptance.

And the trial court found that there was not an implied acceptance.

And also that, and because of that, quieted title in Taylor.

I'd love to be able to find the quote here,

because I think it's particularly relevant to this case,

because the trial court specifically found that Taylor

retained the right to use the land, including modifications to the cul-de-sac.

But that was in the petition to quiet title.

That was in the petition to quiet title.

I do think that that's inconsistent with the trial court's decision here,

where the judge saying Taylor does not have the right to use its property.

In terms of dedication and acceptance, what is required for acceptance?

So there are a couple of different ways.

And what's the source of authority for that?

Okay.

Where do we look?

Yeah.

So there are a couple of different ways.

There's express acceptance.

And I believe that statutory, the acceptance issue was less involved in-

Just on the statute.

Just pause.

Which version of the statute applies to this case?

Oh.

So I think, so I think in this case it would have been,

I think RSA 231 51.

But it was that statute was amended in the course of this dispute.

Yeah.

So the older version of the statute,

I believe that acceptance had to take place within 20 years,

unless the road was opened and built for public travel.

Yep.

And so honestly, I think in this case it doesn't matter which statute applies

because the road was built.

No one disputes that the road was built.

No one disputes that the public was using it.

Under the current version of the statute,

the dedication stays active.

It doesn't lapse the passage.

So go back to acceptance.

What's required for express acceptance?

Right.

So with acceptance, we can have either a vote of the legislative body

to accept, which we do not have in this case.

Or we can have implied acceptance.

If I'm remembering correctly,

is it more a creature of case law in terms of the city take certain actions

to demonstrate an intent to accept the property?

And so that was a really big issue in that,

what we call in our papers, we call it the site plan appeal.

So the landowner wants to withdraw the dedication,

but the landowners need to be taken assuming there's been acceptance.

Right.

So landowners can't actually withdraw the dedication.

They could file a petition to ask that the dedication be released.

And the city could grant that or not grant it.

Based on my reading of the statute,

the city could deny a petition to release the dedication

while at the same time not accepting the dedication.

So it may be released and discharged from all public servitude

by vote of the governing body.

Correct.

That's what would be required.

But to be petitioning for that decision.

Yeah.

But I can envision circumstances where a landowner petitions for a vote like that one.

It's denied.

But at the same time, the property owner doesn't accept dedication.

So then we're sort of still in this limbo and where if there is this rule

that the property owner can't use their property,

you're sort of in this middle land.

Given the fact that they never petitioned in that manner,

doesn't that refute your argument that there's no prejudice then to your client?

No, Your Honor.

I don't think so.

And I think that the reason for that is that this is kind of a more complicated situation.

This isn't a situation where one property owner made a dedication

and two years later changed their mind and tried to get rid of it.

I mean, this is a dedication that took place in 1987 and a lot happened between 1987 and now.

You know, if we look at the facts that are in the record,

we have this study that took place and during that street study,

there was this determination that the cul-de-sac was private.

There was the city placed in the city maintenance sign at the end of Cottonwood Drive.

There was the city support through the site plan process, including that memorandum of understanding.

All of these things come together and Taylor could have petitioned to have it released,

but I think given all the other things that were going on and giving their efforts to do that site plan appeal,

I think particularly during the site plan appeal, the city repeatedly filed notices of no position.

So I think Taylor had this understanding, like, okay, the city doesn't want this property.

Like, well petition, you know, if we need to petition to release, we will,

but right now let's focus on this appeal, which is something we have to do within 30 days and, you know, all of that.

So I don't think that it hurts the latches argument.

And I'm happy to talk about the latches argument.

Do you have a light turn on your camera?

Oh, I'm so sorry.

I'm so sorry.

It means you're two minutes.

I'll wrap up. Thank you so much.

Yep.

Attorney Spector Morgan.

Good morning, M.A. Please look for it.

My name is Laura Spector Morgan.

I'm from the McChina Spill Group.

I represent the city of Laconia.

Today also in the courtroom are Matt Leahy and Steve Knicks, who Mr. Leahy represents himself.

Attorney Knicks represents Nancy Edelson, who's also with us.

This court should affirm the child court's decision in this case because it is supported by the evidence and it is not the product of gross mistake.

I'm happy to take questions at any time.

Do we have any deference to the city council's vote?

The Superior Court reviews the city council's vote de novo.

And so there is no deference there.

And this court review, it does owe deference to the trial court's decision.

Yes.

On summary judgment, of course, this court has a different standard of review.

It reviews the motions for summary judgment considering the evidence in the light most favorable to each party.

In its capacity is the non-moving party.

If there is no genuine issue of material fact, you determine whether or not the moving party is entitled to judgment as a member.

Do you agree with the attorney carrier that the summary judgment standard review applies to this case?

The summary judgment standard, yes, absolutely applies to this case.

It's interesting to hear that Taylor home feels there are matters of facts in dispute because they moved for summary judgment.

So in moving for summary judgment, it seems that they would have been asserting and in fact they did.

There were no material facts in dispute.

So I'm not sure how they assert now that there were material facts in dispute.

Is the issue of whether a cul-de-sac or hammerhead, the most expeditious or efficient use of this property, is that before us?

It is not before you.

In fact, Taylor home conceded that before the trial court.

In its memorandum of law, in support of its objection to intervener Leahy's motion for summary judgment,

and in support of Taylor's press motion for summary judgment, Taylor said,

this dispute is not about whether or not it is appropriate to convert the cul-de-sac into a hammerhead.

Rather, the only issue for the court to analyze here is whether or not there is an occasion for the city to lay out a public highway over the cul-de-sac.

So it is clear this is not a, which would be better.

It's not a hammerhead versus a cul-de-sac.

It's whether or not there is an occasion to lay out the cul-de-sac.

There was no petition to lay out a hammerhead for the city council to consider.

Isn't at the end of the day, when you have on the one hand the rights of a landowner,

and the other hand the public interest the city represents, doesn't that inherently require balancing?

It absolutely requires balancing and that's what happens.

And shouldn't the trial court have followed our direction with respect to what goes into balancing?

The city, the trial court did do that balancing in the motion for reconsideration.

In the original decision, the trial court held was that Taylor's rights in this property were so burdened by the public's rights on the basis of the dedication that there was nothing to balance.

Because once a property owner dedicates its property to the public use in the form of a road, yeah, it has the right to continue to use its property.

But isn't that the issue? There is some, I think the city agrees, there is some residual property interest that Taylor has after the dedication, right?

It's not nothing.

It's essentially nothing, though. This court has held. It is essentially nothing.

In the case of Steve versus Jackman, that case involved a ordinance that required people to clear the snow on the sidewalk in front of their house.

The sidewalk, of course, being part of the public right of way.

And in that case, this court held the property owner has no or greater right in the public street in front of his property than any other part of the highways of the town.

So it's very common that people own the fee in front of under the road in front of their home, right?

And the city has an easement over it. Very rarely does the city or the town actually own the fee under the road of any public road, almost always an easement.

So, but the property owner who owns the fee, their rights are so encumbered by the rights of the public to use that right of way for viatic purposes, for telephone poles, for travel, for maintenance, for water and sewer lines, for cable lines.

That the rights of the fee owner are essentially none.

Taylor Home could use its property to drive over. It could use its the right of way to potentially landscape. You're allowed to have your lawn in the right of way.

But if the town comes along and wants to move the traveled way within that right of way, the town has every right to dig up your lawn and move that traveled way within the right of way.

That would have been required to revoke the dedication.

There is no way to revoke a dedication.

Taylor Home certainly could have come to the city council at any time between 1987 and the light out and said.

And petitioned under the statute.

Sorry.

And petitioned under the statute.

And petitioned under the statute.

And is acceptance required for dedication?

Acceptance is not required for dedication.

What acceptance does is acceptance changes that dedication into an actual public road so that the city becomes liable for the maintenance.

And so what happened here?

Was there acceptance?

There was no express acceptance.

And the trial court found there was no implied acceptance.

So no, there was no acceptance.

Notwithstanding the city's maintenance.

Notwithstanding the city's maintenance.

Correct.

Was Taylor paying property taxes on this property?

On the cul-de-sac?

Yeah.

I do not know.

I don't believe that's part of the record.

Is that in the record?

Yeah.

In terms of the assessment of property rights and interests, is that a legal determination or a factual determination?

I believe that's a legal determination.

Okay.

Which version of 231-51 do you believe applies to this case and doesn't matter?

The 1989 version.

The former one.

The new one.

Okay.

Yeah.

So given the Taylor-Holm does not test that they dedicated the property here, and given that that dedication was never released,

Taylor-Holm's interests in this property are so minimal that as the trial court held, any public interest outweighs those private property rights.

And here there are public interests.

And it is true.

The trial court did not go through all eight Crawley factors.

But the court has never said that that is a checklist and you have to check off every one of those eight factors.

It has said, here is a list of things to consider in determining whether or not there's a public interest in laying out this road.

Is an express finding that there's a public interest required?

Yes.

I believe that there is.

Yes.

Then you believe the trial court made one?

Yes.

Yes.

I believe that there's a public interest motion in its decision on the motion for reconsideration.

Yes, I do.

And here, again, we're not looking at laying out a dead-end road.

The dead-end road exists.

We are looking at laying out the cul-de-sac at the end of that dead-end road.

And what that cul-de-sac does and what it has done for 30 years when both parties have treated this cul-de-sac as a public road,

to the city, maintaining it, plowing it, paving it, treating it as part of the public road system for over 30 years.

It eases the flow of traffic.

People get to the end of the road.

They go around the cul-de-sac to turn around if they need to.

Fire trucks get to the end of the road.

They use it to turn around.

Ambulances, school buses, police cars, whatever.

Now, did the department heads say during the site plan review process, we can make a why work?

Yes, they did.

Because what municipal officials will always say if they can is, yes, we can make that work.

Because they recognize that people have property rights.

And if they can make something work, they will.

That doesn't mean it's the best way to do it.

Now, cul-de-sac is clearly the best way to ease the flow of traffic at the end of this road.

Do we have any deference to the Director of Public Works' determination that that cul-de-sac was private?

That cul-de-sac was private.

It had never been accepted by the city.

It was private.

Now, it's been laid out as a public road.

So it was dedicated but remained private.

Yes, that's how dedicated roads works.

Well, if you come into the town and you apply to build a subdivision and you say,

I'm going to build these roads to town standards, I'm dedicating them to the town.

Until the town accepts those roads as public roads, they're technically private roads.

The developer or the homeowners association has to maintain them until the town accepts them.

So they are private roads until that moment of acceptance.

And what the court has held is incredibly unfair to our municipalities

for anyone to be able to simply dedicate a road to the town or city

and put that liability on the city or town.

There needs to be that act of acceptance in order for the municipality to be liable and responsible for that road.

But in that interim period between dedication and acceptance, they are private roads.

And what are the property owners' rights during that interim period?

They are extremely limited because it has been dedicated to the public use.

On the latches argument just briefly, the latches argument doesn't exist anymore

because the latches argument was made in this case was that even assuming that Taylor Holm dedicated the cul-de-sac in this case,

latches prohibits the city from relying on it for the occasional analysis

or from using it as a basis for not assessing damages.

Well, Taylor Holm hasn't appealed the fact that no damages were assessed here, so that part is gone.

And it has conceded dedication.

So to the extent a latches argument was made, it's really been waived in the course of this appeal.

How did under the prior version of the statute dedication could lapse after a period?

Yes.

So what happens, assuming that version of the statute were still in existence,

what happened when the dedication lapse with all the property rights revert to the landowner?

So that version of the statute was in place primarily for the situation where we had paper roads, right?

Which had been dedicated but never built.

And so what would happen in that case is you would have, for example, from the 1920s,

one of those division plans with lots of little lots and they'd have roads and then more little lots,

but those roads would never get built.

And so you'd have those dedications out there and then the roads wouldn't get built.

So the question would become what is the status of those roads?

We actually still have those questions.

Under that version of that statute, that dedication would lapse

and that those rights would revert, assuming those weren't separate parcels of land,

those rights would revert the abutting property owners.

If the road was built, the fee rights and then if the public easement,

if the dedication lapsed, usually the property owners own to the center line

and if there's no public dedication at that point, they just get to use that as part of their property.

If the road is built, what happens at that point is you have a private road

that continues to be maintained by people who use it

and anyone who was conveyed property subject to that subdivision continues to have a private right to use that road,

but there's no longer a public right to use those roads.

The public interest lapses, but the private rights of anyone who was conveyed property

subject to that subdivision plan, they continue to have private rights to use those roads.

If there's no further questions, the city would ask that the court affirm the decision of the trial court.

Thank you very much.

Thank you. I'd just like to make a couple of brief points.

So there is no case law that says that dedicated but not accepted property,

in the case of dedicated but not accepted property, the property owner has no right to use that property.

Jackman not involved dedicated but unaccepted property.

What we do have is the case of Hersh versus Plonsky and I'd like to read from it,

but I think it's very clear. It says once a dedication is effective,

the public represented by the municipality gains land for a public purpose without cost.

To be effective, there must be both an offer of dedication and acceptance.

So in this gray land where we have a dedication, we do not have acceptance.

And if we were to adopt a rule, because again, I cannot find that rule in the case law,

I think the adoption of a rule that immediately upon dedication,

the property owner loses the right to use the property for its own purpose.

I think that that would disincentivize both dedications and acceptances.

For the property owner standpoint, a dedication would be risky.

The property owner would immediately lose the right to use its property.

While at the same time exponentially increasing its risk,

given that under this concept, the public is now allowed to use it

and the owner remains responsible for it.

But isn't that part of a condition of an approval of the original subdivision?

So there has to be some good faith development by the original developer.

I'm sorry, could you put the question?

Well, if it's a condition of a subdivision approval,

then there really isn't a debate or discussion as to what the developer should do with it.

It's an expectation of the approval of the original subdivision, isn't it?

Well, in this case it was not a condition of the approval.

The approval back in 1987 actually said all roads shall remain private.

The very existence of the road in a certain location, in a certain design,

as depicted on an old plan or relatively older plan,

is part and parcel of that approval, isn't it?

It can be part of the approval, yes.

But again, plans change.

Sometimes a plan is submitted and then the property owner doesn't go forward with it.

But again, I do think that dedication would be risky for a landowner

if this rule were to apply just because there is the risk that the municipality will never accept it

and they'll have this land.

I'm sorry, my light is on again.

I'm so sorry.

Thank you again.

Taylor would ask that the court reverse and remand the trial court's decision.

Thank you.

Thank you very much, counsel.
