This is case 2024-0321, state of New Hampshire versus Gabriel Price.

Good morning, Anthony Johnson. Can you stand your reserve one minute?

Yes, Your Honor. May it please the Court, Christopher Johnson on behalf of Gabriel Price.

My plan this morning is to address, first, a self-defense jury instruction issue, and then second, the reckless conduct issues.

Happy to take the Court's questions at any time.

Beginning with a self-defense jury instruction issue, the error was in telling the jury that hitting Holton with a baton capable of causing death or serious bodily injury constituted deadly force.

That was wrong on substance, and it was wrong on process.

It was wrong on substance because capable of the language the Court used is relevant to the definition of second degree assault.

But the Court here was not instructing on second degree assault, it was instructing on a self-defense concept of deadly force.

Deadly weapon is the second degree assault element.

The self-defense concept of deadly force speaks in terms of the substantial risk of death or serious bodily injury.

And so capable of causing death or serious bodily injury has a broader reach than something that's a substantial risk of causing death or serious bodily injury.

So it was wrong on substance, but it was also wrong on process.

So even if the Court had given a correct definition of deadly force as it was trying to do, it was wrong to give this instruction because it usurped the jury's function.

The Court in effect told the jury the answer to a disputed question, and that courts can't do.

And so for those reasons this self-defense instruction was error.

It broadened or made it easier for the state to characterize prices conduct as deadly force, and it told the jury that it should characterize that conduct as such.

And how is that preserved? Can you address that issue?

So the defense made an objection when the Court read the jury instructions to the jury as happened here, as often happens.

The Court says, does anybody have any concerns? And the defense of that time approached and made this objection.

I think it's crucial to note that at no point did the Court say, you've objected too late.

And the state didn't say you've objected too late. They had a merit-based discussion about it.

So everybody understood that if the Court had incorrectly instructed the jury, it would be able to correct that.

Was there an objection to a self-defense instruction at all?

Yes, so this point that I've identified was objected.

The defense lawyer specifically said you can't tell them that, that it is...

I guess my question is, did the state object to the trial Court issuing a self-defense instruction at all?

No, there's no dispute that the jury, at least not that I recall, and in any event it hasn't been raised as sort of an alternative route.

But it was rightly, as far as the record reflects, the jury was rightly given the option of self-defense.

And so it was the content of that.

I can't understand what the evidence is supporting self-defense in this case.

So, well, let me say two things about that.

First, the state has not argued harmless error on this issue.

And so the Court did give an instruction on self-defense, and it gave an instruction that was erroneous in the way I've described.

And so those facts being true, it kind of, at this point, it doesn't matter.

That board has left the launch, yeah.

But also, there was some evidence that, you know, Price had testified that as he approached the car to engage with Holton about the accident,

Holton tried to kick the door open in such a way that it would have struck Price.

And so that was the hook that the defense had.

And it was sufficient to get the instruction.

Well, back to the point of preservation.

Is it fair to say that the trial court essentially said to the defense attorney,

if I take out the language about purposely striking with a baton in that definition,

I will also take out a subsequent instruction that the defense attorney wanted.

That's right.

And so, I mean, I guess as I read it, it seemed that the defense attorney had a difficult choice to make

in agreeing to let that second instruction sort of override his concern about the first.

How is that not a waiver?

So it's not a waiver because the defense was entitled to the second instruction.

It was the court, it was not a fair choice.

The case law that I've cited in the brief indicates that courts can't put the defendant to it.

Unfair choice between two options.

And then when they accept a version of that choice, say that they've accepted, they've waived an objection to.

And the State on Appeal doesn't challenge this, as I understand it.

They're not saying that there was, the defendant wasn't entitled to that second instruction

or that it was improper.

And it was, I think the State is right, it was a proper further elaboration.

What that further instruction said is, so if you find that Price did use deadly force,

then you have to consider whether Hultin used deadly force or Pacting with deadly force.

And in that case, you must quit.

The second one is important particularly if the jury is going to have the first one

because the erroneous effect of that first improper instruction

was to take the option of non-deadly force off the table for the defense.

So in theory, the defense had two self-defense options.

One is that you characterize Price's conduct as non-deadly force

and you can prevail even if Hultin is only using non-deadly force to attack him first.

But once you say that Price's force is necessarily deadly force,

it's not good enough if Hultin is using only non-deadly force.

Hultin has to be using deadly force also against Price.

What's your response to the State's argument that the court first instructed the jury

that at the time was, quote, not automatically a deadly weapon?

So that came in the context of when the court is instructing the jury

on the elements of second-degree assault.

One of the elements of second-degree assault is deadly weapon.

We have no problem with those instructions.

So that's proper.

But the concept of deadly force is different from the concept of deadly weapon.

Deadly force is a self-defense concept, not an element of second-degree assault.

And so it can very well be that the instructions,

and it's indeed true that the instructions on secondary assault were fine.

But then when you come to self-defense,

the court basically sort of improperly imported into the deadly force concept

this broader understanding of deadly weapon.

Again, the difference is for deadly weapon,

an object can be a deadly weapon if it's only capable of causing death or serious bodily injury.

An act is deadly force only if it poses a substantial risk of causing death or serious bodily injury.

So capable is a bigger class of things that are capable of causing death or serious bodily injury

than the things that pose a substantial risk of doing so.

Turning to the reckless conduct issue, we begin with sufficiency.

So here the state had to prove a substance that prices conduct in leaving the gun in the car

created a substantial and unjustifiable risk,

the disregard of which was a gross deviation from the standard of care.

It's not enough to prove a mere possibility of the risk, a mere possibility of harm.

And the undisputed facts in this case individually and cumulatively

shows that the risk was not sufficiently large to be substantial.

It's a relatively brief time that price was that the LP was in the car alone with the gun.

The location of the gun mattered.

It was under the driver's seat.

It was not in LP's face.

It was not like a conspicuous option for him.

There's also no round in the chamber.

And the evidence was this was a block that you had to pull a slide to make it to fire.

So merely pulling the trigger wouldn't have caused it to fire.

There's no evidence that LP was a volatile or violent child

that was likely to seize a gun under these circumstances.

And there was no evidence that LP was ignorant of the rules or the dangers of guns.

Price testified that LP had been told never to touch a gun.

You put all of those circumstances together.

The risk of the price sort of disregarded when he left the car to engage with Holton

was not sufficiently large to be a substantial and unjustifiable risk.

It was a mere possibility.

It state raises or suggests at least the plain error is precluded

unless there's a contemporaneous objection.

So I think the state cites a case before this court had a plain error rule.

I think the plain error rule rule 16A was adopted some years after McAdams.

And this court has in a number of cases addressed questions of sufficiency of the evidence

under plain error, applying the four prongs.

And by and large in those cases the court has recognized that an injustice is done

if somebody is convicted of a crime

when even viewing the evidence in a legless favorable to the state,

the state didn't prove it.

And so here again, with respect to the reckless conduct charge only,

arguing the state just didn't prove it.

Finally, I want to say a brief mention on the second issue relating to the reckless conduct charge.

And this was the erroneous exclusion of LP's testimony.

There's no violation of a discovery rule here.

And the error was not harmless.

A criminal defendant who testifies has obvious structural incentives to testify favorably

that the jury will be aware of.

It is therefore inevitable that a defense will meaningfully benefit by corroboration

of a defendant's testimony, at least on a plausibly disputed issue.

LP's testimony that he had been instructed about guns and understood not to touch it

would therefore have been a powerful corroboration of price's testimony to the same effect.

Isn't it a hearsay?

It isn't. I think it's not for two couple reasons.

One is that issue the state didn't preserve in the trial court.

It's not relied on by the trial judge.

And the testimony, if it matched prices, would not have been hearsay.

It would have been, I have been told not to touch guns is not, well, or let me say,

that might be hearsay, but I know not to touch guns would not be hearsay.

Also, I think my father has told me not to touch guns is not hearsay.

That's, I'm repeating a command.

It's neither true nor false.

And I'm buying that last one.

Yeah, I may be wrong about that one.

But fundamentally, I would revert back to there are formulations that would have evaded hearsay,

and it wasn't what the trial court relied on or the state proposed.

And your position on the discovery rule, 12B, is that a disclosure did technically...

Well, the child was on the witness list, and that's the rule the state cites in its brief.

The definition of what counts as a statement subject to disclosure,

I mean, an oral statement reduced to writing.

The defense had one, they turned it over.

It happened not to contain this information.

But one is allowed, a lawyer is allowed to ask questions.

They're not, you know, that they haven't asked the witness before in a trial.

And you don't violate the discovery obligation by asking a question you're not certain of the answer of.

So for all these reasons, we asked the court to reverse the assault convictions

under the self-defense jury instruction and the reckless conduct for sufficiency.

And if the court relies on sufficiency, it doesn't need to reach the evidentiary of the issue.

But if it affirms sufficiency, then we've asked to reverse that conviction on the exclusion of L.P.'s testimony.

Do you remind you of any questions?

Good morning, Your Honors.

Name, please, the court, Elizabeth Woodcock for the State of New Hampshire.

I'd just like to address a couple of factual assertions that my colleague just made.

He suggested at the outset that there was some evidence that the victim, Mr. Holton,

kicked the door open at the defendant.

Well, not really.

What happened was that the defendant made very quick steps towards Mr. Holton's truck.

He took his baton and he smashed the window.

Mr. Holton was doing everything he could do at that point to get away from the defendant.

He hadn't started, he hadn't done anything other than to jam on his brakes.

When the defendant pulled ahead of him, having hit him,

jam on his brakes so that he didn't run into the defendant's truck.

And he was just trying to figure out what comes next because he'd been in an accident.

The second thing that my colleague has suggested is that the child's testimony might not be hearsay.

Well, we don't really know that because, of course, we don't know what the child would have said.

And in point of fact, defense counsel told the court,

I don't know how he's going to answer that question.

So when the objection comes, it's an objection that I don't have any information on this point.

And the court asks defense counsel, what do you think he's going to say?

I don't know.

So the point of this is in order to sustain the argument raised by the defendant,

you have to assume certain things that the little boy would have said.

The other point is that the defendant actually told the court, told the jury.

I told him about the use of guns.

Now, the idea, the third point that I would like to make is that there is somehow an assumption

that the gun is under the seat of the car.

That's not very clear to me because what the testimony was was that the gun was between the defendant's legs.

Now, I don't know what that means if it was between his feet, if it was between his thighs.

I don't know where he was keeping that gun, but nobody ever testified that it was underneath the seat.

This raises a really significant question in terms of the recklessness question because

before you get there, Ms. Woodcock, could you address, I have a question about page 24 of your brief.

You say that the charge required the jury to determine if the defendant had been criminally negligent in leaving LP alone.

Is the standard criminal negligence or recklessness?

Well, I think that the issue is, I think that the, I may have inartfully expressed that

because I think that the issue is recklessness, but negligence certainly is part of an analysis of recklessness.

And I think that Justice Gold, I think that when he gets out of the car, when he's stopped by the police,

and his immediate reaction is, I get it, I get it, I left the gun in the car with my child.

I think that that is really almost an admission of saying, I shouldn't have done that.

But isn't that admission more an admission of negligence, not recklessness?

Well, I think that it is an admission of both.

The idea that you would have, I mean, firearms are not exactly predictable things, Justice Countline.

And you have a Glock that has a magazine in it, and the magazine is loaded.

You've got that lying around in your car.

Now think about this situation, you're going through a tall roof, you get in an accident, then you share them on the brakes.

And who knows where that gun lands?

If it's underneath the seat of the car, is it still underneath the seat of the car?

When you've jammed on the brakes and caused the other car to jam on its brakes?

You're driving?

Well, how can we say it's reckless if we don't know the answer to that?

Well, I think that you can, first of all, I think that the deference that the court owes to the jury is important to consider here.

But I think that all of the facts of this case suggest that the defendant was reckless.

Wouldn't it depend on the child if it's a three-year-old strapped in a car seat or a 15-year-old who has been through gotten safety classes?

Wouldn't we have to know more?

No. The 10-year-old was sitting in the back seat of the car watching his father get into a really violent interaction with another person.

A 10-year-old doesn't sit there and say to himself, oh gee, what can I do to help dad?

I could do a lot of different things.

10-year-old minds look at something going on like that,

and a 10-year-old, if he had found the gun, easily could have picked it up and said, I'm going to go help my father.

But that wouldn't have been helpful to have had the answers to the questions that the defense was trying to ask L.G. about his knowledge of guns?

Well, then, Justice Count, we're back into the objection that I raised.

That's your sin.

If you're going to say what L.P. would have answered that question, is a servant for the truth of the matter?

But we don't know. L.P. could have said I took a firearm safety class as a 10-year-old. We don't know.

The father could have testified that he enrolled his son in a firearms safety class.

There would have been nothing wrong with that.

The defendant could have said that.

L.P. could not have answered the question, what did your father tell you about the use of firearms?

What was the issue? That would have been hearsay, because it would have been offered for the truth of the matter asserted.

But if the objection in the trial court was this is hearsay, presumably the defense could have rephrased the question to address the hearsay concern.

Well, it still wouldn't have addressed the concern that the defense attorney didn't know what the little boy was going to answer.

But doesn't that happen all the time in trials that we don't know exactly what answer we're going to get at times?

It can happen at times, and it certainly has happened to my detriment at times.

But in this particular circumstance, what the defense was offering this for was to advance its own defense on this charge.

It wasn't just a kind of throwaway question.

The defense can now say, oh, it wasn't offered, it wouldn't have been offered for the truth of the matter asserted.

But if L.P. had said, my father told me the following about firearms, it would have gone directly to whether leaving the gun in the car with him was reckless.

And that would have been offered for the truth of the matter asserted, and there's no way that it comes in.

The trial court made the right decision on this particular point.

The defense had offered no information to the state about what L.P. would say, and the answer was very likely inadmissible hearsay.

So it's on both bases that the trial court made the right decision?

Pardon me?

It's on both bases, it's the violation of the discovery obligation of Rule 12, and the likelihood that it might be inadmissible hearsay?

I think that-

That's the legal underpinning of your argument?

I think that those are the two points, and I would raise one response to something that my colleague raised, which was that the state never raised the objection of hearsay.

It's not the obligation of the appellate to preserve arguments.

And I think that this court has the opportunity and really should highly consider the option of affirming this because the trial court got the right result, even if the reason wasn't what this court would-

It's going to have preservation.

Can you address the defendant's view of the jury instruction preservation issue?

I think that if you-

Trials happen in a kind of rapid pace pace, rapid pace, and I think that what you have here is you have a defense attorney who's saying the jury instructions are fine, and then the court gives them and then the defense attorney gets at this as well.

Now I have a little bit of a problem.

If you read the jury instructions as a whole, they're not telling the jury that it has to find that the defendant used deadly force or anything of that sort.

It's leaving those questions open for the jury.

And while you can kind of divide it up and say, well, we'll take this little piece of jury instructions and this little piece of jury instructions and we'll find problems there.

If you read them as a whole, what Justice Edwards did was she gave the jury all the options that it needed to have in order to decide whether the state had borne the burden of proof.

This case, if you look at it, it's a really kind of stunning case.

And I'm sure that the jury hearing all the witnesses say that they saw this man, the defendant come across and smash the window and begin beating Mr. Hall.

The idea that somehow these jury instructions didn't give the jury the option of thinking about self-defense, the option of thinking that maybe the baton isn't a deadly weapon.

They certainly did.

And so you find one sentence in many pages of jury instructions and you say, I don't like this particular sentence.

That argument was not made clear to the judge until after the instructions were given, the judge gave the defense options.

He said, all right, well, I can take this out of the written instructions.

You don't give me an idea.

And all the defense said was, I don't like the choices you're giving me.

You're telling me that you'll take this out, but then you'll also take this other instruction out.

And I don't like that choice.

Well, yes, I think that that's true.

What was the evidence of consciousness?

It sounds like what you're suggesting is that the defendant or age type of incidents were in Utah and smashed.

What is the evidence that he consciously disregarded the risk associated with the presence of the block?

Justice Gould.

I would assume it'd be his admissions to the police.

There are his admissions to the police, certainly.

He knew that he should not have done it.

I think that the jury, the juries are often instructed that you don't have to leave your common sense at the door.

Leaving a firearm that has a loaded magazine in a car with a 10-year-old child who's watching his father get into a brutal altercation with another person,

kicking him while that man is lying on the ground.

All these other people are coming around and saying, hey, stop that. Don't do that.

And the 10-year-old says, I could see him doing that.

Leaving a loaded firearm with that 10-year-old?

I think that that is the definition of reckless disregard.

And is it because the father is engaged in a fight or is it your position that leaving a 10-year-old with a loaded magazine?

Well, I'm not sure that I would ever go so far as to say it is always a reckless act,

but it is an awful lot of the time, Justice Gould.

You don't have to read very many newspapers in the United States to read a story about some child picking up a loaded firearm

and having a disastrous result.

And in this circumstance where we have a little boy, 10 years old, whose father has just been involved in an accident,

and then jailed on his brakes and jumped out of the car with a baton walking over and smashing the other driver's window,

if you're 10 years old and you're watching that, I'm not sure what goes through your head,

but it's probably not a law school graduate's analysis of a case.

It's probably something like, oh boy, dad is in trouble, what can I do?

And it matters not that there's no bullet in the chamber?

It does not matter.

There are bullets in the magazine and while the defendant gave some testimony about how he wasn't sure

that his son would know how to load the bullets into the chamber from the magazine,

it's not a risk I would want to take with a 10-year-old,

and I think that a reasonable person would not want to take that risk here on.

If the court has no further questions, I will yield to my colleague.

Thank you.

Thank you, Attorney Johnson.

Two quick points.

With respect to the self-defense, it's important to bear in mind the words which were,

the judge told the jury that purposely striking with a baton,

capable of causing serious bodily injury or death, constitutes deadly force.

Nothing else in the jury instructions anywhere else countermanded that.

And the question here is deadly force, not deadly weapon.

And secondly, with respect to reckless conduct,

there's many things that a parent shouldn't do.

And my, uh, Ms. Woodcock has referred to common sense.

There's many things that are not consistent with common sense,

but that doesn't make them criminally reckless.

It has to be a substantial risk.

Thank you very much, counsel.
