Warning, may it please the court. I'm sorry. Hi, this is case number 20, 24, 0189, John

Hermans et al. First textiles coded incorporated, DBA, textiles coded

international TC. Justice Bassett is not able to be with us physically this

morning. However, he will be reviewing this proceeding by recording and will

be participating in the deliberation and decision in the case. With that, attorney

Rowling, please proceed. That's right, Your Honor. May it please the court. In their

40-page opposition. Could you just identify yourself for the record? I'm sorry,

Your Honor. Carl Rowley from Texas and Covern from Textiles Coded Incorporated,

DBA, Textiles Coded International. In their 40-page opposition, the Hermans do

not dispute that they filed two separate lawsuits as a strategy to gain a litigation

advantage against TCI. They expressly acknowledge in their pleadings, in both

this court and the trial court, that they filed these lawsuits with full

knowledge that the first to judgment case would have preclusive effects on

the second case, on the remaining case. They say over and over in their briefing

that they did not have a full and fair opportunity to litigate their property

damages claims. But they did. Yes, they did. Could have not split their claims

or they could have tried the property damages case on September 8, 2022 instead

of moving to continue the case a week before trial. They decided to seek the

stay on September 1, 2022, knowing that it might cause the other case to go to

judgment first. So the first element on Race Judicata, same parties. The

Hermans said that they are not the same parties in this case as they were in

the other case because their lawyers decided to use different class definitions

in the two cases. But the Hermans are the same people through the same flesh and

blood human beings in both cases and the presence of additional parties. It's

absolutely settled under New Hampshire law. Could you have two different

classes under one docket? Absolutely, Your Honor. And an example of that is

the is the Brown case, the same case. Two different class definitions are

brought in single class action lawsuits all the time. It's very frequent. But

you agree that members of the property damaged class could never be bound.

Who were not members of the medical monitoring class could never be

bound by the medical monitoring case. Don't you? I wouldn't say never

bound, Your Honor, but they are not directly bound. These are the non

overlapping class members, correct? They are not directly bound in my view by

Race Judicata. That does not mean that there couldn't be some other ground

later that arises that might bind them to that result that was imposed

with respect to the Hermans with respect to the name plaintiffs. But

you're correct. We do not contend that class members who were not class

members in the medical monitoring case that their claims are barred in the

property damages case. Only those plaintiffs who overlap. So is it

practical matter what happens to them if we agree with you? To the folks

who do not overlap. Well, there are for a variety of options that the

court could take. One of them is to dismiss those claims without

prejudice, such that if they wanted to file additional claims in the

future, they could try and do that and litigate whether or not there is

some ground for those claims to be barred. This again is the non

overlapping class members. How do you address the plaintiff's claims

that you waived this argument by virtue of engaging in this litigation

for years? Your Honor, we did exactly the opposite of waiver and

exactly the opposite of acquiescence. We raised Race Judicata in our

answer to the first original complaint in the case filed in 2017. We

raised Race Judicata again in response to the 2022 complaint. It is

impossible to raise Race Judicata without raising claims splitting

because the first two elements of Race Judicata are claim splitting. Same

parties, same transaction. Might or could have been brought that same

transaction. So there is no question that we raised claim splitting

and Race Judicata initially. We raised it during case structuring

conferences during starting in 2018. For certain, we moved for

stay when the Hermanns tried to separate these cases such that

they could have two trials or two judgments. There is no question

that there was no waiver in this case, and we were steadfast in

that. There's no indication that TCI acquiesced in anything other

than a single trial and a single judgment. And TCI was absolutely

consistent with that throughout the litigation. So the Hermanns

say that the additional parties rule somehow doesn't apply to

class actions. We cite all sorts of cases and they

distinguish some of them by saying, well, that's not a class

action. But what they don't have is a case that says that

it makes a difference whether it's a class action. There is no

case that says that the additional parties rule somehow does not

apply to class action. There could not be such a case. If

there were, if they were right, a single party could file unlimited

class actions arising out of exactly the same transaction. As

long as the lawyer was smart enough to tweak, just change the

class definition a little bit. The only time that Race Judicata

would be applicable to class actions is if a plaintiff's

lawyer messed up and said, ah, I forgot to change the class

definition. That simply cannot be the rule. And there isn't a

single case that I'm aware of in the country that provides for

that. I don't know that that's ever even been asserted in a

lawsuit. We cite case after case in which the claims of

named plaintiffs and absent class members are barred by

Race Judicata. Let me move to the same cause of action

element. The Hermans try to make this issue complicated, but it

is not complicated. It is a transactional test. In a car

accident case, the occurrence is the car accident. In a breach

of contract case, it's the contract. In this case, it's

TCI's alleged contamination of the Hermans' private well. There

is no question that the Hermans could have sought property

damages in the other case. If that's true, it is the same

cause of action. If they could have sought property damages,

it's the same cause of action. That's Finn. That's the

collial case. No one thinks that the Hermans could not have

brought, could not have sought property damages in

the other case. What is the transaction or occurrence in this

case? It is the TCI's alleged contamination of the Hermans'

private well. It's just like the car accident. It's just

like the contract. There is one transaction in this case.

No one has suggested, not the trial court, not the Hermans

that there is a separate or different transaction in the

case. They just look at different facts relating to

remedies or what facts would be needed to prove up damages.

What facts would have been needed to prove up medical

monitoring? But they do not point to another a different

transaction. And that under New Hampshire law is what

controls. Same transaction or occurrence. And there's no

question, Your Honor, that the first to judgment rule,

for example, applies to class action. So the Hermans try to

distinguish our cases. Some of our cases, Sipson, for

example, by saying that they did not involve parallel

proceedings. Proceedings occurring at the same time.

They only apply to sequential proceedings. But if

parallel cases were exempt for some reason, from race

to decada, there would be no need for a first to judgment

rule. It doesn't matter whether the cases were filed and

proceeded in parallel or in sequence or

consecutively. It doesn't matter when they were filed

under the case law, where they were filed, which one was

filed first. Either case can be first to judgment.

Should the non-overlapping class members have

received notice prior to entry of the dismissal?

Entry of the dismissal in the medical monitoring case.

They did not receive notice. Your Honor, we did ask

suspenders that they receive notice. This is what

defendants do. They want to make sure that as many folks are

bound by it as possible. But there would have been no

point really in giving them notice before the final

judgment was entered. Because by the time this

court ruled in the medical monitoring case, it was

over. I mean, that was race to decada. There was

going to be a final entry of judgment on the merits on

that separate case that they chose to file as a

separate case, knowing this risk, acknowledging this

risk in their pleas in this case and in the trial

court. The only reason that the other case was

able to reach judgment before this case was that

the Herman split their claims. It couldn't have

happened if they didn't split their claims. Am I

correct that you were in favor of a stay back in

September of 22? And it was the Hermans that wanted

to go to trial? Yes, Your Honor. We did, in fact,

did move for a stay, which was entirely consistent

with the position that TCI took since the beginning

of the case, not to separate the cases. We moved

for a stay. The Hermans opposed that motion for

months. We spent a lot of money preparing for

that September 8, 2022 trial. And at the very

last minute, they decided the Hermans decided to

move to stay. And when you objected to the stay

of the September 22 trial, what was your argument?

Your Honor, we did not object to the stay of the 2022 trial.

We moved for stay previously, and then at the last

minute, the Hermans also moved for stay. I'm

sorry if I misstated my question. What was the

basis for your request to stay the September trial

initially? They were treated up until June of 2022.

I believe June 23 of 2022. Let me make sure I get

this date right. June 23 of 2022. They were

treated in the trial court as consolidated for

discovery, as consolidated for motions practice,

and the understanding up until that date was that

they were going to be tried together. One trial,

one jury, one judgment. It wasn't until this

court accepted our Rule 11 petition that it became

more apparent what the Herman strategy was.

They wanted to try the property damages case

first and then use that verdict in a later trial

of the medical monitoring case if they won the medical

monitoring certified question. That was their plan

to get two bites of the egg. There is no question

about it. They explained it in their briefing.

Then they decided to change their minds. You know,

your Honor, TTI spent a large amount of money

preferring for that trial. And then there was

another trial setting in April of 2024, which

was for five months. When the case was already

barred by Race Judicata, it was already barred.

You see, I prepared to try that case in April of 2024.

The only reason that this, that the medical

monitoring case became first to judgment

was that the Hermans decided not to try the case

in 2022. The equities in on this issue are

certainly not on the Hermans side.

Out their opposition, the Hermans conflate

continuously over and over claim preclusion,

which bars any claim that might or could have been

brought in the other case, the first to judgment case,

with issue preclusion, which is limited to what was

actually litigated page after page. They make this,

they conflate these concepts in virtually every section of

their opposition. For Race Judicata, differences

in theories between the cases do not matter.

That's the Finn case. Different claimed injuries don't matter.

That's the Simpson case. Different remedies don't matter.

Different damages don't matter. Different damages, evidence

does not matter. That's Khalil and East Marine,

very importantly. The U.S. Supreme Court has

forcefully rejected the idea of equitable

exceptions to Race Judicata. There are equitable

exceptions to collateral estoppel. It's a completely

different doctrine. It's based on what actually

happened, what was actually decided, what issues

were actually presented, what claims were actually

pled. Race Judicata is not based on any of

those things. It's based on same parties, might or

could have been bought, in other words, same

transaction, and final judgment on the merits. That's

it. None of these other, they're red hairs. They

have nothing to do with Race Judicata, but it's

page after page of their opposition. There is

nothing unfair. This is the Khalil case. Nothing

unfair about enforcing Race Judicata when

claims could have been brought in one suit, which

clearly could, but were not. Thank you, Attorney

Brownlee. Your red light is on. Thank you, Your Honor.

Good morning. Good morning. May I please

the Court? Kevin Hannon on behalf of Pelley's.

TCI asked the Court to leave hundreds of property

owners whose soil and groundwater contaminated

with a known toxic chemical, a highly toxic

chemical, without their day in court on any of

their claims, not even any element of their

claims. A finding for TCI would mean that

owners of property contaminated with toxic

chemicals would never get their day in court

on any issue in their case because of a claim

that could not be litigated in the state

medical monitoring without present physical

injury. That can't be the case here. No

issue or claim in the property damage case

has been litigated, and TCI doesn't

identify a single one, excuse me, that

had been litigated. This Court should affirm

the trial court's order as it's a finding

that the medical monitoring class and the

property damage class are different

parties, not the same parties, affirm

the trial court's order that the

medical monitoring case was not the same

cause of action as the property damage

case, and also affirm that obviously

the trial court's decision that raised

Judicata does not apply, but the Court

should also find that the judgment in the

medical monitoring case was not a final

judgment on any issue in the property

damage case, and even if you were to find

that the elements of raised Judicata were

met, you should find that TCI's

defense of raised Judicata, which is

based on claim splitting, they say it

over and over again, does not exist

because TCI participated in and

acquiesced to two cases proceeding

simultaneously and consolidated for

many years, more than four years in the

same court in front of the same judge

and without a correction. Why wouldn't

the Hermanns have gone to trial in

September of 22 then? Originally

your Honor, I thought that there would

be some issues that would be resolved

that could apply to the medical

monitoring case. As we said and

actually it was a joint motion by the

parties, it wasn't the Hermanns

moving alone, we said that we

recognized that we did not have that

a determination of liability in the

property damage case will not

necessarily resolve a liability

questions in the medical monitoring

case, and we cited authority that

said that a class action settlement

would not be binding on individuals,

not a member of the class.

So my originally thinking was that

we could conclude some issues in the

property damage case and realized

preparing the case that was not

true, corrected that position and

then informed the court, which is

entirely consistent with what we

present here. They were not the same

parties here, clearly the property

damage case members cannot

litigate the medical monitoring

interests because the medical

monitoring interests are defined by

elements, operative facts that are not

in the property damage case and the

medical monitoring case

members could not litigate the

property owner's claims because they

don't assert the right to property

ownership required to bring those

transaction or occurrence allows the

same question. So the transaction or

occurrence you're going to use the

language for example in Finn is a set of

operative facts that lead to a right

to relief. So what is it in this case?

In this case for medical monitoring

it's number one exposure to toxic

chemicals at certain levels and for

certain durations that result in an

increased risk of serious disease that

that increased risk of serious disease

arises to a level that makes it

medically necessary for diagnostic

testing and that diagnostic testing

available and as this court has

ruled part of that is present for

the property damage. For property

damage it's interference with well

first of all its ownership of

property and interference with

property rights such as annoyance of

discomfort and loss of use and

enjoyment. All those

elements of the cause of action

we need to prove. What is

I mean attorney Rowley says it's the

contamination of private wells. Well

isn't that reach both sets of

claims? Well actually in the property

damage case the claim was

contamination of private wells and

contamination of soil on properties

not an element. Here for the medical

monitoring case there's a different

transaction in terms of different

element of transaction in terms of

timing. The exposure that's

necessary for the medical monitoring

case started soon after the plant

began operating. For the property

damage case the distinct operative

fact was that the harm occurred or

began to occur in May 2016 and that's

evidence in the supplemental

notice that went out to the class

in 2024 this year that identified

May 2016 as the operative date for

the property damage case. Is the

exposure theory that you're

mentioning exposure through the air

or through the water? Well it was

the contamination of properties occurred

during 3D air. The exposure for

human exposure occurred through

consumption of household water at

certain levels and for certain

durations of time. And those are

key because for example plants

could have proved negligence duty

and breach of duty but still not

have a cause of action under

medical monitoring as this trial

court recognized because it would

not complete the causal chain that

gave you a right of action.

Another definition if we look at the

fin case is the same cause of

action is right to recover. Well

plants wouldn't have a right to

recover on the medical monitoring

case if it wasn't for exposure at

particular levels that created a

significant increased risk and

disease that that increased

risk of disease was sufficient to

require medical testing,

diagnostic testing but for those

elements and as this court ruled

the presence of present physical

injury there would be no claim for

medical monitoring and in fact

this court ruled that there was no

claim for medical monitoring absent

proof of present physical injury

which is not a required element in

the property damage case. The cases

could have been brought together

to subclasses certified.

Well your honor it would be very

difficult because there was not an

overlying class definition that

would apply to both of these because

of how distinct the class members

were so what you see in many of the

cases that DCI sites there's the

same class defined as the same

members bringing two different

claims but here it was not the

same each class was not the same

members the same class of members

they did overlap right there was some

overlap your honor but that those two

classes were certified to vindicate

two entirely different legal

rights based on different timing

and different characteristics property

ownership versus exposure at

significant levels. Going up on the

chief's question that could have

been brought in the same action in

theory your honor you could plot

both class definitions into each

case but that would be form over

substance here it would be form over

substance because there was not one

overall class that would have

defined the different interests in

each and it's clear because not one

class neither class overlaps the

other or vice versa because of the

difference in class members in each

case. So here again we had very

different causes of actions the trial

court properly ruled that the property

damage case is a distinct cause of

action from the medical monitoring

case it was a different group of

operative facts without those operative

acts including present physical

injury there was no right to acclaim

as this court ruled and it can't be

that a claim that does not exist under

new hampshire law that cannot be

litigated under new hampshire law which

this court ruled could have preclusive

effect over another claim that does

the medical monitoring case as this

court ruled could not be litigated

and so not only were not any facts

in the medical monitoring case

any facts in the property damage case

litigated in the medical monitoring

case they could not because that

medical monitoring case could not be

litigated in new hampshire as

presented. Was it the intention when

you filed the joint motion to state

that the two matters would go to

trial together? Yes because at that

point we believe medical monitoring

would go forward and and every

structuring order that was put in

place had none of which TCI

objected to set the cases for

trial at the same time so the the

intention was at that time in

recognizing that the overlap that

there was very little overlap in fact

in those cases meant that they the

better course was to allow the

medical monitoring decision to

resolve. Can you respond to attorney

Rowley's argument that this with

respect to acquiescence or way over

that the TCI raises repeatedly

including in the answer the first

complaint it's structuring

conferences or something? Well

first of all your honor at the time

that they answered originally there

was no second judgment for race

due to God to apply so we go to the

motion to dismiss there were two

different motions to dismiss and each

of the individual cases no objection

at that time to their being separate

cases then they filed two separate

answers we've had consecutive

multiple structuring orders where

both case numbers have been listed

set to go forward actually in the

transcript that Mr. Rowley

referenced there's no objection TCI

by to forward two cases going

forward simultaneously that

transcript actually asked the

council for TCI at the time asked

whether there would be two separate

trials and the court said we would

deal with that issue as the case moved

on but they would be treated as

consolidated and of course at the time

of the order of certification we had

one class certification hearing for

both classes and TCI never objected

at that time we simultaneously opposed

witnesses some applicable to one

case or the other and and at no

point during any of the structuring

order conferences or in the structuring

orders

did TCI object and if we look at

ruled our section 26 of the

restatement of judgments as the

failure of the defendant to object

to splitting the claims claim is in

effect as an acquiescence and the

splitting in a claim here there was

active participation in other words

that TCI all along participated

without objection to

these two claims being presented

together and just this kind of way as

you suggested that when the joint

motion occurred and there are other

motions for stay they argued that these

case cases should move in parallel

so here there's that according to

the restatement of judgments there is

no claim splitting defense because TCI

participated in these two cases

act moving simultaneously being prepared

simultaneously in front of the same

judge and in front are and in the

same court and this is not a

situation where any part of a claim

was held back or litigated or tried

to be sprung on the defense later after

a judgment they knew from the beginning

that these two cases were proceeding

pair parallel without any objection

and we cannot we could not find what

they suggest that there has to be

some affirmative objection when all

their conduct showed that they acquiesced

and participated in these two cases

moving in parallel and the other thing

to point out again is that the medical

monitoring case is clearly distinct

from the property damage case because

when the medical monitoring case went

up on appeal the only issue that was

being addressed in the medical

monitoring case was medical monitoring

without present physical injury as

they claim TCI didn't play any

issue in the property damage case

before this court in the notice of the

appeal in fact no facts were

determined by this court's decision

in the medical monitoring case and the

medical monitoring case could only

preclude class members from bringing

a claim again without present physical

injury had no other effect thank you

very much thank you very well you

reserve one minute yes rather first

it's more of the same conflating

issues with facts with theories

speaking about them as the they're

all the same and as if somehow

they're the equivalent of a cause of

action for race judicata purposes

they are not when we say medical

monitoring cause of action that's not

cause of action in the same race

judicata sense and i should give you

the site of px3 at pages 19 and 60 through

61 is where we raised race judicata

mr. hannon just made our our waiver

response case he said we consistently

advocated and in fact i think we're

successful until the rule 11 petition

was accepted for a single trial with

a single judgment how can that be

waiver of claim splitting the plan was

to have a single trial and a single

judgment there couldn't possibly have

been waiver up until that point in

time turn around your red lights oh

thank you thank you very much council

this case is submitted take a brief

recess
