This is case 2024, 0560, JNC properties, LLC versus

Reister Realty, LLC.

Good afternoon.

Very much be pleased with the court.

My name is Jeffrey Christensen.

I represent Reister Realty.

What we're dealing with in this case is a contract to purchase an apartment building

that was drafted by the plaintiff, the buyer, JNC properties to purchase this building for $1.3 million.

After they purchased it, there's an internal email from JNC properties.

Their plan is to raise the rents from $800 a month to $1,500 a month with little to no renovations.

And that new revenue stream would be worth $1.7 million.

So why is that relevant to our analysis?

That's relevant to the specific performance question and whether there's an adequate remedy of law.

Because here, this is a case where there is an adequate remedy.

You only have this financial incentive that's no different than buying a annuity or a bond or a stock.

You're not buying this property for personal use.

You're not buying to live in it.

You're buying it as part of an investment portfolio.

And the equitable remedy of specific performance is something that requires, as a necessary prerequisite,

well-established in New Hampshire law, that there be no adequate remedy of law.

There's a number of New Hampshire cases that the defendant and the plaintiff cited that recognize

that this is the usual remedy.

It's the ordinary remedy in land sale cases.

But it's not the automatic remedy.

It's not the universal remedy.

There haven't been any cases in New Hampshire that deal with a situation

where the buyer is buying it purely as a financial investment.

But there was evidence here.

The buyer, in this case, had a contract with a contingency that said,

we want to inspect all 12 units before we buy it.

They testified they didn't get to see all of these.

They didn't get to see the condition of the property.

They wanted to buy it anyway.

It didn't matter what the condition was.

They're a real estate investor.

They're buying it as part of their portfolio.

They calculated the value of this investment.

It's a stream of revenue.

It's a stream of rents that come in.

And that will be worth 1.7 million with no costs, no renovation costs.

That's going to be the value.

We're going to pay 1.3.

We get 1.7.

That $400,000 difference, that's an adequate remedy of law.

While New Hampshire hasn't addressed this yet,

there are several cases outside of New Hampshire

that have addressed this issue.

There's a case in Minnesota about farmland where the buyer was buying it,

not to use it, not to live on it, but solely to rent it out to a third party.

And in that case, the court said,

because any equivalent parcel of farmland

would serve these same investment purposes,

the uniqueness of the land is a less weighty factor here,

calling for specific performance.

The court denied specific performance

and remanded it for the damages question.

Let's see the exact same situation here.

They're not planning to use it.

There's no evidence that they have any particular interest in this building.

They just want an apartment building that provides rent,

the present value, which is calculated to 1.7 million.

What deference do we owe to the trial court?

In this case, this is a question of law.

Now, the trial court has discretion

when it comes to the equitable remedy of,

does the equity support this?

Once you get past that threshold question,

is equitable remedies available?

But here, there should not have been an equitable remedy.

And you shouldn't have even gotten to this question

because of the statute of frauds issue

that we're dealing with here.

So when we have this contract that provides for, among other things,

a financing contingency that was drafted by the buyers

with specific dates that they were required to meet,

one of which was applying for financing within two days.

They didn't do that.

It took them about two weeks.

There was a financing deadline that they had to meet,

by which point they had to either terminate the contract

back out, prove that they had financing,

or waive the financing contingency,

and say, we're going to proceed for just on cash.

They didn't do any of those three in the contracts,

is if you don't, the seller has the right to terminate.

It's an unqualified right that has no time limit

on when they can terminate, no restrictions

on what your motivation has to be for terminating.

Right, but after all those deadlines,

your client didn't terminate.

It didn't terminate, not immediately.

After all these deadlines passed, though, correct?

Right, once the financing contingency expired,

and the buyer didn't do what they were supposed to do on that,

now there was a little bit of a delay,

it was over Thanksgiving, but the seller then said,

hey, we've looked at everything,

we're not going to go forward.

We're not going to agree to the extension

that you requested.

And that's really where it came in,

because there was an email from the buyer

requesting an extension to the financing deadline,

requesting an extension to the closing date,

and the seller never signed that.

And the buyer testified, well,

it doesn't matter that they didn't sign it,

because before that email,

they agreed to waive the financing contingency entirely.

And I said, extend in the email,

but they agreed to waive it.

And that's where the statute of frauds issue comes in.

The New Hampshire court required,

or New Hampshire law requires,

that any land sale contract,

be in writing signed by the party

against whom it's being enforced.

There's good reasons for that.

We want to promote certainty,

protect from frauds and perjuries,

reflects the concerns about the reliability

of oral evidence.

New Hampshire says that doesn't apply

just to the contract itself,

but to any amendments to the contract,

those also have to be in writing

that comes from the Langdon case.

The trial court said that only applies

if the amendment relates to one

of the essential elements of the contract,

the purchase price, the parties,

and the land to be conveyed.

Any other provision,

you can amend with an oral agreement,

but that's contrary to the applicable case law.

In the Langdon case,

you had a purchase and sale agreement

that was expressly subject in writing

to the consent of a third party

that was affiliated with the seller.

That third party didn't consent.

The seller said, tell you what, flip a coin.

If it comes up heads, I'll sell it to you anyway.

Flip the coin, it came up heads or whatever it was

in favor of the buyer.

Great, it should be sold.

The buyer said they sued for specific performance,

and he waived that contingency third party consent.

The court said it didn't matter.

You might have had this oral agreement to flip the coin,

but that was an oral agreement

that did not satisfy the statute of frauds.

That agreement did not affect

one of the three essential components of the contract,

the purchase price of the parties, or the land.

That was an extra piece of the contract,

just like this financing contingency was.

The statute of frauds should apply under that Langdon case.

Isn't this under quite your first argument?

Your first argument is essentially

this was the sale of a business.

You can take the delta between their expected rents

and the purchase price, $400,000,

and that's their damages.

And there are cases that say,

if you're selling a business,

it's a measure of damage.

Here you're saying, no, this is a sale of land,

it needs to be written down,

and AMMs need to be written down.

And our cases are clear that land sales require a right,

and land sales are subject to specific performance.

So it really doesn't matter either way.

So to the extent that this is land,

the statute of frauds means that this contingency,

the alleged waiver over the phone, doesn't matter.

It's not enforceable.

If you get past that and say,

either the statute of frauds doesn't apply,

or because it's not land, it's a business,

or the statute of frauds is satisfied for some other reason,

then you get to the question of,

should equitable remedies be applied here?

And they're no, because that threshold question of,

is there an adequate remedy of law,

is not satisfied, but is an adequate remedy of law?

In this case, that equitable relief

actually becomes inequitable,

because you're looking at a decision where either,

should the seller be subject to pay this lost profit,

this $400,000 difference that the buyer

is expecting to receive?

Or should the buyer get that profit by buying the business

that they expected to be able to turn it into?

Which as a practical matter says,

who should pay that profit that the buyer was expecting?

Is the alleged wrongdoer or the tenants

who are essentially innocent bystanders?

The trial court, with respect to specific performance,

the trial court referred to language that I think you rely on

in Dow versus Northern Railroad,

with respect to the plaintiff having a particular

liking to the land as dicta.

Is that erroneous?

I believe it is, your honor,

because there are other cases that also rely on that,

in New Hampshire and outside of New Hampshire,

that refer to being the primary motivation

to have a full or a specific liking to the land.

Yes.

The XTV Downing case also refers to that.

Equity will decrease specific performance

for a contract for land,

because the damages recoverable of law

may not be a complete remedy to the purchaser

to whom the land may have a particular and special balance,

sorry, peculiar and special balance.

There was no evidence of that here.

The court said, the trial court said,

well, if it's land automatically,

the only question for specific performance

is, do they have the money to buy it?

They do have the money to buy it, great,

it gets granted automatically.

This threshold question of,

is there a adequate remedy of law,

is inherently and inescapably satisfied,

is basically how the trial court ruled.

And that doesn't satisfy the fundamental question

of New Hampshire law,

and doesn't satisfy the equities, as I mentioned.

That imposes that burden on the tenants

rather than the seller.

So, if you're going at specific performance,

and if you look at the other cases

that have addressed land sales for investment purposes,

they specifically address this question.

There was a case in Idaho where it says,

the evidence fails to show

that the plaintiffs need the land in question

for any particular unique purpose,

which is one of the main reasons

for granting specific performance.

On the contrary, the plaintiff's own evidence,

like in this case, that email,

shows that they seek to obtain the land

only so that they may resell it for a profit.

Under these circumstances,

specific performance would bring the plaintiffs

no greater relief than with damages in the amount

that was the Watkins case in Idaho.

The Miller case in Wisconsin,

where it was a sale of a business,

similarly unique, says in a case in which

a contract is for the sale of an entire business,

the buyer's negotiations to resell the property

enabled his loss to be from the breach

to be exactly monetized.

The case for specific performance collapses.

If you could give the buyer their lost profit

or the building, you're faced with this decision,

which one should they get?

There's no reason to give the land to the buyer

instead of that lost profit

when their motivation was purely financial.

It doesn't get the buyer anything,

it only penalizes the seller,

it only penalizes the tenants.

If it's a lion item in a spreadsheet,

what's the point of specific performance?

If there were some evidence that the buyer

wanted this land for some particular reason,

they had plans to redevelop it,

they were gonna use it themselves,

some particular characteristic

that they were interested in,

but there wasn't any in this case.

The only evidence was that they were going to buy it,

they didn't need to do any inspections

that were gonna buy it anyway,

regardless of the condition.

They weren't gonna develop it,

they said with little to no renovations,

we can raise the rent and increase the revenue

and get that revenue straight.

The motivation was purely financial,

so give them a purely financial reward.

Give them the lost profit that they were seeking,

that's an adequate remedy.

Now there was one other issue

that I do want to touch on briefly,

and that's the question of agency,

that underlie a number of questions

that came up with the trial,

evidence that was excluded under the hearsay rule,

because the closing agent was not an agent of the buyer,

documents that weren't disclosed

because the closing agent wasn't an agent of the buyer.

And the trial court ruled that the closing agent

was not an agent based on the Denton case out of Florida,

but ignored the primary holding in that case.

So in that case, the buyer didn't have enough funds

to close as of the closing date,

and the closing agent said, that's fine,

you can come tomorrow and bring the rest in,

it'll be fine.

And the trial court said,

well the closing agent does not have the authority

to bind either party to a new contract,

is not empowered by a contracting party

to negotiate changes to the term.

That was the Denton case,

but here the trial court said,

even though they're not an agent,

they are empowered to negotiate and bind the other party,

because of these emails with the closing agent,

where the closing agent is emailing both sides

back and forth, can you do December 9th?

Can you do December 10th?

So in other words, the trial court

had this contradictory ruling that said,

they're not an agent for the purposes of discovery,

their emails didn't need to be disclosed when requested,

but they are an agent for the purpose

of binding you to a contract.

And that's contrary not only to the Denton case,

but New Hampshire law, which says,

for a contract to be formed,

acceptance needs to be communicated to the offeror,

not merely to an intermediary.

So if somebody makes you an offer,

hey, I wanna buy your house,

if you go tell a third party,

I'm going to accept that,

but you don't actually communicate

that acceptance to the offeror,

there's no contract form.

So when the closing agent is negotiating with these parties,

saying, hey, when are you available?

When are you available?

I'm available December 9th.

Great, that means there's an agreement

to close on December 10th.

That shouldn't be if that party is not an agent.

So we have these contradictory rulings,

but those emails are part of where we get,

and I see my legs turned on,

so I'm gonna stop here.

Thank you.

May it please the court?

I'm Joshua Gordon, I represent JNC Properties LLC,

one of the principles of which

Jeffrey Hushame is here this morning,

this afternoon.

JNC asks this court to defer the evidentiary rulings,

the jury verdict, and the trial court order

requiring the seller to transact the property

on the agreed terms.

Specific performance is the standard remedy

for land transactions in New Hampshire.

This was an ordinary commercial land sale

among sophisticated businessmen

using a forum contract, standard financing,

with the typical vagaries of scheduling,

and one party's regret at under-valuating herself.

So is this a sale of a business or a sale of property?

A sale of property.

The changes in the settled law

urged by Racer would cause turmoil

in land sales in New Hampshire.

If adopted, no one would know

that they're going to actually get the place

that they bought, and Racer says

it's not trying to overturn 200 years of law,

but the law makes the very fair assumption

that land is not fungible, every piece in particular.

And that's what Doe's Dicta in Dow explains.

It's not an exception, it's an explanation.

Thus the general rule that is for real estate,

remedy is specific performance.

The law allows deviation from that

only when there's significant equitable reasons.

Here there's no allegation of fraudulent inducement

or anything like that.

So as a matter of law, if the matter involves sale of land,

specific performance is the only remedy

subject to equitable exceptions in terms of...

That's the law, and that's been the law for so long

that there isn't some of the essence language in...

But equity only operates

where there's no adequate remedy at law.

I mean, that is the threshold inquiry,

and I think what they're saying is that should apply here

because there is that adequate remedy.

Having to prove a particular liking

is an extreme minority view.

And it's not a particular liking,

it's the threshold question for equity to operate,

is there an adequate remedy at law?

And I think the argument here is yes,

in this case there is,

because it's a kin to sale of a business.

No, these people wanted this piece of land,

and why they wanted this piece of land is

maybe it was uniquely profitable,

maybe they like it, maybe it's got a good view,

but it's this piece of land.

And even in a cookie cutter suburb,

the bar is so low, even in a cookie cutter suburb,

the buyer would say,

well, I like this lot better than that one.

But isn't there a two-part inquiry

that has to begin with the question,

is there an adequate remedy at law?

I don't think so, but the time for that has passed.

So to answer the chief's question,

your position would be any sale of real estate,

you jump immediately to a specific performance analysis.

Yeah, I think this is an interesting historical exercise,

but it's not really the current reality.

The land's not different now,

there's been a part of buildings in Manchester

for a hundred years, and nothing has changed.

There's no significant equitable reasons

that would undo the general rule

that you get specific performance.

Even for an investment property,

you'd acknowledge this is an investment property

for your client, right?

Well, I can't really acknowledge that

because I don't know.

There was no testimony about why J&C bought this.

They own other properties, they're hands-on landlord,

and they bought this property for their reasons

and whatever reasons they are,

those were connected very much to this corner in Manchester.

But isn't that distinguishable from a family

who decides that that corner is the best place

to raise their family?

I don't think so.

Land isn't manageable, every piece of land is particular,

and I don't think you can exchange this one for that one,

that the other one might be less profitable

or harder to fix, or has a roof that leaks or something,

and they are particular to this piece of land.

Your opponent's side to Miller versus Wissie Broadcasting,

Judge Posner, has a contrary view.

How would you distinguish that case?

I think that the law in New Hampshire is so well settled,

and if this court would adopt the suggestion of my brother,

I think land sales, buyers and sellers or at least buyers

of land wouldn't know quite what to do.

Am I going to get this piece of land that I contracted for?

Or am I going to get some other thing?

Or am I going to get a pile of money?

I wanted this piece of land.

And so while there may be exceptions

and other jurisdictions, this is so well settled

in New Hampshire that, as I said,

I think it would make the turmoil,

and I think as that turmoil's reached everyday buyers

and sellers, probably there would be solutions like

land of the essence causes or something like that

to avoid it, and then there of course would be

this is settled, and it's so well settled

that there is exceptions to the doctrine.

You have to show significant equitable reasons.

So this is a transaction that involves a sale of property.

Explain to me why the statute of frauds

doesn't apply to all the various oral agreements

that were made regarding financing,

contingency, the closing date, all that stuff.

Waste or waived the closing date

and the financing contingency, I think that's...

Orally, right?

Orally.

And to avoid uncertainty in land sales,

the statute of frauds applies to the property,

the price, and the parties,

but not to every term of the contract.

And oral modifications of other terms are allowed.

And until December 3rd, which was after the contract date,

raster conducted itself as if they were

in a contractual relationship.

The contract called for a November 30 closing date

and any assent by raster to a date in December,

any date after November 30 would be a waiver

and raster repeatedly assented.

They assented to third parties, though.

Do you agree with that?

Pardon me?

Their assent was to the third party

to the title contract.

Oh no, right after the Hall Street settlement

of the other property that they bought from these people

on the 29th, there was a meeting,

a conversation afterwards,

and the Steve April, my brother's client,

conceded that he told J&C that a closing

during the weekend of December 6th should work out.

That same day, Mr. April emailed the closing agent

that December 9th works for me.

The jury found that raster agreed

to extend the closing date beyond November 30.

So these are oral agreements,

but made in the presence of J&C,

not just to the closing agents.

The closing agent is an agent.

Well, there's two conceptual ways

of looking at the duties of a closing agent.

An economist might say the agent has no duties

to anybody, just an agent,

you know, the loyalty is to the transaction.

They essentially represent the transaction.

But the cases show that the closing agent

is essentially appointed by both parties

with a duty to facilitate the transaction

in a prudent manner,

which includes scheduling and closing.

The duty to both parties is a special appointment

as in most transactions,

it's an escrow agent who holds the funds

for the deposits or the settlement amount

when the closing comes,

and thus he adds fiduciary duties to both parties.

And arguably the escrow agent has duties

to the municipality if there is prurated taxes

or utilities, but in no way does the closing agent

work for only one party.

And here in fact, the agent had specific duties

to raster, he had duties to pay off raster's debt

on the building that raster previously had.

So raster's communication with the closing agent

were relevant at trial,

and the Superior Court made no error in that.

So your position is that the closing date

is not an essential term?

Closing date is not an essential term,

I think that's, I can't cite the case,

but I think that's pretty well settled.

My brother raised one more issue

about the proposed addendums

that J&C proposed written addendums,

and my client was, that was an attempt at formality,

but the writing is unnecessary,

and because memons can be oral,

and so the fact that those were not signed is just.
