Number 2240506, State of New Hampshire versus Raymond LaForest.

Morning, Attorney Baldrige.

I understand you reserved one minute.

That's correct, Your Honor.

Robert Baldrige for State of New Hampshire.

The issue in this appeal is simple.

There's the Interstate Agreement of Detainers, the 180-day speedy trial

deadline to try defendant to not begin to run until he has

until the defendant has called to be delivered to the prosecutor

and the appropriate court in the prosecutor's jurisdiction

his request for final disposition of the untried

indictment or complaint that resulted in the detainer.

The defendant was indicted for a felony offense committed in Gotham.

Under RSA 496-1 and Article 17 of the State Constitution,

the appropriate court to try this offense is the Hillsborough North Superior Court.

Is appropriate court defined anywhere in the act?

It is defined in A-2, which defines it as

municipal court district court or superior court.

It's not defined as the court in which the defendant's proceedings are being

held or anything like that.

That's not the definition used.

But we know it has to be a particular court because it is the

appropriate court in the prosecutor's jurisdiction.

How should service be accomplished? Should it be the Sheriff's Completing Service?

The agreement states that the warden shall

provide the request to the appropriate prosecutor

and the court and require certified mail and return receipt requested.

Service should work if the warden tells the warden he wants a

final disposition after being notified of the detainer.

The warden is to forward the paperwork to the inmate,

return receipt requested, and the defendant's burden to actually make sure

the appropriate paperwork was received by both the appropriate court

and the correct prosecutor. And that's to clearly explain why

the appropriate court in this statute has to mean the Hillsborough North

Superior Court. The appropriate court cannot be an

unconstitutional court. Article 17 explicitly states a person

had the right to be tried in the county or the judicial

district where the offense was committed. The Constitution even described

their right as essential to life, liberty, and the

state of the individual. The whole of that disappeared court

self was an appropriate court on the IED in the situation.

Would it be unconstitutional to try the defendant in that court

would produce an absurd result? How do you respond to the

issue of preservation? Yes, the first page of the trial court's order

on the motion for continuous states that the state argued

that Hillsborough North has not been served

and the IED request cannot proceed. The burden of preservation of the show

that an issue was actually raised before the trial court,

right here the trial court order states it was argued.

And the purpose of preservation is to make sure the trial court had opportunity

to address an argument and that clearly happened here. The trial court goes on

and discusses the state's argument for at least a page and a half.

There was eventually a motion to dismiss file.

10 days later the state file was caught they caught a motion to

reconsider an objection to the motion to dismiss.

And I believe it's paragraph three of that filing states

they still maintains that service has been

not perfected and contradicted a statute. So at least so if the

if the notice had been sent to from Hillsborough North South to Hillsborough

North would you be making the same argument? If the

clerk in the stuff had realized there was an omission to make a case and they should have

filed it. Would you make the same argument? We probably would not try to make the argument.

There is language to say he shall have calls to be delivered so

it's arguable whether that would apply. But in this case

if Hillsborough North had received it we would state that the date that the

Hillsborough North received the paperwork is triggered the 180 days.

Not when Hillsborough South received it but if Hillsborough South forwarded

we would not try to argue that even though the Hillsborough North

had it hasn't been perfected. Right. There's no dispute that

your office that the appropriate prosecutor was placed unnoticed.

They were served. That's correct. Isn't it undisputed that the

prosecutors dropped the ball for lack of a better phrase?

At least one assigned to the trial court level was

confused about what the IED required. There is some

filing that you learned of oppression that

which state entity was responsible for actually bringing the

defendant to New Hampshire and I believe in the

objection to the motion to submit there's some allegation that they

spoke privately and the one prosecutor was

under the impression that it was six months

after he's delivered to the state of New Hampshire.

In other words couldn't the state have remedied any deficiency in notice to

south versus north or north versus south simply by

requesting a hearing and requesting the sheriff's office to begin the

process of returning the defendant. So theoretically the

state could have filed a status hearing saying we received this paperwork

it doesn't look like the court does it can the court schedule a trial date and we

can get this day running. That's a separate question though of when

the actual 180 days would start. The very earliest the earliest the

court ever heard anything about this would have been in June 2024 when the

state filed its most request for continuance.

So this but the statute does says if the

inmates burn because it actually states it starts when he shall

have called to be delivered. So if the inmates burn theoretically if the

even a more expansive definition of the ID

then it still wouldn't begin when the wrong court received it

and as the court said in spring court that infects me again it's

when the prosecutor and the court receives the ID paperwork.

Any arguments that it's inefficient or unfair just arguments to amend the

ID itself. The statute says refers to the appropriate

court of the prosecuting officer's jurisdiction.

Correct. So Hillsborough County's southern district is within the

jurisdiction of the Hillsborough County attorney.

Correct. That is correct. We know how is how is that not a proper

interpretation. Well the language is the appropriate court not a court

the prosecutor's jurisdiction. So just plain language,

statute of construction that would still mean it's the Hillsborough North

and again the Constitution states you have to be give a right to be tried in

the judicial district where the crime committed.

So if the court accepted that argument it would be holding

Hillsborough County's appropriate court to serve even though he cannot be

tried in that district. State content that would produce an absurd result

it's not reported by the language. Are there any I mean it's not unusual for

courts to divide up and in districts? Yes.

And this is an interstate compact. Are there cases from other jurisdictions that

give guidance on this? If they exist the state did not find

them despite looking. The closest example would be the

federal U.S. Attorney's Office to have various districts.

That I don't have a case this time for that.

Some of the language A2 talking about appropriate court and A3 which

requires various courts and officials to cooperate.

That can be explained by the fact that there is an interstate compact.

49 jurisdictions they use different names for the trial courts

so there needs to be a definition of what appropriate court means that

jurisdiction. Those provisions should not be

registered broadly to any court with a subject matter jurisdiction

trifalony is appropriate. And various jurisdictions have

different ways that certain courts are services. Some just have a clerk that's

responsible for a whole county and every court in that county

does service. There's New Hampshire where Hills North, Hill South has two different

clerk's offices. The definitive brief also cites

606A3 which states that courts and state officials have to

cooperate have to enforce the IAB in cooperating with each other.

That should not be interpreted as holding that the 180 days starts

when the wrong court is served or the various courts and officials have duty

to fulfill the defendant's burden for him for at least three reasons.

One A3 cannot be interpreted insistently with A1. A1 states

that 180 starts after the defendant shall have calls to be delivered.

They're clearly placing the burden on the inmate the defendant.

Second, even if the provision was interpreted as requiring other state

officials to fulfill some kind of duty for the defendant

that still not could not require that the 180 days start when any

state official or court receive the IAB paperwork

because A1 language plainly states that is 180 days after delivery on the

appropriate court and appropriate prosecutor. So as we discussed a little

even if Hillsborough South theoretically should have forwarded this IAB

request to Hills North it'd be when Hills North receives the IAB paperwork

that the 180 days starts. And third, holding that the 180 days starts

when the wrong court receives service would not effectuate

the statute's purpose. We know the problem the IAB is meant to address

because it's stated in Article 1. The problem is the uncertainty

caused to rehab programs and treatment programs when the detainer

lodged against an inmate allows the inmate to prevent that problem

by testing the appropriateness of the untried complainer indictment

that was on the detainer by demanding a speedy trial.

It atters courts and prosecutors from filing complaints

and indictments if they aren't ready to try

or that should never have been filed in the first place.

But if you hold that Hillsborough South started the 180 days

the court would create precedent that would require dismissal even if the

appropriate court or the appropriate prosecutor

has not actually received service the IAB request

to relate to dismissals when the correct prosecutor and the correct court

actually haven't done anything wrong. That's not going to deter

the type of problem the IAB was meant to address.

Well is dismissal here with or without prejudice?

It's with prejudice. So isn't the alternative to the trial courts have the

opportunity to dismiss without prejudice? Is that

something that's permitted under the act? I believe the federal has been

amended to allow that. I do not believe New Hampshire's

does allow that. My understanding is dismissal with prejudice.

I can follow the further briefing but my understanding is dismissal with

prejudice and normally it's unless you say without

prejudice it's with prejudice. Well given the lack of resources that

and people that are incarcerated typically have

shouldn't we construe this notice requirement less strictly than this

the state's asking us to? I mean who's responsible for

who was responsible for submitting the IED paperwork to

the southern district with them the warden or was it really is it on the

inmate? It's on the inmate to just check

to return the seat and see who actually received it and the inmate does

have some duty to actually understand how the court

system works but that's just the nature of the IED itself

and this court interpret statutes based on how they are written the words

actually use not inferring some kind of fairness

exceptions. In regards to burden on the inmate

it's not much of a burden it's notifying the warden you should get

return receipt there's always a possibility that

his attorney can file the appropriate paperwork in the

right court once they understand the mix up or even

potentially just file an motion with an attach could theoretically

found a service but the plain language is he shall of course be delivered and it

does not start until the correct court or the appropriate court

correct prosecutor receives service I guess the long answer is

no because that's what the statute says that's a short answer

uh no further questions I'll save the remaining my time for a buttle

Tony Hausman May it please the court Stephanie Hausman on behalf of

Raymond LeForest to the extent the issue before the court is a legal one

the state's entire argument hinges on an assumption that the phrase

appropriate court means the court that has venue or jurisdiction over the

charges but just as Donovan pointed out we don't

need to make assumption about what that phrase means

because Hampshire's IED statute defines it

New Hampshire defines the appropriate court as the

municipal court the district court or the superior court

it does not require a specific judicial district

it does not require service on the courthouse

where the charge is pending and it does not require service on the courthouse

where venue for trial is appropriate under the constitution or

statutes of the state so could the notice have gone to

Merrimack County Superior Court and comply with the statute

well that then brings up the phrase in the entire context

which the state as the Chief Justice pointed out also doesn't address the

appropriate court of the prosecuting officer's jurisdiction

here there is no question that the Hillsborough County Attorney

was served and that the Hillsborough County Attorney has jurisdiction

in both judicial districts of Hillsborough County Superior Court

the state is asking this court to adopt language that the legislature

did not see fit to include I brought this up with the state last week

it's not in the briefs and I can submit the statutes to the court

but five other jurisdictions at least define appropriate court

and the five that I have found all define appropriate court

in the way the state is asking this court to say New Hampshire has

defined in their definition in their definitions definition of appropriate

court so two specifically say in which

the court in which charges are pending and three

talk about the court with jurisdiction of charges

that is the state the language that the state wishes were in the New Hampshire

statutory definition but that language is not there that is not

language that New Hampshire adopted to the extent the issue before the

court the factual one this court must assume the facts

before the trial court at the hearing were sufficient

to sustain its factual finding that Mr. LaForest

served the appropriate court it is the state's burden

to show compliance with the IAD it is their burden on appeal

to show that the trial court clearly aired its factual findings

it's their burden to provide this court the necessary record

it's their burden to timely raise and preserve their arguments

and it's their burden to bring to this court's attention the law

controlling the legal issue the state has not carried its burdens

in this case do you dispute the fact that the trial court

considered this issue as to which was is the appropriate court

yes the trial court's order does address the issue the

appropriate court of the prosecuting officer's jurisdiction

but in the trial court's order also cites facts

that were before the court at the hearing and so

I think in general this issue is going to be a mixed question of fact and law

whether the defendant has served the appropriate court according to

what our statutory language is and according to the facts I'm just asking

whether it's preserved whether what was preserved

the argument regarding that the state's making state says in their brief that

their argument was preserved in two ways one at the hearing

they did not request that a transcript be made of that hearing for this court

to in a motion to reconsider that motion to reconsider was

denied as untimely and the state hasn't

appealed that decision the untimeliness of the motion to

to reconsider but in both the June 24th and the July 24th

2024 orders Judge Messer addressed the appropriate court issue yes that's

right Judge Messer initially made that ruling in her

June 2024 order and the court affirmed that that

ruling in its July order and what was the factual dispute as to whether it was

the appropriate court understanding what the factual

issue was it appears that most of the facts that

the trial court cites in its order were not disputed

there was an agreement that Hillsborough County

Superior Court Southern Judicial District received notice of Mr. LaForest's

IAD paperwork in December of 2023 the state

initially the state asserted that the the 180 days started running from that

date in their initial pleading in in this case

and they cited the paperwork that the

the defendant caused to be served on the Hillsborough County Superior Court

cited the I guess return receipt that record is not part of the state's

record on appeal but those facts don't seem to be disputed

it's unclear from the court's order whether the court's

order was based also in part on just knowledge of the operation of the

two judicial districts of Hillsborough County Superior Court

and whether the computer system or the staffing

or other considerations that would be known to the court

or on the question of whether service in the southern judicial district

was served on the appropriate court pursuant to the statute

unless there are further questions. Can you just

respond briefly to what I understand to be the state's

a principal argument of the state the appropriate court

could never be Hillsborough County south under part one

article 17 under our venue statute under the rules of criminal procedure.

The term appropriate court is defined within the chapter that

this court is asked to look at and so that is

RSA 606A and so that is the the definition that controls for

purposes of the question before the court. So our analysis

is limited to four corners of the statute and the way

and the way appropriate court is defined in 606A.

And yes and our legislature absolutely could have said the

appropriate court is the courthouse that has venue

under RSA four I forget the statute number or

part one article 17 but the the legislature didn't include that

language and so that's not language that's controlling.

Unless there are further questions we ask the court to affirm.

Thank you attorney boss. Yes just to make sure the standard review and the

actual findings are clear. The trial court's court has found that

Hillsborough itself received the paperwork not Hillsborough

or that's page 41 the state's appendix that's the only factual finding

actually married before this court that the Hillsborough was not

served with the IED paperwork so there's no factual findings to

review. It's purely a pure no vote issue for the court.

What is the appropriate court? Statute said the appropriate court

not any court in the states in the jurisdiction the fact that it uses

language the appropriate court necessarily implies

that there are multiple courts as a prosecutor

practice before it has to be a particular court.

We are contending that court has to be the one that can actually try

the case. That is the most logical interpretation of the

statute. So for example if the paperwork was

served on the National Circuit Court even though it's the

prosecutor's jurisdiction that wouldn't be the appropriate court.

That's correct and just to make clear how

ruling that any court the property calls it

county attorneys practice you to multiple courts

all the time they normally practice before the circuit court and it's a

pure court in their jurisdiction the attorney general's

office but at least the jury unit and the homicide unit

practice in every circuit court. I'm sorry it's a pure court

in the state. If I understand the defendant's argument it would be in

service on any court would trigger the 180 days

and the state asked the court to reverse the truck with order

and a vacate decision dismissing the defendant's indictment. Thank you.

Thank you very much counsel.
