This is case number 2024-0250, Keen Publishing Corporation versus Fall Mountain Regional School District, SAU 60.

Morning, Attorney Sullivan. I understand you're in two minutes.

Yes, Your Honor. Good morning, Chief Justice McDonald. Justice is Donovan Bassett and Calvary.

I am Gregory Sullivan and it's my honor to represent the Keen Publishing Corporation in this action, the appellant.

The request, the initial request that ultimately led to this litigation was made by a reporter for the Keen Sentinel newspaper on August 29th, 2022.

That date is important. And some 10 months, 303 days later, the school district, SAU 60, ultimately provided counsel.

Attorney Garrow sent to me a response to that, not only initial request, but that same request was made four times.

Was it for just a report or more than that?

I would like to read exactly what it says. It says, any and all documents from the Fall Mountain Regional School District related to the resolution of an investigation concerning intervener's conduct

by the law firm of Jackson Lewis of Portsmouth, New Hampshire in 2022.

So this argument that it was a request only for the report is just false. It was any and all documents.

Do you agree that either report would fall within an attorney-client privilege and therefore not have to be disclosed?

Did you agree that the report itself, prepared by Jackson Lewis, would fall within an attorney-client privilege and not be disclosed?

Not at all. The attorney for Jackson Lewis was not giving legal advice to a client. They were hired to be an independent investigator.

And this court has found that to be the case in a number of cases in the last five years, prevents a stone or two that immediately come to mind.

Seacoast newspapers versus Portsmouth, they're all independent investigators and not hired to provide legal counsel, so no.

And of course, as I'll get to, even if you wanted to call it that, I'm going to suggest that categorical per se exemptions are dangerous and wrong.

And really violative of the constitutional and statutory framework that this state has to make sure that the citizenry is able to hold its government officials and agencies accountable and responsive.

But that request was made four times.

Now, one of the four, the response, which was a denial every time, was given within five days.

It just shows the lack of appreciation for the importance of the statutory framework here.

But ultimately, what was provided to counsel for Keane Sentinel is this four sentence summary.

And that was provided after the petition had been filed?

After the petition had been filed, yes. 303 days after the initial request.

And it identifies the intervener.

And I must say that I have a redacted and an unredacted brief in front of me, so I am trying to toe the line, which has been extremely difficult,

because what was released to the public identifies the intervener.

The intervener's motion to intervene identifies the intervener.

And while I'm on that subject, the redacted brief of the intervener discloses so many of the underlying facts themselves that the trial court has issued a protective order,

which this court has said that protective order really is still in effect today, I believe.

But the fact that the redacted brief is available to the public today and for the past several weeks, whatever it's been,

makes me question the need for me to be so constrained in my role argument, but I'll try to do that.

Can you go back to that statement that was produced that you just had?

Yes.

And that is an effort, as I understand it, to comply with paragraph 1A of section 4?

That's what they call it.

Were any of the underlying records produced evidencing the payments that were made in that statement?

Negative.

The only thing that the keen sentinel received through me was this four sentence,

call it what you wanted, does not comply with the statute, not even close,

and some of their policies which are available to the public online anyway.

But nothing that the statute requires.

And the statute clearly requires, upon the records of any payment made to an employee of any public body,

upon the resignation discharge or retirement of the employee,

paid in addition to regular salary in a crude vacation, sick or other leave,

shall immediately be made available.

And the two key words here without alteration for public inspection.

Seems the legislature is being particularly emphatic in this situation.

It's, to me, black and white, those words aren't in there by mistake.

They want to see, they want the public to see the records.

We don't have the records.

We don't know how much actually was paid or has been paid under the terms of this agreement.

I think I can use that word, even though there are other words in the intervenance brief that explain it more clearly.

But I think I'm safe to say there was an agreement that Mr. Elliott, after 26 years, his employment was terminated.

And I'd also like to cite, from the case of Union Leader Corporation versus New Hampshire Retirement System,

this court saying that RSA 91A41A was enacted in 1997.

The provision was prefaced by the following findings.

The general court hereby finds that it is essential to the conduct of public business that public bodies,

in order to be accountable to the people, make available all records pertaining to payments made to employees of the public body

in connection with their leaving employment that are not payments associated with an employee's salary and accrued benefits.

And that's exactly what we have here in this case.

Is it your position that the, under 1A, that the disclosure of records of any payment would include any,

the Rejection Lois report or any settlement agreement if there were to be one?

Is your argument that expansive under that provision?

No, not just under that provision, that relates to payments.

Okay, so that provision is not the basis on which you argue that either the report or any agreement, settlement agreement,

if there is one, should be released. That's a separate argument.

That's based on Part 1 Article 8, Part 1 Article 22 of the Constitution. It's based upon Chapter 91A.

But not this provision of 91A.

Well, in fact, this provision of 91A does apply.

But you're right, the report itself and what the documentation Council for King Sentinel has never been able to see.

And it's another era that I believe the trial court made in not allowing,

I had asked for numerous alternatives to what happened here.

Could we please see the documents for attorneys eyes only as we did in the Prevenza case?

Could we have Council for the Plarrings and the Petitioner President during the in-camera review of the documents?

And on that point you point to Petitioner King Sentinel as the basis for requiring Council to be present at the in-camera review?

That language, Your Honor, respectfully is not ambiguous. It's very clear.

The language in King Sentinel?

Yes.

Could you distinguish that case though because that involves sealed court records?

The King Sentinel case that you cited?

I don't see a distinction that makes a difference.

No. We're talking about the public's right to know what the government is up to.

Whether it's contained in court records, as ultimately these records are, or just a request that's denied initially,

91A is very clear as to what the public's right to know is.

From your perspective, is there any kind of an exception under 91A for subsection 6,

which provides every agreement to settle a lawsuit against a governmental unit, threaten lawsuit,

or other claim entered into by any political subdivision, et cetera, shall be kept on file, et cetera,

and open for public inspection? Are there any exceptions to that statute?

Not that I'm aware of. I think that that section, which Council's going to argue we didn't argue down below,

does nothing but reinforce the entire grabberman of chapter 91A.

Can parties contract around that?

No. That's been attempted in this case. I say no.

And it was attempted in the case of Stone versus the city of Claremont,

where this court specifically said you cannot contract around public policy or statutory law,

which is what we're talking about here.

So would a severance agreement fall under that provision?

A severance agreement or a termination agreement? Would that fall under that section?

Yes.

So is there any argument or dispute that what was going on here,

what was hypothetically being settled, was a threaten lawsuit?

No idea whether it was or it wasn't.

We don't have access to any of the significant underlying records in this case.

But what we do know is that the defendant, SAU, is arguing that the rank of the individual involved here is important.

One can settle does not buy that.

In the cases of a police misconduct, and that's what we have here, is governmental misconduct.

And most importantly, it's the response or lack thereof of the supervisory personnel that's at issue here.

And I'm prohibited from detailing why that is in and of itself so egregious and the public should have the right to know

what went on that led up to this ultimate termination.

Well, how should either we or the trial court take into account the privacy interests of individuals

that might have been involved in interviews about this situation?

Isn't that an important factor to take into account?

Of course.

Privacy interests of complainants and witnesses can be dealt with by redaction.

But the de minimis privacy interest in my daughter, my co-counsel tells me to say they have no privacy interest.

A government official in misconduct has no privacy interest with respect to that, but she writes it's de minimis.

And the SAU, the principal, the superintendent, they have no privacy interest in the performance of their official duties

and what they did or did not do in this particular case.

I just want to finish up on that rank argument that they make.

In all the police misconduct cases, there was no distinction between a chief of police and a patrol person.

And they talked about the trial court, talked about the lack of seriousness.

For a teacher employed for 26 years to be terminated as a result of misconduct engaged in during and at the workplace, that is serious.

With respect to the rank, I can think of no government employee more important for us to hold accountable and for us to trust than the teachers of our school children.

Thank you, Attorney Seller.

Thank you.

I understand.

Pellies will be splitting time.

Ten minutes.

Yes, Your Honor.

For the district.

Yes.

Five minutes for the intervener.

Good morning.

May it please the court?

My name is Diane Garrow and I'm here representing the Fall Mountain Regional School District, SAU number 60.

The right to know law does not require that the public have access to all governmental records.

It recognizes in RSA 91A colon 5, 13 exemptions for records that do not need to be disclosed to the public.

Well, how do you get around 91A 4, section 6?

Your Honor, that argument was never raised below and be the position that that statute's pretty clear.

It talks about settling a threatened lawsuit, pending claims, threatened litigation.

There's no evidence that any of those factors were met in this case.

So what do you call it?

What was the nature of the so-called agreement then?

I would say if it was an agreement, it was a severance agreement, separation agreement.

Did you say a separation agreement?

Separance?

Yes.

Excuse me, Your Honor, a separation agreement.

A severance agreement?

A separation agreement.

You could, as Justice Donovan said, severance agreement.

You might be able to use that terminology as well.

And how is that not subject to disclosure under the right to know law?

Under the particular section that talks about the disclosure of settlement agreements.

It has certain preconditions for that.

A threatened lawsuit, pending claims, threatened litigation.

There's no evidence that any of that.

And what exception would apply to a separation or severance agreement?

The exceptions that would apply were the ones that the court found that the district had carried its burden in demonstrating.

They would be the exceptions in RSA 91A5, Roman numeral 4, for confidential personnel,

or other records whose disclosure would constitute an invasion of privacy.

And why can't that be addressed through redactions?

Any concerns with respect to privacy or confidentiality?

Your Honor, I think the mere existence provides information that is protected

and comes within...

And how, to Attorney Sullivan's point, how are the people, the constituents,

the residents in the Fault Mountain Regional School District,

to hold their public officials accountable if they can't have access to an agreement that it entered into?

I don't think, Your Honor, that the agreement goes to what Attorney Sullivan's argument is

as far as holding the government accountable.

There was something that happened that led to the termination of a teacher.

And how the district responded, how the district management responded,

is something that Attorney Sullivan is asking the public has a right to know.

Do you dispute that proposition?

I dispute the proposition, Your Honor, that they have unlimited access to the underlying information.

There was the statement that the district released, the RSA 91A4 Roman No. 1A statement,

which does provide information to the public as far as payments that would be in addition to anything.

Well, on that statement, as I read the statute, it requires production of the actual records,

not the creation of a new document or a new government record.

It's the actual records.

Why weren't the actual records reflecting those payments produced?

As the trial court found, the information in that document conveyed all the information

required by the statute.

The actual records, Your Honor, would have been checks of payments.

Okay, I think the statute speaks in terms of the actual records,

which would be made available immediately, not the provision of a summary,

which may or may not be accurate.

And without, I think the argument is, without the actual records,

one can't check to see if the statement or the summary was accurate.

Wouldn't you agree with that?

I would not agree, Your Honor, that the statement is not accurate

and that there needs to, it's a statement.

How would the public know whether it's accurate or not?

It seems that what the legislature is getting at,

and as I remarked to Attorney Sullivan,

the legislature seems particularly emphatic about documents

or about records created in this context.

The information, my understanding of that statute,

is to provide the public with information if someone leaves the district.

If they're paid anything, that's more than what they're entitled to.

That the public has a right to know.

The statement that was presented includes all of that information in it.

It doesn't vary from other information that's subject to the protective order.

It mirrors information that's in the, in camera documents,

subject to the protective order.

So it conveys the information of, very specifically,

it doesn't tell us how much the SU is paying for this individual's insurance coverage, right?

It gives you the percentage, that's correct, Your Honor.

It doesn't tell you how much.

It doesn't give you the dollar amount, correct.

It does include that lump sum amount, is that right?

It does, Your Honor.

And what was that for?

It was basically a payment in excess of what he was entitled to.

Right, but what was it for?

What was the impetus for paying something in excess of what he was entitled to?

I was not involved, Your Honor, in negotiating that.

So I don't know what the specific dollar figures represented.

But if you look at that alongside the statute that requires public transparency regarding resolution of any claim or other claim,

don't those two concepts marry together and bring any documentation under that statute, under that piece of the right to no law?

In other words, if there's just a random $17,000 payment without any explanation,

I think the inference is that that is settlement of something.

And you've said it's a settlement.

Yes, Your Honor.

I mean, the way I look at those two statutes is you have a specific one that deals with employees,

that deals with what the public has a right to know as far as public employees.

The other one about filing the settlement agreements for threatened pending lawsuits, threatened claims,

is a broader scope for many other types of issues that might arise with municipalities with school districts.

Is it your position that if an employee were to engage in what everyone recognizes as misconduct over a period of a decade

and the SAU were to become aware of it and investigate it,

that there's no right for the public to have access to any of the information beyond the payments made

or the four-line statement that was released?

Is that your position?

No, Your Honor.

My position is it would depend on who the employee is, what the rank of the employee is,

whether or not the allegations and misconduct deal with official duties.

So I take it if it's a teacher, your view is it doesn't have to be publicly available and disclosed?

It would depend what the allegation was involving the teacher.

In this case, we don't have, as this Court has set forth and read in Provenza,

we don't have a high-ranking official, we don't have criminal misconduct,

we don't have someone acting within their official duties.

But if there's a concern, as Mr. Sullivan said, that if the supervisors were not overseeing the employee

or became aware of problems and didn't do anything, then that's certainly something

that the public should have the right to know, isn't it?

I would agree, but that is not this case.

As a trial court found, there was no evidence to support what Attorney Sullivan's allegations are

as far as what the investigation involved.

So I think his claims just aren't borne out by the evidence in the record.

What is your best argument for why the Jackson Lewis report shouldn't be made public?

Redacting information that would involve the privacy of third parties?

I think as a trial court found, it would be difficult to redact that report

to protect the privacy interests of third parties because of the small size of the school,

the nature of the allegations, even with redactions, you could identify people.

The redactions, in some respects, would make the information left in the report misleading.

So it seemed that's a disturbing concept that the right of access to important information

is somehow less in a smaller community because the information might enable someone to identify people.

That's just one factor, Your Honor. My time is up.

Where in 91A do we find support for a distinction based on an employee's rank?

That is found in your case law, Your Honor.

Which case?

Reed and Provenza.

Reed is the case that talked about the seriousness of the offense in weighing the privacy interests

in whether an official was a high-ranking official.

Provenza talked about official duties and interaction with the public.

What?

Provenza involved.

Was a police officer in Canaan?

Correct.

Correct.

A teacher is not a police officer, and I think we did specifically reference the fact that

police officers are held in high esteem because of the important duties they hold.

Why is a teacher different in terms of ensuring the safety of the young people in their charge?

Well, in Provenza, Your Honor, it involved something that occurred in the public.

Official duties was provided or received.

A lot of press coverage here.

We have internal workplace issue.

Didn't involve interactions with the public.

Did not get any publicity.

And was the type of conduct that's generally dealt with internally through a human rights department.

Thank you very much, Your Honor.

Good morning.

May it please the court, Lauren Snow-Chiwick in New Hampshire for the intervener.

I'm happy to take questions at any time.

I do just want to make note.

I appreciate Attorney Sullivan noting the omissions in the intervener's brief.

That was a mistake.

We believe it should be corrected in line with the protective order.

And we're willing to resubmit that.

The protective order is still in place.

So that was an inner burden omission and I appreciate him noticing that.

The trial court decision in this matter was correct.

What the trial court did was balance the privacy interest with the public's interest.

And what they found is the intervener's interest is high in this matter.

So we were previously just talking about what makes that so?

What tips the balance in favor of a person?

And here what they found is the highly personal nature of some of the facts that are found in this case,

which are important.

There's also factors of non-employees that are personal.

And when that starts balancing towards those interests,

it starts weighing in favor of the non-disclosure, which we understand is a high burden,

which was met in this case for the trial court.

The low-ranking employee is also an important aspect to look at

when we're looking at what was the target of this investigation.

So the government conduct is important to learn from the investigation.

Of course, that's the purpose of the 91&A analysis.

However, a lower court has looked at this.

I believe it was Union Leader Corporation.

When you have the workplace misconduct where it's colleague v colleague,

there is a heightened sense of privacy concern between these two

or this isolated situation.

It's not every situation in a school setting,

but when you have a setting such as this,

it starts lending towards in favor of that there is a privacy interest established.

And so why we understand that the court in the case law is this balancing.

So it's not absolute.

So the public, we can't say in absolutes that they should never find out what happens.

But this is a very particular case where all the factors weighed in favor of non-disclosure.

And how can't that be addressed through redaction?

That, thank you, Your Honor, that's difficult in this case.

And the reason, and I think I echo the concern,

it's been difficult for us to maintain throughout this case.

And for that very reason, we can't get away from the fact it's a small community.

A lot of the cases we've seen where redactions may have been appropriate are department-wide.

There might be multiple employees that were looked at.

This is a single employee that was looked at.

So by nature it's very traceable, but that's one aspect.

That's only one factor that goes into consideration.

Just as fast as point, does that create a different 91A regime

if you're in a small community and everyone knows each other?

No, Your Honor.

I think this, it can live in harmony within the 91A analysis.

But there is here a case that does weigh in favor of the non-disclosure

when you have the particularities that we have,

that there just isn't a process in which to protect those interests.

And then the overall goal of the government conduct is not borne by the record.

And that's what the trial court correctly noted,

where what you're looking for is not necessarily revealed in the documents.

How does any documentation that may exist not fall under 91A for subsection 6?

First I'll echo that there's a preservation issue with that.

And so I think when we're looking at whether it falls under that

this was not necessarily a claim or there was an appending claim.

The settlement or the supposed settlement agreement,

hypothetical settlement agreement, if you have one,

doesn't necessarily, it's a part of that or it can be part of a disciplinary process.

And that can then fall under an analysis.

Well, that's part of a disciplinary process.

Why does the person receive a 17 grand?

If it's a discipline, you wouldn't think that they would get anything

beyond what they were entitled to.

Right.

And so in a hypothetical situation such as this,

a lot of times that amount can reflect salary owed

and it may not be in addition to the amount actually owed

or it could be simply a severance.

But a lot of heard the district saying though it wasn't money owed

when I asked the question of them.

Right.

And Your Honor, I would say though from the particularities of it,

it's basically a payment of the salary that was paid out.

It's that these payments were in addition to the regular salary

in accrued vacations, sick or other leave to which the intervener was entitled.

That's different.

Right.

The 17,000 is different than the regular salary in accrued vacation, et cetera.

Yes, Your Honor.

Yes, Your Honor.

The payment made is tied to the agreement.

And what I think you can be clear on though is it,

and this is what the trial court found,

is it establishes by receiving the information that was asked of what was,

how did the parties leave their employment?

What was the agreement?

And so to the point it's,

and this is what in any severance agreement is difficult

because it never really speaks to exactly what happened

because in any sort of separation agreement,

there may be rights that are left on the table.

There may be rights that were not left on the table.

So it never encapsulates the entire process that happened.

And so that's the difficulty in any of these cases

is allowing that information.

What is the intervener's concern about not producing the actual records

that reflect these payments?

Thank you for that question.

So if there's going to be an analysis of the most concerning document,

is that the most concerning document in our record?

No.

But there's still, as the trial court noted,

the settlement, or suppose a settlement agreement

is tied into the personnel record

and is tied into the confidential analysis,

which then needs to be weighed in the balancing.

And so there always is going to be a concern

that's tied in the entirety and the totality of the situation

that should be non-disclosed.

This is a statute directly addressing records of payments

to a former employee.

I mean, that's a provision of law

that the legislature has enacted

with specific concern to the situation.

And I'm not understanding how it cross-relates

to these other concerns.

I mean, it's just a very specific and emphatic directive.

Yes, Your Honor.

And if I may, and I believe the trial court's decision

helps that live in harmony

in the sense that it's complied with the payments,

any payments received or given in this case,

that information was, when request it was handed over,

but then also balanced that there's privacy interest here

that we cannot ignore.

And so that was a manner in which those were protected, as well,

which allowed the balancing test to live in harmony

and within the case law.

Thank you very much.

Go for their time.

Sorry, everybody.

Thank you.

Council just used the word before agreement

that I feel prohibited from using.

However, I can say that, fortunately,

the court has the unredacted briefs,

as well as the redacted brief of the intervener

that fully explains what kind of an agreement it was.

And it called for the payment of strike debt.

Prior to it being promulgated,

it cost the taxpayers $7,220 for an independent investigation,

almost $18,000 as a result of this agreement,

and 80% of health insurance benefits

that the public has no idea whether that was $0.05 or $5,000.

We have no idea and we should.

I want to warn the court in my last few moments

about the danger of categorical exemptions

like the attorney-client privilege,

just because it's in the statute,

like confidential, commercial, and financial information,

like internal personnel practices,

we fell into that categorical exemption trap

in the Fenderman case,

which I take responsibility for,

as well as the court at that time.

It was just wrong.

Every case turns on its own set of facts.

That's something I did learn a long time ago.

The trial court's determination here

that the privacy interests of the complainants and witnesses

couldn't be protected by redaction

is based upon pure, conjecture, zero evidence to that effect.

And as we point out in our brief,

if there's any stigma and embarrassment

that's going to result from the disclosure of information here,

it's on the perpetrator of these events

and on the district itself for their lack of action.

I'm going to say over a period of time,

whatever that might be,

the complainants and the witnesses, if they're identified,

shouldn't be embarrassed, they should be applauded

for their courage.

And as a result of that,

I would suggest to the court

that the balancing interests

that should have been discussed in chambers

with all counsel and counsel

for the petitioner present

should have been discussed.

I experienced it in the case of Union League

versus New Hampshire Housing Finance Authority

that had thousands of pages we had to go through

and came to the right result.

Thank you very much.

Thank you all.
