This is case 2025-0093, Patrice Thomas versus Paul R. Goslin et al.

Good afternoon, Attorney Christensen. I understand you reserve one minute for a bottle.

I have your honor, thank you. May it please the court, my name is Jeffrey Christensen,

and I represent the Goslins, Paul and Stephanie Goslin who are here today.

They own the property that Ms. Thomas is trying to take by adverse possession.

So this is an adverse possession claim relating to a shared driveway.

Ms. Goslin's own the land, Ms. Thomas has an easement,

and a large portion of this is because that she's been letting guests park in the driveway

and therefore now claims to own the driveway.

Since the 70s, these two families have been friends, Paul, his parents,

Ms. Thomas, her husband, his parents, including the current parties.

Paul Goslin was in fact her power of attorney, the executor of her will.

But eventually there is an issue with contractors parking on different parts of the driveway

and the relationship broke down.

Ms. Thomas claimed to have adversely possessed a large swath of the driveway.

That was narrowed down in some judgment to really two areas where carport

either was or currently is.

So carport one is currently there, and it's been there for decades,

is right next to the garage on Ms. Thomas' property, and she parks in carport one.

Carport two was built in around 1993.

There was one decades earlier that came down, but the one relevant to this case is in 1993.

Lasted for about nine years, and then it collapsed in 2002.

When her guests were coming to visit, they would sometimes park in carport two.

Afterwards they parked in the driveway.

After carport two came down,

the Goslin family gave Ms. Thomas an easement across their property for a sewer.

They gave her this easement for free.

Again, these families were very close.

The 2002 plan that was part of this easement agreement, recorded by Ms. Thomas,

recognized that the entire disputed area was owned by the Goslin family.

So carport one was identified in his encroachment onto the Goslin property.

Carport two wasn't identified, wasn't marked, it wasn't on the plan at all.

It was gone. The whole area was just part of the Goslin property.

But in both cases, it's acknowledging that the land under the carports,

or where the carports was, was owned by the Goslins.

That defeats, alone, any claim for adverse possession.

This is an acknowledgement of the Goslin's superior title to that land.

It interrupts any adverse claim, even if the claim was ripe.

At that time, that claim is surrendered because of this plan,

just as if she had executed a quick claim deed saying you own this land.

Does that make the use more open and notorious?

Well, no it doesn't.

Because if you look at the question of notorious first,

the use must be sufficient to notify the record owner, the Goslins,

that a claim is being made to own the land.

How can you be notifying somebody that you are claiming to own their land

when you are publicly recording a document where you claim not to own it?

Where you claim they own it?

So that's not notorious.

But you are also recording a plan that shows the encroachment?

Yes.

But you're recording saying I'm encroaching on it, but you are the one that owns it.

Now, maybe you're notifying them of an adverse claim,

but you can't say on one hand you own it and I'm claiming to own it.

Adverse possession can't be secret, it can't be surreptitious,

it can't be deceptive.

You have to be stating I do own this.

Even if you ignore the notorious aspect, however,

this was a plan that was adopted by the Goslins, agreed to by the Goslins.

Adverse possession can't be consensual.

If they're saying yes, there's an encroachment there, we're fine with it.

That's a permissive use.

So even if you put aside notoriety, that plan shows permission.

Because the Goslins are agreeing, yes.

That's an encroachment but we own the land.

Both parties, this was a plan prepared for Miss Thomas,

agreed to by the Goslins, both of them got together and said we agree.

That's an encroachment but we own the land.

The Goslins own the land.

You cannot consent to adverse possession.

If she had recorded it on her own without their permission,

without their consent, maybe you'd have a different issue.

But because they agreed to it, that creates permissive use,

that means you can never get to adverse possession.

Even if you put the plan aside, the trial court,

both of these carports, there's a question of permissive use,

that the trial court misconstrued the law.

So any adverse possession cannot exist if there's permission.

Permission can be expressed, it can be in writing,

or it can be implied by the circumstances of the parties.

The trial court looked at the extensive history between these parties

and as I mentioned there is quite a bit of extensive history

of giving permission to Miss Thomas and her predecessors.

They gave her the sewer easement for free.

Her contractor testified that every time he came to the property

the Goslins said you can park on the driveway, no big deal.

They gave her permission to build a fence on their property

so her dog would have space to run around.

Paul Goslin himself when she was renovating her home

gave her permission to put a dumpster on her property

to live in an RV that was on their property

to store personal possessions in his home.

This history should have given rise to an implicit permission

that, yeah, you can park in the driveway.

You can have that, just like it shows in that easement.

But the trial court said because there was no writing

you could not have implied permission,

which is internally contradictory.

If it weren't writing it would be expressed

but it doesn't have to be expressed.

It can be implied.

That would be when there is no writing.

So you can't say that in order to have implied permission

you have to have expressed permission.

That just defeats the point

that undermines the precedent in that issue.

The fact that there was no written permission is immaterial.

The background circumstances, this long history shows

that this was a permissive use

allowing guests in the parking lot

or to park in the driveway was not adverse.

Well, easements are always permissive, right?

Correct.

And so are you saying that you can never adversely

possess property that you have an easement to?

Well, that's a very good question.

And I'm glad you asked that

because there is a different legal standard

when there is simultaneous permissive use

and adverse use.

So in this case you have a permitted use,

this easement that allows ingress and egress

and this simultaneous adverse use parking.

In those cases the claimant bears the burden

of showing that the easement was repudiated,

that the permissive use was repudiated

or that that action was sufficient

to inform the owner of the adverse claim.

Parking in a driveway is maybe adverse

but it's not notorious.

It's not enough to say I own the driveway

and we have to remember what ownership means.

It doesn't just mean I can have my guests parked there.

It means I'm allowed to say your guests can't park there.

But you put up a carport, isn't that

something a little bit different?

So as to carport one, you might have a point.

This issue is really more as to carport two

where the carport only was there for nine years.

You only get adverse possession to the area of carport two

if you tack on this intermittent parking by guests afterwards.

The guests sometimes come and they park in the driveway.

And if they sometimes park in the driveway

now Ms. Thomas has the right to tear up the driveway

and use that space to build an addition on her home.

That's what fee ownership is.

That's what she's claiming.

And there's nothing in that history that would tell the Goslins,

hey, she's letting guests park in the driveway

from time to time.

That means you can never park there again.

That means you need to protect them.

Could they not get passed on the driveway to their home

if somebody was parked in the driveway?

It depends on where they're parked

and there is an issue here of the location.

Now in some cases this is an area where they can get to their home

but sometimes they had guests.

They had large parties in the fourth of July, that sort of thing

and guests would park in that area as well.

So if somebody is there for one house

then yeah, that area can't be parked in by a guest for the other house

but vice versa.

But you could still pass and repass?

Yes, in most cases.

Now there were, as I said, there was an issue where

the breakdown of this relationship started happening

when contractors were parking in an area where Paul couldn't go

but that was sort of a short term issue.

This whole period showed that

for the most part Ms. Thomas' guests were parking

after Carport 2 came down

in the driveway along a row of boulders.

And that's what she said in her affidavit.

That's what the Goslins testified to.

That's what the witnesses said in their depositions

that were read into evidence

and that's what the photographs show.

The photographs clearly show that

after Carport 2 came down

they weren't parking right next to Carport 1.

They were parking in the driveway on the pavement.

So even if you say that is an adverse, notorious use

that she's claiming to own the shared driveway

it's in a different location.

And you cannot have a building in one spot for nine years

and then that comes down

and then you start possessing a different area of land

and tack those two together for an adverse possession claim.

I don't recall.

Did the trial court take a view of the property?

Not a view.

There was only photos and plans submitted.

Is the question of whether it is permissive

or not a question of fact or a question of law?

Well, in this case it's both.

I think normally there'd be a factual question

was permission granted, is permission implied?

But in this case we also have that legal question

of what means implied permission?

What do you need to get there?

And if you need a writing to get to implied permission

that's a legal question.

That's a standard threshold.

What counts as implied and what doesn't?

But otherwise we're entitled to defer to the

or we should be deferring to the trial court

on her factual findings.

If the factual findings are reasonably supported

by the evidence, sure.

But in this case I don't think you can do that

because that underlying legal standard of

I'm not addressing the factual findings.

She recognized that there was this extensive history

and referenced it in the decision but then said

but because there was no writing like there was

in the case of an easement, of the sewer easement

therefore there's no implied permission.

So was not addressing if you assume you can

have implied permission without a writing

do these factors reach that standard

of showing implied permission?

That question wasn't really reached by the trial court.

And I think in this case that clearly shows

that there was implied permission especially

when you have following that a plan

that one party agreed to, both parties agreed to saying

yes, the Goslins own that land.

So that if that's in writing that's

express permission but it also shows the implied

permission by this history going back in time.

I also want to address a couple issues

specifically on Carport 2.

I know we talked about whether it's notorious

in light of the easement but there's also

an exclusive use issue here.

Because once Carport 2 comes down

this parking in the driveway when guests come to visit

is not an exclusive use.

In order to be exclusive the use can't merely be

I'm the only person to do it.

You have to actually be excluding the record owner.

You have to do something to prevent them from using it.

So for example in the Blackborough case

there was an adverse claimant who removed a building

cut down trees, did some landscaping

used the property recreationally.

No evidence of any use by the record owner

but this court held that was not exclusive use.

Recreational use even though you're the only person

using it that's not exclusive.

The Heming case had an adverse claimant

who marked the area that they were claiming

with a row of trees, planted those row of trees.

The owner never crossed that line for 25 years.

But this court held that those trees

because they did not provide a complete

or substantial enclosure of the disputed area

even though the claimant was the only user

that was not sufficient for adverse possession.

There are other cases where a claimant builds a fence

that does count.

You're preventing the record owner from using it.

You're excluding them.

That's not here.

Now the trial court relied on the Matic decision

where one party, the adverse claimant

built a driveway on the land of the other.

But that's while dealing with something similar,

the driveway, it's very different here

because this is somebody building a driveway

for their use.

They're accessing their home every day.

They're changing the land of somebody else.

Once I build a driveway on your land

you can't use that land for something else

without tearing up the driveway.

That's unlike here where there's a driveway

that already exists that you have a right to use

and you're just occasionally parking in the driveway.

You occasionally parking in it

doesn't prevent the other user, the other owner

from using it while you're not there

when your guests aren't visiting.

You're not doing anything to prevent the record

owner from using that land.

That's not exclusive.

The only way to reconcile all of those cases

is to be exclusive you must do something

to prevent the other user to interfere with their use.

So your argument pertains to that period of time

after the second carport came down?

Yes, for that 11 years.

When the carport 2 was there,

sure you could call it a structure, sure.

That can be exclusive.

We can talk about whether it's permissive,

there's the implied permission, there's the 2002 plan,

all of that.

Those issues relate to both carports.

This is as for carport 2 after it comes down.

Thank you.

Christianson, you reserve one minute.

Tony Allen?

Is this your client?

Yes.

The bailiff didn't let the other folks set up here

so I would just ask that you follow the same course.

Absolutely.

Thomas, will you sit in the back?

Sorry about that, Your Honor.

She's our task-minder.

Would you like me to wait or pick in?

Let her start your clock.

Please proceed.

May it please the court.

This is Kirsten Allen of Shaheen and Gordon

and I represent plaintiff Pellie Patrice Thomas

who is here with me today.

I'm happy to take questions at any time.

Defendants appeal centers on factual findings

of the trial court including the court's findings

about determining the weight to give evidence

and the credibility of witnesses.

Of course, deference is owed to the trial court

for these findings when they're supported

by the evidence and supported by the record

as they are here today.

When did the adverse possession begin?

It depends as to carport one and carport two.

The trial court did construe the evidence

in this matter strictly.

There was different evidence submitted

that for instance carports existed as early as the 1950s

but here the trial court relied on photographs

and the date of those photographs.

As to carport one, adverse possession

the court found began in 1969

and so would have perfected in 1989.

As to carport two, adverse possession began in 1993

when it was constructed although there were

prior iterations of that carport.

So 1993 and perfected in 2013.

Why doesn't the recorded plan defeat the claim

as to carport one?

For a variety of reasons Your Honor

and as Justice Donovan noted

we actually believe it supports a claim

of open and notorious possession.

So that plan identifies and outlines carport one

and notes encroachment and carport over lot line.

And encroachment is definitionally

an infringement on another's rights

and that's in Black's law dictionary

and so it supports that Thomas has the carport

is where it's encroaching into the Goslin's line

and openly records that

and the court looked at that

and relied on seven New Hampshire practice

real estate 806 and reason that although

Thomas's claim to adverse possession of carport one

would have perfected the plan actually records

her rights to that at the time

as they existed at the time.

So she couldn't have,

she wouldn't have had practical ability

to convey a record title to carport one

without a court decree of title

which she didn't have at the time.

So it really just reflects her rights

as they existed at the time.

Carport two isn't reflected on that plan.

It had been taken down at the time

but she was in the court found

that she was exclusively using that area

at the time openly and notoriously.

The court noted that

which is contrary to what my colleagues said today

that there were no details provided

to indicate how the plan was generated

so not by agreement

or the source of information for the note.

So the court determined that the plan

didn't undermine Thomas's claim for adverse possession

and I would point out that

Maddox V. Higgins, a 2023 case out of this court

says that trial courts are free to determine

the appropriate weight to be given site plans.

So that's citing Perry v. Parker.

So this is a factual finding of the trial court

which is owed this court's deference.

The Goslins point to photos from guests

parked in different locations for the proposition

that the trial court aired in finding

that Thomas adversely possessed carport two.

However, the trial court relied on a testimony

of the parties about the parking habits

of Thomas's guests, a variety of other photos

including which are at the appendix of 22 through 29

and deposition testimony of various parties

that were submitted at trial

and considering the totality of the evidence found

that Thomas's guests would park their cars

in the area where carport two stood

for the statutory period.

So this is a conclusion that was supported

by the record and should be affirmed.

The Goslins also argue that the trial court

failed to find the parking was incidental

to the easement.

So Thomas has an easement containing the right

to pass and repass from her property

to the Boulevard, Weir's Boulevard,

which such right shall be designated

from time to time by the grand tour.

The Goslins also have a right to pass

in common with others over that right of way

and the parties share a paved driveway

from the road Weir's Boulevard

to each of their properties forking at the

Thomas's property and the Goslins property.

So carport two is not on the driveway,

it's adjacent to the driveway?

It's adjacent to the paved portion of the driveway

as is carport one.

And that's evident on the plan

which is the appendix 22 and the photographs

23 through 29.

So you can see that both of the carports

are not on the paved portion of the driveway.

Are these limited to parking and driving over?

Like there's no, I don't know,

demarcation of parking spots

or bricks or restoration, anything like that?

Carport two is immediately adjacent to carport one

and as shown on the photographs

it would be marked essentially

by it's being where the pavement ends

but otherwise after the removal of carport two

it's not marked by painting or a line of bricks.

So the use is just limited to parking?

The use is limited to parking

that's been consistent from 1993

through the statutory period and beyond.

The court found that that parking

was exclusive to Thomas's guests

and only her guests and continuous.

There was a testimony at trial

about who those guests were.

It wasn't as the defendants would suggest

guests such as delivery drivers

or anything like that.

It was Thomas herself

while her husband was alive.

Thomas' mother when she moved in with her

and then a romantic partner

and another who were there

in a routine and customary manner.

Was there any evidence that the Goslin

and their friends used the property

at carport two for parking or anything else?

They submitted a photo of their child

and then a photo later on

when the dispute escalated

between the parties of them parking

with their guests all around the driveway.

But that was sort of after the dispute

began that that photo was there.

But I would cite

Matic V Higgin which found

that mere entry of the fee owner

isn't sufficient to

defeat adverse possession

or the exclusive portion

of adverse possession without an ouster

which is what we have here.

I mean the court considering the totality

of the evidence did find

that the use of parking was exclusive

for the statutory period

and did find that Thomas's

the only change after the collapse

of carport two

and after Thomas hired contractors

to remove it following that collapse

the only change was

the orientation of the parking

and that use continued

in all material respects.

That was the finding of the trial court

which should be affirmed

and is consonant with applicable law.

So the Goslins argue that parking

wasn't sufficiently enclosed

citing to human be Roe Chevrolet

so that's a mischaracterization

of that case which doesn't require

that the adverse possession

is sufficiently enclosed.

So in that case there was a row of spruce trees

and at the time of review

the spruce trees were thick

and could bar access.

However the court found that wasn't

sufficient for adverse possession

because there wasn't evidence

that 20 years previous

those spruce trees were

essentially a sufficient flying of the flag

or that they were in meaningful existence.

Spruce trees of course grow

in 20 years previously.

It wasn't clear that they were

large enough to be open and notorious.

So that was about the 20 year statutory period

and whether those plantings

were sufficiently open and notorious

to be considered a flying of the flag.

So here the court found

that the 1993 construction

of the carport was a sufficient

flying of the flag.

The court's language was that the construction

of a structure like a carport

was such a blatant act

to put the fee owner on notice

or to be an inference of non-permissive use.

And so that is the ruling here

which is supported by the evidence

and consonant with applicable law.

So both carport spots are still in contention?

In carport one?

On this appeal?

Yeah.

Carport one is a subject of the appeal

as far as I understand it

perhaps just to the plan.

That's as I understand the appeal.

As to the question of exclusivity

I would point out that on the five questions

on appeal there is,

it's not clear that the question

of exclusivity was raised.

I would say that it was a finding

of the trial court that the use

of carport two was exclusive.

And I would say that of course

MADIC supports the position

of court that it was.

As to the question of implied permission,

the court did review the history

of goodwill and there was testimony

from Paul Goslin of permission

which the court found was not credible.

There was testimony of Patrice Thomas

concerning the permission

and that there was no permission given.

The court considered documentary evidence

and didn't require that permission

was in writing but found that

given that there was a writing

which didn't reference any prior permission

and that the parties had

despite their amicable relationship

in goodwill had the easement agreement

in writing but didn't have another

writing and could have had another writing

the court found the implied permission

was not likely.

That was the reasoning of the court

with respect to implied permission

which is another factual finding

of the court which is owed deference.

And I just want to review to make sure

that I've answered all of the questions.

Your Honours I'm happy to answer any questions you have

but I think that I've responded

to the five questions on appeal.

Thank you very much.

Thank you very much.

One minute.

Thank you very much.

I want to start by answering your question

Justice Donovan about whether

which Carport is subject to this appeal.

They both are.

There are different arguments that apply

to each of them so the discussions about

whether intermittent parking by guests

is exclusive or notorious

the questions of whether the court

correctly found that the parking

was in the same location as Carport 2

those only apply to Carport 2.

The questions of the 2002 plan

whether permission was implied

by the history of the parties

whether permission requires something

in writing to be implied

those apply to both of these Carports.

So the question of

whether you have this 2002 plan

and whether that needs to be in writing

you need an easement a sewer easement

to be in writing so you can get a permit

that needs to be in writing permission to park

permission to build a Carport

in the 70s don't need to be in writing

but this is a legal question

there's no factual deference

on the question of this 2002 plan

there's no factual dispute that it exists

there's no dispute that the Gosland

executed an easement that adopted it

there's no dispute it was recorded

on behalf of Miss Thomas I think she testified

her attorneys did it

the significance of the 2002 legal plan

that's a question of law

and that's what you can address

and I see my red light is on

thank you very much counsel

this case is submitted

thank you
