This is case 2025-0133 in the matter of Tara Dickison and Thomas Cileo.

Good morning, Attorney Conner. I understand you reserved two minutes.

Mrs. Conner, where was that argument preserved in the lower court?

It was preserved repeatedly that remarriage was a substantial change in circumstances.

And the trial court cared when it looks at the law firm and the Canada Way cases which did not involve remarriage.

But that was a major point in the underlying proceeding that remarriage was a substantial change in circumstances as a matter of law.

But was the argument made that it was a per se change or that it was a foreseeable or unforeseeable change?

It was simply that it was a substantial change. The trial court also focused on whether it was unforeseen.

But regardless, it does not matter because in eating this court note that it was a substantial recall in eating the remarriage was two months post-perforce.

Currently much more in it than here when we're approaching five years post-perforce.

But regardless, it doesn't matter whether or not Mr. Cileo might have thought his wife, his former spouse might have remarried some day.

The question is whether once he personally remarries, whether he's going to get a combination from the first spouse to continue to pay this new family unit under this analysis,

somebody could go on to have five or six different spouse pay outlawing.

Where was it argued that the burden of proof should be shifted to the trial court as opposed to on appeal?

Was that an argument actually made?

Have you not seen that in the trials we've thrown in but that is the law as a matter of...

That's what this court said to me. The trial court has the right to get the law correct.

Even though the argument wasn't made.

So it's a plain error basically, it's what you're arguing.

In terms of our analysis, what role, if any, does the legislature's 2019 amendment play?

I think the only thing that it plays is it reinforces the legislature's recognition that cohabitation, which is a lower burden than remarriage,

because there's no obligations that the trial court can be used to terminate a modified animal.

The fact that the legislature has recognized that cohabitation will do that and certainly remarriage will do that.

The other interesting aspect of the court's legislative action in 2019 is under that statute,

these conciliators' alimony obligations would end in a year.

It was a 22-year marriage, 11 years will be next year, not in life and certainly not into a second marriage.

So I think that that legislature has recognized that alimony needs to be sort of restricted here

and it doesn't go on forever and certainly doesn't go on with cohabitation support to the latest argument.

This whole case that the plaintiff relies upon, I argue, the Miller-Wallard case,

it's an unpublished decision by three members of the court.

It did not open the rule in our belief that these are published decisions in regard to the effect of remarriage.

That also, that case is also significantly different because the alimony stipulation read that it's involved with a alimony quote

in the amount of $1,500 every other week for 10 years or until the petition of remarries, whichever occurs last.

Because the stipulation expressly stated that it was continuing to be on marriage,

the court enforced it in an unpublished decision.

In this case, the stipulation did not expressly stated that it would continue post- remarriage.

The stipulation was silent, just as the stipulation is being and will you be silent?

And when it was silent, the court said remarriage is, as a case of changing the circumstances, absolutely extraordinary circumstances.

We don't have any evidence of what those extraordinary circumstances may or may not be.

And interestingly, the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court, in the O'Brien case in 1995, had this issue from the court.

And the court said that the matter of law across the country is a majority rule that is that remarriage is the substantial change in circumstances,

warranting either termination or modification, depending upon the spouse's post- remarriage circumstances.

As an example of a situation where a spouse's second marriage means they'll be entitled to support, Massachusetts court cited both perhaps they're going to be in a problem of charge.

If their financial situation is just so bad, perhaps we will require the first husband to continue to pay, but otherwise not.

And the court cited this court's decision in E, and the support of that is one of the courts across the country that has found remarriage-consistent change in circumstances.

I want to ask you about a particular passage in the trial court's order.

It says the New Hampshire Supreme Court has held that changes to a party's condition that are both anticipated and foreseeable at the time of the decree

can arise to the level of substantial change in circumstances sufficient to warrant modification of an alimony award, and here's the important part.

Both parties counsel concede that the foregoing legal standard is applicable here, despite the amendment to the alimony statute following this divorce.

The party seeking modification has the burden of proof.

I looked for where Mr. Cilio's counsel made that concession.

I couldn't find it.

Are you able to address whether the party's actually conceded that that was the standard, the appropriate legal standard?

I did not see that precisely worry that way in the record.

And any part of it also is there's been a very repeat recognition of the fact that Mr. Cilio was overly generous in this case.

He wanted to take care of his next point.

But simply because he was generous, doesn't mean that this court has to obligate him legally and continually to continue to pay alimony forever.

And that is the Norbert case at 135 and Hampshire.

In that case, there was an obligation to pay alimony on a continuous basis.

Why do we need to have ran into some financial difficulties?

So it has been agreed to pay up on the sum.

And he said, but that's it.

I'm going to give you this little sum.

I'm not going to have to ever pay alimony again.

And you're related to unfortunate life, loses her job, loses her health insurance,

goes to court to try to get alimony again.

And the trial court said, no, you made it no different than perhaps if you agree to provide something.

It's not a waiver because this court, the trial court, and this court has a statutory framework for a reverence of the language and the stipulation.

The court retains the power to modify orders between alimony and proper showing between insurance and alimony.

So the fact that Mr. Cilio continued to care for his next point.

Wanted to pay more money doesn't mean that he is obligated under the laws of this state.

But doesn't the change in circumstances need to be foreseeable?

No, because this court in Eaton characterized pre-marriage as a pre-neutral change.

It is a substantial change.

You don't need to address whether a desert is going to happen.

And as a matter of law, it's not reasonable to think that one is can foresee whether a remarriage occurs,

even if you're dating somebody at the time of the course.

But go wrong. Somebody could die. Somebody could get sick.

The fact that remarriage might occur sometime down the road is not foreseeable.

That brings us back to the GERC case.

It was a modification based on ontology.

And this court said, when the front is cut into force, college was four years into the future.

It wasn't foreseeable. No one knows what's going to happen in four years.

In this case, it was fought almost five years.

You don't know if you're going to get remarried or not remarried.

And the failure to put in a stiff shouldn't be controlling,

because it's not like the Waller stiff where it was expressly included.

So should we disregard the statements that are allegedly made by your client

that he understood that he'd be paying alimony,

despite the fact that his wife was going to get married to her boyfriend?

Yes, Your Honor.

Because under Warburg, this court has the authority to save him from its own generosity.

He should not be promulgated under the laws of alimony to pay $9,000 a month for the rest of his life

when his wife has moved on and is in a new marriage.

I'm into the spouse for whom she has a right to special court support from him.

She divorces him.

I also want to talk briefly about the rearage.

In this case, there was no consideration of the offset.

In the underlying trial, his dick had been conceded.

Whenever they pushed her for one housing expenses,

when his wife had something extra, she asked for her spouse for an extra.

He gave it to her.

There's a chart in the rearage showing that over the course of a number of years,

that amounted to $177,000.

There was no consideration of an offset against the rearage.

Even though there are rearage, we argue that there are no rearage.

In the Williams case, that's from the date of remarriage,

the obligation to pay alimony should have been suspended.

If he couldn't do with me the lab, I would agree with that.

But once it is for the court, the trial of his court

is the right to go back to the date of remarriage

and terminate the alimony.

So he does not pose that.

If there are no further questions, I'll rest with the meeting.

Thank you very much, Attorney Cohn.

Thank you very much, Attorney Cohn.

My name is Andrew Keelow.

I represent Harris Dick Ascendant.

With me is my co-counsel.

First of all, a lot of people are also in the crowd.

Good morning, Your Honor.

This case rises and falls on one question.

And that one question is,

was the wife's subsequent remarriage

a substantial and unforeseeable change of circumstances

that gave the husband the right to seek a modern occasion

for termination of alimony?

That's the wrong case.

That is the authority case.

That is the standard of modification of an alimony award.

In this case, the trial of the court

found that the remarriage of the wife in 2021

was a foreseeable event.

And as such, that defeated the husband's

decision to modify an alimony.

And it's also a question of pattern.

What is foreseeable or reasonably foreseeable

under the law of law decision

isn't trusted to the trial court in the first case.

In this case, three critical facts

that Judge Joseph found

that supports her finding

that the remarriage was reasonably foreseeable.

First, the wife was in the relationship

with her future husband at the time of the second.

This may sound galastomer,

but the trial court said

it critically found that during the final divorce

the husband, perhaps jokingly,

said to the wife,

I will continue to pay alimony even then.

Third, I always say these

before I start with advocating in 2020,

wife remarried in 2021,

husband continued to pay full alimony

until the end of 2020.

And why?

Did he reduce the alimony?

Not because he said to the wife,

oh my lord, you're remarried.

I don't have to pay you.

The rationale of the husband gave

for reducing his alimony at that time

was that I am facing a substantial IRS debt

of about $300,000

and our twin children are in college

which I am paying college expenses for.

I can't cover everything.

He even wrote that the trial court reported

I will always protect my business.

Therefore, I think it's time to reduce my alimony.

What about the offset?

Why wasn't the husband entitled to $177,000 in offset?

For a number of reasons, judge.

First of all, that chart that appears

in the motion to be considered,

it was not introduced at the trial.

And if you read the transcripts,

I believe you'll see on a couple of occasions

customers entering the trial council

attempted to introduce that chart

and it was excluded by Judge Joseph.

They brought it to Judge Joseph's attention again

only in a formal motion to be considered

that it was attached to his half of day.

But on a more practical sense.

First of all, whether or not

a pay or a off of alimony was

afforded an offset and a marriage

with a factual budget.

They're not guaranteed that.

In fact, in the jury versus jury of 122 New Hampshire,

this is what specifically institutes situations

where an alimony was able to reduce

the child support or direct payments

for the children.

Third reason, I think it's on a more policy driven.

Power sets, you know, a problem.

The purpose of alimony is to

allow the recipient to

maintain their standard of life.

That judge with the jury

says that the recipient of child support

has a discretion on how to spend the money.

The same should be for alimony.

They check to the recipient,

the recipient then decides

I deploy the money here

or I deploy the money there.

If we have a situation where a payor can say

I think I know better,

I think I know better uses for the money.

I'm going to pay this bill

and mop it off the alimony

or I have a credit on the alimony.

That's not what this court has said.

It's the recipient who has a discretion

of deciding how to pay

or how to use the money they receive.

And in this case, lastly, Joe,

yes, Mr. Soleil was generous.

Not down in that for a minute.

While you ask for additional funds,

you pay additional funds.

You look at the transcript,

he even commented, I think,

on the area of the trial

that I don't even think

Mr. Dickinson's current husband is supporting her

and I'll keep paying.

Why?

To say, okay,

and Lou, if you're ready to give a check

for X dollars of alimony,

take off a couple of grand

and use it to pay this other bill.

Why doesn't Williams control the outcome of this case?

Because Williams is based upon

the fact

that there still has to be a fourth finding

that the alimony should be terminated

based upon a substantial

and unenforcement.

What's different here

is that there is no language

in the permanent stipulation

that will allow a husband

to shut alimony off

on his own upon the wife's remarriage.

This stipulation,

he's paying alimony to die.

Lifetime alimony,

because he could not satisfy his birth

and show that the remarriage

with his substantial

and unforeseen changes

in his circumstances

would unilaterally shut off the alimony.

He took the risk that he would be in

and that's the situation

that is concerning

because if we say Williams gives

everybody who has an alimony obligation

permanent their alimony,

regardless of the winding of the stipulation,

he needs to self help.

It is the court

who has a final say

as to whether you can terminate alimony

based upon a substantial and unenforcement.

You would by yourself

without court approval.

I'd like to comment briefly

if I can on this claim

that Newton is a per se

change of circumstances.

That is not what this court held

in Miller-Wallard.

In Miller-Wallard's

unpublished 3-day decision.

However, this court

created a substantial analysis

of Newton

bringing it forward to modern time

and what this court was very clearly saying

is that Newton did not do away

with the foreseeability element

of modification

like court

from Newton.

He jaded.

He says in some cases

in which it is to hear

that the outlaw was aware

of the recipient's purpose

to marry again

when alimony was decreed

released from paying alimony

after the new marriage

has not been granted.

That is the foreseeability element

that is part of the Eaton Post.

Our position,

just because of a remarriage,

doesn't mean

instant termination of alimony.

Isn't it always foreseeable

that after divorce

one of the parties

will be married?

Was the ability

to face the problem

based upon the facts

for each individual case?

Is it foreseeable

that someone could be married?

That standing alone doesn't do it.

What was happening

at the time of the divorce?

In this case,

wife was in a serious relationship

was connected with her new husband

and Mr. Dickinson

said,

I would joke.

Now they come back from London

I'm going to keep taking alimony

even if I get remarried.

Did Mr. Dickinson

forego any rights

that she might have had

to say Mr. Cilio's business

in exchange for getting

lifetime alimony?

That is an excellent point.

This was a key element

of what I understand.

Mr. Cilio walked away

from any claim

that she could have

against Mr. Cilio's business.

And this is a business

that is the money generator

for Mr. Dickinson.

His business is earning

over half a million dollars.

That was an important

right that she gave up

as part of her

lifetime alimony.

And I believe

the trial court

quoted that she said

I anticipate getting lifetime alimony

based upon this deal.

I would have done things differently

if I had known

that I was going to come back

at some point

and cut this off.

But this was all part of a package.

So bottom line is

it does not change the law

even if it's not an outlier.

It does kill,

if you folks did

and Miller and Waller

say it falls into

the general department.

It's very substantial.

Unforeseen changes serve.

Is there an inference

factually in terms

of the substantial change

in circumstances that the new husband

wasn't a provider,

wasn't self-supporting?

But don't get into

whether the husband was

actually supporting the wife or not.

Well, if she was making

all of these requests

for additional money

while in a relationship

with the other person,

maybe before they were cohabitating,

is there any inference there?

No. I would say no.

Again, you have

an extraordinary

manner as a first husband

who was made very clear

that he wanted to support

his ex-wife.

His ex-wife

went to him and said,

hey, the kids need this.

The kids want that.

He could have easily said no.

He wanted to do this.

So I don't think from there

we draw the inference

that his wife was living destitute.

It was just a situation

when Mr. Soleo

wanted to do these things.

And I salute him for that.

But I still just not get

us around the fact

that there was a border

outlawing.

And if he wanted

to modify that amount,

he had to prove or allege

that which was

necessary

to get into that

and unforeseen did not do that.

As a matter of fact,

as Judge Joseph found,

as there was evidence in the record,

substantial evidence

to support that finding,

we suggest that that finding

should be confirmed.

Do you think the appellant

specific argument

is preserved for our review?

I do not believe

the specific argument

is preserved.

Carefully, I did not

refer to language

in eating that says

remarriage, automatic change

of circumstances, burden

shifts to wife.

I would have to re-read

very carefully the motion

to be considered

because I don't want to say

something that's wrong.

But I didn't see it.

I think that

Franny Conner suggested

that this is now pointing to

almost on a plain error review

as he argued that he did not

have this in reserve.

But in our opinion,

in my opinion, Judge,

we may not get the whole party

to provide this case under

the upon standard

of modification,

substantial unforeseen change

of circumstances.

And Bill Waller says

unforeseen or unforeseen

ability is still an element

even if it is a subsequent remarriage.

Judge Joseph

clearly found that

this evidence on its own facts

was conceivable of one

and not conceivable of the other

in this case because

it was conceivable.

Your brief does not argue that

there's been a waiver for

really about

essentially the standard

of foreseeable substantial change

of circumstances.

Husband, addition,

and modify was broadly denied.

I see my right of light is on.

I thank you very much for your

attention.

Thank you, Tony Peele.

Tony Conner.

This is not a lifelong

or an unforeseen

airway case.

It's an 18 in Williams case.

Neither of those other cases

involved remarriage.

And LaFlam did not

overrule the 18 for Williams

and their silvercloth.

The Miller-Waller case,

as I mentioned before,

is completely different

from the stipulation

addressed remarriage

on alimony in the stipulation.

Again, this case,

like 18 in Williams,

the stipulation on alimony

doesn't address remarriage

in their court.

It's a matter of law

giving this a different change.

With regard to whether or not

this was a package deal

on the somehow lifetime of alimony

was a rule of something else,

that is, as far wrong

as it possibly could be.

Mr. Cilio,

as everyone has said,

is extremely generous.

He gave the house

the only merit left

that his wife completely

freed him later.

He paid $5,000 a month

in child support.

He paid $9,000 a month in alimony.

He unilaterally put

three children through college

and no expense to his wife.

He agreed to a $600,000

life insurance policy

which brought his death

to his wife over the last.

He also agreed to 50%

of any retirement accounts

he may get in the future

to those of his wife.

This suggests somehow

that she took less

of the merit of her state

in a belief of future alimony.

It's simply wrong.

Was it part of the record

that that was negotiated though?

It was,

when it's part of the record

of honor is that these folks

didn't have employers

and they came to an agreement

and they went to court

and they signed off on it.

And unfortunately,

I believe Mr. Cilio

had employer could have been

a very generous person

in this situation.

And that's where

the Norbert case

comes in.

This court has the authority

and his authority

to support that wedding

which corrects our development.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Attorney Connor,

thank you council.

Please submit it.

Thank you.
