Good afternoon. For the record, Justice Gould is not able to be here with us today, but he

will review the recording, the proceeding, and participate in our deliberation and decision.

Attorney Strausberger.

Good afternoon, Chief Justices and Justices of the Court. May it please the court? My

name is John Strausberger, and I represent the Respondent J.B. in this matter.

This case presents a unique opportunity for the court to further define what constitutes

good cause for an extension of a domestic violence order of protection in New Hampshire.

Other than this court's decision in the McPherson versus Wiener case from 2008, there's been

little guidance in New Hampshire on what constitutes good cause for the extension of a protective order.

The appellant respectfully submits to this court that an accidental phone call where a neither party

spoke to one another that lasted approximately a few seconds should not establish good cause

for the extension of a protective order.

I still do not believe that it should be considered grounds for a finding of just cause, and my position

on that is because the McPherson case makes clear that the conduct still has to constitute a credible threat

to the petitioner's safety. And so if there was a brief phone call where neither party

spoke to one another, I do not believe that that should form the basis under the facts of this particular case.

Yes, I believe it is, but as the court is very well aware, the statute is completely silent on what good cause is.

There's no guidance under the statute, so really our only guidance came from this court in 2008

in McPherson versus Wiener, and in that case the facts were that there had been prior violations of a protective order

that had been issued by the trial court, but it had occurred approximately 15 months before.

And so although there hadn't been a violation in the prior year's extension of the order in that particular case,

the court considered the violation flagrant enough 15 months ago to still establish just cause.

But I think what's lost in the shuffle unfortunately often here in New Hampshire when you're litigating these cases

because there's very little guidance under our New Hampshire jurisprudence about what constitutes good cause,

is that we lose focus that not only should the court consider any violation of a prior order,

but is the alleged conduct a safety threat.

And I think that's significant. If you look at some of the court's prior decisions, for example,

the Alexander and Evans case that I cite in my brief,

in that case the New Hampshire Supreme Court said that there was insufficient grounds to find credible threat

to the petitioner's safety in that particular case, even though there was...

Is that an extension case?

It was not, Your Honor. It was not an extension case, but again,

because McPherson versus Wiener makes clear that we are also to consider

whether or not there is still a safety threat, I think the analysis should be the same.

So I think...

That's correct.

The language is different, but I read McPherson's to still say, is there a safety threat?

It doesn't use the term that we use in a 173B initial restraining order hearing

where is there a present credible threat to the plaintiff's safety where we take that language out of 173B.

But I certainly thank New Hampshire litigants in both stalking petition cases,

because those obviously by statute track 173B and these 173B cases,

we ought to have some measurable standard on what safety means.

And so I think it's appropriate for the court to analogize in an extension case

the facts and circumstances of what constitutes a credible threat to safety

when it comes to deciding whether or not the petitioner is entitled to an order of protection in the first instance.

And in fact, there's authority for that in the McPherson versus Wiener case

where the court says it's still a factor under Tosta v. Bullis,

which is also another New Hampshire Supreme Court case,

which talked about the underlying facts for the grant of an initial petition,

an initial restraining order.

It's still a factor for the court to consider as to whether or not the act that forms the basis for the threat to safety

was reasonably close in time to when the extension is sought.

And so if the court in McPherson versus Wiener is referring back to those cases such as Tosta v. Bullis,

I think it's appropriate that also there needs to be some analogizing

to what this court has found for threatening or safety type behavior.

And I think it's interesting because as Justice Donovan just said when I was citing the Alexander case,

in that case there were documented findings,

there were contempt findings of that particular defendant violating a mutual marital restraining order in the case.

Plaintiff relied on that to say that she was fearful and she wanted a domestic violence order of protection.

There were documented domestic violence incidents, I believe, that were discussed in Alexander II.

There was a history of domestic violence.

The court ended up saying although it was appropriate for the court to find that abuse happened

because the continued communications from the respondent in violation of the marital restraining order

constituted harassment under our law, which as the court's aware is one of the acts of abuse that 173B encompasses,

that there was no credible threat to safety.

So the mere fact in this case that a very brief phone call that was made,

whereby the respondent testified under oath that it was an accidental phone call

and hitting the wrong item on his phone where he hung up as soon as he dialed the wrong number

and testimony from the plaintiff that she agreed it could have been an accidental phone call,

I cited to the particular section in the trial transcript in my brief.

Given the liberties that are also at stake with a five-year extension on a 173B final order of protection,

that that type of a violation should not serve as a finding of good cause.

What about the hunting trip and the exposure at least to firearms?

So that was the petitioner's position at trial that she felt that the respondent blamed her

for some interaction that happened with Maine's Fish and Wildlife,

and I apologize, I'm not referring to that age, we call it something different here in New Hampshire,

but Maine's version of Fish and Wildlife in that state had an interaction with him,

questioned him, obviously he was not charged with any crime, he was let go,

and the petitioner testified during the trial that she believed that he attempted to call her

because he was upset about that incident.

But obviously she also testified that it was possible that this phone call could have happened as an accident,

and obviously the respondent testified to how the phone call was placed.

And again, if you have a situation where both parties hang up the phone,

there are no words exchanged, there are no threats, there's no voicemail message left,

there's no further attempt to communicate, that fact alone should not constitute good cause under the statute.

Even if the job doesn't find your client's explanation better?

I believe so, Your Honor, because again, the fact that there was a phone call placed

where there was no communication doesn't establish a safety threat,

and if you look back, there are other decisions which I've cited in my brief, such as the Alexander case,

where there were direct violations of court orders, there were contempt findings,

and the court said that the conduct in and of itself, the contemptuous conduct,

didn't present a safety threat, right?

So therefore it was not appropriate to be the foundation for a finding of present credible threat.

And I will acknowledge that our statute doesn't use the term present credible threat,

but this court meant something in McPherson versus Weiner when it said

the court should consider the circumstances of the original petition,

any violation of those orders, and whether or not there is still a present threat.

Was it a violation to be exposed to firearms on the hunting trip?

Well, I think that depends on whether or not the respondent possessed the firearms.

I mean, I will acknowledge that's not a good look for the respondent,

but also I don't believe that was ever pled as a basis or argued as a basis at trial

for the request for an extension.

It was referenced as the petitioner's belief

that that phone call was motivated by the fact that my client had some interaction

with Maine Fish and Game.

Is there something about the structure of the statute and the extensions

that sort of put this on a path to a five-year contrary to your argument?

Can you address that point?

Well, so again, unfortunately there's very, the legislature's given us very little guidance

on whether the court should do a five-year extension or a one-year extension.

Obviously, the statute allows for up to a five-year extension.

So you can't hit a five-year on the first extension?

Correct. That's correct.

But for any extension thereafter, it could be anywhere from one to five years,

and the statute's not provided guidance on that,

and unfortunately we don't have precedent that I'm aware of

that really discusses what the court should be using for analysis.

What do you believe the court...

I believe the court should balance the equities.

In other words, if the court makes a finding that an order of protection is appropriate

because good cause has been proven,

the court should also establish the burden related to the restriction on liberties for the respondent.

And I think that has to go with sort of the flagrancy,

for lack of a better term potentially, of the past conduct and any violations of the order.

Here again, the record is clear that on cross-examination,

the petitioner testified that the action that caused her to seek this additional extension

was this phone call, and the parties never spoke during the course of that phone call.

Curiously, when she filed her extension,

the trial court only granted the extension for one year.

So the extension that were here before the court on today,

prior to the hearing, the court only issued a one-year extension.

After we had the final hearing, which was combined with the party's multiple-day final divorce trial,

the court then issued the order extending it for a period of five years.

So again, there's no statutory standard,

but I think the court has to look at the flagrancy of any underlying violation

and whether or not there would be a need to go out for five years, my client.

How would you characterize the underlying domestic violence incident leading to the first order of protection?

So one of the findings for the first order of protection was an allegation of assault by the petitioner.

There was a criminal charge associated with that.

My client ultimately was found, again, when you look at some of these other cases

where you're talking about violating a protective order like the McPherson versus Weiner case.

In that case, the court placed great emphasis on the fact that there was a charge for violating

the protective order that the respondent in that case was convicted of violating the restraining order.

And that was the basis for the court's finding that there was a significant violation.

Notably, there were other conduct.

There's other conduct in McPherson that's mentioned that could be construed as a violation,

but the court really relied on the fact that the respondent in that case was actually arrested

for violation of the protective order and actually was convicted.

In this particular case, we had actually asked the court for a further hearing on the protective orders

once the respondent was found not guilty on the underlying assault.

The trial court denied that request.

But I think that's notable that the underlying criminal conduct in both the original restraining order

as it relates to the assault and the violation of the protective order as it relates to this telephone call,

those charges were disposed of with either or not guilty findings or being dismissed by the court.

And whether or not this call was motivated by bad faith,

the mere fact that there was a brief phone call that neither party spoke to one another,

I don't believe should support a finding for good cause because it does not address the safety issue.

And that is crucial.

And whether we're talking about present credible threat or we're talking about some other concept of safety,

McPherson versus Weiner shows that we need to make a finding that there's still a safety concern.

Thank you.

Attorney Crisp.

Good afternoon.

May it please the court.

My name is Jack Crisp.

I seated a council table with me as attorney Sarah Crisp who represented our client,

the petitioner during the trial of this matter.

I would like to start off by just making a couple of points.

First, with respect to whether there were convictions,

the respondent was convicted of violating the protective order.

That is a conviction that's still out there.

Second, no to a prior violation of the protective order.

In this case?

Yes.

In addition, as the trial court pointed out,

the burden of proof in a criminal setting is not the same as it is in the family court

where you're going from beyond a reasonable doubt to a preponderance of the evidence.

And the respondent was convicted initially and appealed to the superior court.

Be that as it may,

I'd like to start off by asking if any of you have any questions,

I would like to try to address them right out of the starting game.

Judge Bigelow appears to have just suggested one sentence at the end of the order.

Explain any of the attacking events that are respondent's explanation of the phone call.

How are we to discern whether you've considered all of the past violations

and poured conduct into the setting of whether the cause existed?

I think if you look at Judge Greenhouse's 14-page order at the very outset,

he makes it clear that the hearing was on both the divorce matter

and it was on the motion to extend the protective order.

Right, but the last one appears to me that he's waiting on calls based on the expenses.

I appreciate that.

But after pointing out that the hearing, the four days of hearing,

encompass both the requests for the protective order and the divorce,

he goes on to say that these are my rulings and findings.

And I would add to that two other things.

One is RSA 173B5 indicates that if the respondent requests

a hearing on an extension after the court grants it,

that he must request that the court make specific findings.

The statute specifically says that.

And in this case, no such request was made that the judge make specific findings.

But frankly, it would be my position that Judge Greenhouse's 14-page order

is replete with the reasons why he extended that order.

It was suggested by counsel that the issue of guns was not raised in the request for the extension.

That is not true.

If you go to paragraph 8 of the motion to extend the protective order,

the issue of the respondent having possession of guns and violation of the court's order

is something that was raised at that time.

The court in McPherson addressed the good cause issue.

And among the points it made was that good cause is a term used throughout the law

and it is understood and recognized.

Secondly, I think with respect to the phone call,

it is characterized as a mistake for which there was no conversation.

If you read the transcript, it is evident that the respondent lied under oath

to Judge Greenhouse about the entire incident involving the phone call.

It was the petitioner's testimony that she believed that the respondent

thought she was the one who had called Maine Fish and Game

and told them that he was in possession of guns and that he was poaching deer.

He believed that and it was her belief that he was calling her in anger over that fact

at the time that he was stopped by Fish and Game

and the call ended.

But I think it is important that the record is clear that the respondent was

outright lying about every detail of that phone call during his testimony.

It is also the case if you read the record and you read Judge Greenhouse's order

that the respondent intentionally concealed the fact that he was retaining firearms.

That he told the court that he only had and the police that he only had 14 guns

and that, you know, they belonged to his daughter.

His daughter then testifies that well she only owns three or four guns

or that's what she tells the police.

In video camp footage, the respondent tells the police

he has more guns than they can fit into the police car.

He has re- why would he-

I don't know if it was time that he was initially served, wasn't it?

How is that relevant to whether good cause existed to the five year extension?

Because the respondent was understood that the law required him

both Judge's order and the statute himself to surrender any firearms he possessed

but he intentionally retained and concealed and lied to the court and lied to the police

so that he could continue to retain possession of those guns.

And there had to be a reason for that.

Was that the paragraph eight that you referenced as a motion to extend?

Was that raised in that paragraph?

The issue of the guns was raised in that paragraph

and I'm also making reference to the findings that Judge Greenhouse made.

He specifically referenced everything I've just said to you in his order.

Those were part of his findings and rulings.

But the way the order reads it's sort of like the marital division and then

oh yeah there's the issue of the extension and here's two sentences on that.

Well as I indicated at the outset, if you read the-

when you read the order, the very beginning of the order makes it clear

that the hearing and the findings and rulings are on both

the motion to extend and on the divorce decree itself.

And I think if you-

It's a little hard to discern really what's going on in the order because it's both-

my colleagues have said the last sentence relies just on the last paragraph of the order

relies on the call only and not on the firearms issue.

And it's on that basis that the court extends for five years.

I understand what you're saying about that last sentence.

I don't agree that Judge Greenhouse was relying simply on that phone call when he made that order.

And I don't think it says specifically that I am relying on solely this incident.

I do appreciate your concern about it.

But as I have said, the statute requires- provides that when you request an extension,

you must request that the court make specific findings if you want them.

And in this case that request was not made.

What factors should a court consider in granting in the amount of time

that a second extension should be granted for understanding the statute provides for up to five years?

Yeah. And considering that question, Your Honor, I go back to my days in the county attorney's office

where we would have people who had been committed to the state hospital for a period of time

and then we would have to have hearings to determine when that period of time was over,

whether they should continue or not.

And often there was no acts that had occurred that would make it easy to say,

oh, this person is still a continuing danger.

And yet the staff at the hospital strongly believed that if they were released to the public,

the medication was taken away from them that they would be a danger to the public.

It is a difficult question. I agree with that.

I think that Judge Greenhouse, frankly, was fed up with all of the lies that he was being told

by the respondent, by the respondent's flagrant violation of the existing court orders,

by his taking money, taking property that belonged to the petitioner,

violating the court's order about transferring property, taking property,

his refusal to comply with the court's orders when he was ordered to return things,

to pay things, he simply refused to do it and he was not going to comply with any of the court's orders.

Tell the court the truth.

Do you agree that the restrictions on the respondent's liberty interest should be part of the trial court's

calculation in determining whether it should go up to five years?

Well, I'm not sure I equate his inability to possess a firearm with liberty.

In my mind, liberty is more in the nature of confinement.

But I think that...

I'm in a position, Your Honor, where I know the respondent.

I knew the respondent's father.

You know, I lived in that area and I am familiar with the people there.

I feel that Judge Greenhouse's order, continuing this protective order,

was very much the right thing to do in this case.

Can you accept that argument, then?

It's essentially punitive.

And there would be zero consideration to the respondent's right to bear arms.

Is that the correct analysis that you can look at community,

you can look at other behavior in the case, and the bad amounts to just funds?

I'm sorry, I'm not understanding the question.

Essentially, your argument is that throughout the divorce matter,

that the trial court essentially found that the respondent was untruthful,

had gone so far as lied in court and maybe committed contempt of court in one way or another.

And that that all together justifies the extension for five years.

I'm wondering, is the standard for just cause so broad that it just includes bad behavior

and a punitive response to that behavior?

I don't know that I consider perjury, flagrant disregard for court orders as just bad behavior.

I think when you are looking to protect the safety of somebody

and you are dealing with somebody who has shown that they're unwilling to tell you the truth,

they're unwilling to comply with your orders, and they're prepared to conceal weapons,

I think that gives one pause and concern for the safety of others.

I forget Article 2.1 or 1.2 in our Constitution that deals with a right to bear arms.

This court has said in the past that there are limitations on that.

There is the case about someone who wanted to have their license to carry a concealed weapon

that was taken from them because of threats they made.

They contended that they had the right to bear arms under the New Hampshire Constitution,

but this court found there were limitations on that.

I think one of those limitations is if you have, by assaulting your spouse,

by breaking down doors, by this kind of conduct,

that you do pose a threat to someone that the possession of firearms,

as the legislature has found, as the legislature mandates that that person not have firearms,

that is a reasonable limitation on that right.

So I don't see it as a liberty issue.

But if we have to articulate a standard,

and the standard is focusing on the conduct that has occurred since the last extension order

and then consideration of the underlying offense leading to the first restraining order,

should there be a balancing that helps to determine the length of time of that second extension?

I think that the party's prior conduct should be the basis for that determination.

And if you have a single incident of a minor, a less serious nature,

and in the future there is nothing more, then maybe there is reason for limiting the duration of the order.

When you have a relationship with a history of abuse and violence,

when you have a party who has demonstrated an unwillingness to comply with the law,

to be truthful to the courts, to possess excessive numbers of firearms and to lie about it,

I think there's reason to be concerned and the duration ought to be longer.

I don't know what else there is to look to other than the conduct of the parties.

I think compliance with court orders, truthfulness to the court,

I think those are conduct that reflect upon the whether or not you can trust this person not to abuse someone else in the future.

Thank you very much, Attorney Crisp. This case is submitted.
