This is case 2025 at 005, petition of Scott Marshall.

Good morning.

Before we get going, I want to acknowledge the presence of our new colleague, just Brian Gould.

Welcome.

Thank you.

Attorney Krupsky, I understand you've reserved two minutes.

Yes, Your Honor. Please proceed.

May it please the court.

My name is John Krupsky, and I have the pleasure of representing the appellant, Scott Marshall, in this appeal.

This is an appeal from the New Hampshire retirement system.

As a result of the New Hampshire retirement system decision in which they acted unlawfully and unreasonably when they failed to follow and apply to clear an unambiguous language of, say, 183 woman numeral six.

In that, Marshall was an employee of the Department of Corrections, in which he was a group two employee and served for approximately 14 years prior to 2009.

In 2009, he was laid off, December of 2009, he was laid off, and he was his accumulated contributions.

Can we pause there and make sure I understand?

Sure.

As of the time he was laid off.

Yes.

He had qualified for group two.

Yes.

And he was vested.

Yes, Your Honor.

And then he was laid off in, I think, October of 2009.

Yes, Your Honor.

And then within a few months he was recalled.

Is that correct?

Yes.

He was recalled back in February.

And indeed, he asked to withdraw his accumulated contributions on December 22nd of 2009.

Is that correct, Your Honor?

And it was only literally just over two weeks later that he's enrolling again as a member of the retirement system having been recalled from being laid off.

Yes, Your Honor.

And so, thank you, and you've laid that out quite nicely.

And this is where the problem came in.

And in the law at the time, which has remained unchanged since the changes throughout the system.

So nothing alleges like you did this year affects this case.

Right.

And what the law states is that in the event, it says that in the case of a prior service, credit time served as a member in which the members accumulated contributions have been withdrawn.

The amount of credible service purchased may be the full length of service relating to the withdrawn contributions or partial sales thereafter.

The amount by the act to reinstate and they use the words reinstate in the statute.

All that he needed to do was buy back the time with interest and therefore it would be reinstated.

Like he never took that money out.

Is there a difference between reinstated and vested, however?

I think it's one in the same, Your Honor, because he was vested before he took the accumulation out.

And then once he paid back the money with interest, it's he went back to the position he would have been in before he took out the money and he would have been in a vested status.

Go ahead, finish me.

It would have been a vested status because under the law and as many examples reinstated means you're placed back to the position you would have been in had that event not occurred.

So in terms of like a termination, if you're reinstated, you're brought back to the position you would have been in.

Insurance policies, if it's reinstated, you don't get a new policy.

You get the policy you had that you purchased at the time in terms of judicial proceedings.

If a case is reinstated, it starts back where it was, it doesn't start over again.

So the word reinstatement is extremely important and was completely ignored by the New Hampshire retirement system when they transferred him from being, which he should have been, a tier A, which has certain benefits and made him a tier B employee which have lesser or diminished benefits.

At the time he was laid off, there were no tiers.

There were no tiers too.

There was just tier A.

And that was one of the most significant differences even today is tier A is averaged over three years.

You have three highest years and includes all your income in terms of your earnable compensation, whether it be from details, whether it be from overtime, whether it be from severance payment.

It's all included.

Tier B is treated completely different.

It's over five years.

They've made some changes recently under House Bill 282, but there are significant differences.

It's five years.

They do a thing called compensation over base and they exclude many of the income that would be included into tier A.

Can I just get back to Justice Conway's question about the language of vested rights?

First of all, do you, I keep trying to definition of vested status in 100 A.

Is that correct?

Is there a definition of what it means to be vested?

I would say, Your Honor, that the only time that they talk about vested is in deferred retirement where they do talk about a vestment within 10 years.

That will be the only place.

The other place you might find for the 10 years is in 2011 when they made the changes to the statute.

If you go into the history there, there is a list in there saying that the 10-year watermark was important for them.

They considered that to be a vestment.

But the statute itself, as of this day, I believe there was a change in 282 that talked about vesting being 10 years.

But the statute in place, while this was going on, did not give a definition of vested.

So in the contract to which you point, where he's taking out the money, it says five completed 10 or more years of creditable service and elect to return of my accumulated contributions upon termination of employment,

I understand that I have waived my right to a vested deferred retirement benefit.

What does that mean?

How does that, how do you interpret that when?

I interpret that reading as a whole and that it's that one benefit that he would not be able to get unless he did another 10 years.

However, if you look at the paragraph above it, it provides that if I'm subsequently employed and become employed as an individual to New Hampshire retirement system,

I'll be enrolled as a new member and we'll have the option of reinstating, and again Mr. Wood, reinstating previous credit services of six months or more by paying the withdrawn

accumulated contribution with interest from the date of the withdrawal.

So once again, this reaffirms and complements the statute that existed at the time and remains changed.

From my perspective, the only difference here is when he talked about deferred retirement, they're saying because it is listed in the statute as having the 10 years going forward,

that's their only reason for it. That would be the only benefit that they told him that he would not receive, nor would it change his tier A status.

And in fact, at the time when he went to the retirement system, there was, and it's in our brief, an employee by the name of St. Cyr,

and he had a conversation, Mr. Marshall had a conversation. She said, don't worry about it.

This is going to hurt you when you get the money and you can pay it back. It's like it never happened.

Which whatever happened to them, $178,000 that Mr. Marshall paid into the system?

He paid into the system. It went into the system.

He hasn't got it back?

So that's what he's saying. And you can remember on that $178,000 that he paid into the system back in 2009.

He only took out about $76,000.

So there's other monies that were taken out, which was another $13,000 from the previous 1994 to 1998.

But in 2009, he received approximately $76,000.

And he paid back into the system $178,000 in order to have his time reinstated.

Only to be told, well, it doesn't really do what you expected it to do.

We're just going to have this go forward.

There's nothing in a statute or in a statutory framework which says that if you reinstate time, it only goes forward.

And the huge mistake we believe was made by the retirement system was that they didn't even address 103.

They addressed 105.

So I looked at it and said, this doesn't, essentially, not even addressing the statute we're talking about

because those changes were made in 2011.

But under 105, he needed to have had vested status before January 1st, 2012, correct?

Under 105, you would say that he did.

However, did he lose that status?

Well, we're saying he didn't.

Your theory is he never lost vested status.

As long as he paid back that time, he paid back with interest, it would go back to his vested status.

But did he lose it when he took the money out?

I wouldn't say he lost his vested status.

I would say he was no longer a member until he regained his membership.

And this is in conformance with Barney, in Ray Barney, where this court had ruled that you get reinstated, it goes back.

The problem with Barney, why the petitioner didn't win in that case, is she never re-employed with the state

and tried buying back her time without being re-employed.

This is a totally different circumstance.

So his membership was terminated, but his vested status remained under your view of the case?

If, as long as he paid it back, he would have lost that vested if he didn't pay that money back.

So there was no gap investing?

Excuse me?

There was no gap investing in other words.

When he got the money back, he was no longer a member.

How could he be vested if he's no longer a member?

Because the statute under 100 A3, Roman No. 6 says that if you pay back that money with interest,

you will be reinstated to the position you were at prior to taking that money.

So our theory is he never lost it if he did not pay that money and did not pay it with interest.

He paid it with interest, so it's not like he's just paying it back.

In essence, in my mind, it's sort of like you take your loan against your 401k and pay it back and it just moves forward.

And looking at this also from the standpoint of fairness and equity,

I mean, he paid $178,000 to get a benefit.

He was told that he would get.

Does he get any benefit from that payment?

Yes, he does, but it's a hugely diminished benefit your honor.

And what I mean by that is tier A has a myriad of beneficial benefits that he will,

if the decision of the retirement system stands, he will never see.

The calculation, the earnable compensation, which are one of the biggest ones,

and he'll never see that.

The only thing he will see is the additional years of service, he will see an extra 2.5%.

So if you take the 2.5% for one year, and I'm just going to use rough math, your honor,

and you take 2.5%, it would be $2,500 on $100,000 if you make that.

And it would take multiple years.

And now you've got to look at the multiplies, et cetera, but he'll never regain a benefit,

nor will he ever get the benefits that he would have gotten as a tier A employee.

And I would like to point out, your honor, that he did work this time, right?

This wasn't like he was buying time.

He worked those 14 years and then had to take money because he was laid off,

he was involuntarily laid off.

It's not like he decided, hey, I'm just going to take this money.

It was a matter of being out of work.

You know, the record doesn't reflect, you know, exactly where,

but it makes sense that you laid off, you're not working,

you need to have money to live and feed your family.

Can I just make sure I understand that?

I think I heard you say this.

In this response to an argument the retirement system makes,

that it would make no sense to allow an employee to withdraw the savings

and still qualify as a retiree.

That's the argument they're making against your client's argument here,

but you're saying what makes the difference in this case

is that he paid back the money.

And he's employed and was, he's retired now,

but was an active member when he paid the money back with interest.

Okay.

And that makes all the difference.

And I think that's a plain reading of 183, Roman numeral 6.

As I said, your honor, it remains unchanged,

even with all the changes in the retirement system from 2009 until today.

If he had not paid it back with interest, it would be different.

Right.

And just real quick, I just want to,

my time's up, so.

Attorney Foley.

Good morning.

May it please the court?

My name is Peter Foley.

I'm representing the New Hampshire Retirement System Board of Trustees.

Before I get into what I was originally going to talk about,

I think I can shed some light on some of the court's questions.

The issue about where vesting,

the vesting requirement is in the record,

it's, there is a finding in the amendments,

the 2011 amendments by the legislature,

that talks about 10 years as vesting.

It's cited in the hearing officers first recommendation at page 12 of the record.

It's an output note, noting that.

And essentially there's no dispute that it's always been 10 years to vest

for purposes of becoming eligible.

My point is, as she points out on that footnote, it's not defined in the statute.

Correct.

It's not in the statute, but it has been the practice for years,

that the 10 years is vesting period.

So we would, everyone's working under that operative concept.

So if you have 10 years, you're vested, that puts you,

and if you had those 10 years as of July, January 1st, 2012,

you're vested in your interay, you don't lose anything.

So that's where Mr. Marshall was.

No, he was not in interay.

First, when he was.

There were no interay at the time, but he was vested.

Right.

He needs that qualification.

He met it until he withdrew his contributions, terminated his membership.

No longer was a member.

That's not what the plain language 105A5Roman2 says.

No, it's a member in service who is vested in status before January 1st, 2012.

He was vested in service before January 1st, 2012.

He was vested.

He canceled his membership, and then when he reached service,

he brought back that time.

And so, yes, that portion of the statute talked about before 2000,

being vested before 2012.

But if you look at a complete analysis of the language of the statute,

in particular 1052D,

because that talks about the transition period

for folks like Mr. Marshall,

who at the time of the statutory change,

which was January, it was July 1, 2011,

and they are focusing also on January 1, 2012,

at that time he had less than two years of credible service.

So he was not vested at that point.

Because you're saying at that moment he hadn't done the buyback.

So would it be different had he in 2010, 2011 completed the 100-in-some-odd?

Definitely.

If he had purchased the time back prior to the adoption of that statute,

or if he had not withdrawn all his contributions after being out of work for two months,

he would not have that issue.

I don't see how the plain language of subparagraph D helps you,

because it talks about group two members who commenced service

prior to July 1, 2011, which he did,

and who have not attained vested status prior to January 1, 2012.

He had attained vested service.

He had attained vested service prior to January 1, 2012.

We just established that.

He had attained it, but he lost it.

The point of the statute is when you look at Part D, which is the...

That's what I'm looking at.

Well, then the tables, it focuses on the amount of credible service on,

specifically on January 1, 2012.

And in that table, it says if you have between zero and four years,

you are in Tier B with the multiplier of 2.1.

That's in 100 A5, 2D.

How does that help with vested status?

Well, incredible service is one thing.

Vested status is something else.

Well, credible service is...

This is instructive as to what the legislature was getting at

when they were considering what timeframe this statute is going to take effect at.

I don't think they were intending to allow someone to withdraw their contributions

and then come back to service and then get the benefit of vested status

without purchasing that time back.

We just talked about that.

Yeah, you talked about it. He happened to buy the time back.

But under the statute, it would be a totally absurd result

because there's nothing in the statute that would require anyone to buy the time back

under the language you're referencing.

And so that makes no sense to get better clarification.

It's appropriate to look at the other portion of the statute that deals specifically

with someone like Mr. Marshall who, as of January 1st, 2012, had less than 10 years.

And in fact, he had less than two years of service.

And that statute says his status is determined based on the amount of credible service

he had on January 1, 2012.

And when you read the statute as a whole, that makes perfect sense.

Keep in mind, these amendments were adopted at a time when the legislature was issuing findings

indicating how crucial it was for the retirement system to remain solvent

and how significant the impact of the system is on the operations of local and state government.

That is the point of all these amendments.

It's not intended to open the door for someone to withdraw their contributions

and then maintain some status that they could have had but lost through their own actions.

Well, it does another reading of the facts could make one feel like the retirement system is playing gotcha here.

I mean, he was involuntarily laid off in October.

He was called back to service within months.

On December 22nd, 2009, he asked for withdrawal of his accumulated contributions.

They come back to him in two checks, one on January 4th and the second on January 26th, 2010.

Literally, on January 6th, in the middle of these two checks, he's reapplying for withdrawal.

Correct. And so he couldn't just purchase back that service time.

I don't even know. He canceled. He cashed the second check by the time he achieved employment by February of 2010.

I mean, it's within days that this all happened.

And that's my point in that he was free to reverse that transaction and buyback that time right then instead of waiting 10 years.

That 10-year period is what caused the interest to be applied.

He's paying it back. The retirement system is whole.

No, the retirement system is not actually whole from those types of buybacks.

They can only charge interest at a rate that has to be at least 2% lower than the rate of return.

That's the statutory formula for those particular buybacks.

He satisfied the statute.

Sure. He satisfied the statute.

But there is no intent in that statute to focus on somebody's prior history of service credit as opposed to what their actual service credit invested status is on January 1, 2012.

The reason for that is it opens the loophole. This gentleman purged the time back.

If all you're doing is looking at the historical status, someone could be able to purge the time, could get their recumulated contribution refund, come back to work and then say,

hey, I used to be vested. I get TRA status, even when I'm purchasing that time back.

But that's what the statute says. And maybe the legislature created the loophole.

Well, the only thing you point to for us to rely on is some guidance that the retirement system put out about interpreting this situation in 2019.

And we're supposed to defer to that?

Well, two things. One, we're supposed to interpret the statute as a whole to avoid an absurd result.

And that would be an absurd result to allow an individual to withdraw their contributions, return to service and then claim,

hey, I'm a TRA, even though I don't have to buy back those 10 years.

Not if he's paid it back with interest. How is that an absurd result?

It would be an absurd result because there's no requirement in the language you're relying on that he has to buy it back with interest.

There's no basis. If you're issuing a ruling that says that statute allows Mr. Marshall to do what he did, it would allow anyone to withdraw their contributions

and then come back to service and then declare TRA status without processing those contributions.

Because there's nothing...

Again, you've heard the facts of this case. He paid them back.

I understand, but we're looking at the text of the statute and what is it intended to provide.

And it isn't intended to open a door for folks to withdraw their contributions and then come back and try to take advantage of that prior service time.

Why should we focus on 100A5 and not A3?

Well, that's the next issue. A3 is just a procedural statute. The system has completely complied.

It allows for requesting a cost statement and then purchasing back your time and then getting the time reinstated.

And all those three things have happened.

How long has the buyback been in the law? That is the reinstatement language.

That statute has been in the law for quite some time.

And when the legislature amended the statute, did it modify that language in any way?

Well, the term reinstatement, I think, is putting much more into it than it actually means.

He has had his service time reinstated. The time has been reinstated.

But the effects of losing that time and then coming back are a totally different issue.

The service time is in his record. He used it to retire.

He got the full benefit of his $178,000.

He got service credit for those years and he's now retired and he actually is tier B.

What is the benefit of the interest he paid, though?

The benefit?

Yes.

Well, he had the use of the money for 10 years. The system didn't.

It would be a windfall for him to be able to get the service time back without paying interest.

And it would also cost even more money to the system.

Already, they're losing 2% of the money based on the rate of return.

What is their general rate of return?

What is that?

What is the average rate of return?

Well, it varies every year statutorily. I don't know the exact numbers now.

But it can be 5%, 7%, 10% or lower at times.

But no matter what rate of return is, the system can only charge interest that's 2% less than that.

So essentially, the system has complied with RSA 100A3.

That is really not a statute that is at issue.

The other arguments involving equitable relief are not made out.

There's no contract here. So for those reasons, the system was correct.

And I'd also ask you, I'm running out of time, I'd ask you to look at the language of 100A5 to A.

And the specific language used for Tier A is any group two member in service who is invested status before January 1st, 2012.

That's a presence. That implies someone who isn't vested status at the time,

not someone who used to have vested status and has somehow come back after that fact and no longer has it.

That's the plain language of the statute.

Tier B has a similar language talking about members who have not obtained vested status prior to January 1.

That's also a perfect tense.

It's all focusing on January 1, 2012, not relying on some historical record for somebody's ability to qualify for these different tiers.

Where in the statute does it say you lost vested status by having been laid off?

The statute says when you withdraw your contribution, this is in 100A35, you are no longer a member.

If you're not a member, you're not, you can't be vested. You're not even a member of the system.

And when he buys that time back, he's not getting everything back that he did.

He now has prior service credit that he's purchased, but his membership service is limited to what he actually obtained since he came back in 2010.

So there's no question that when he withdrew his contributions, his membership was terminated.

Vesting can't survive a termination of membership.

Where does it say that?

Well, it's a common sense, Your Honor. If you're not a member of the system.

It doesn't say it in the statute.

It doesn't say what vesting even is in the statute, Your Honor.

But if vesting is a right that applies to a member of the system, and you're no longer a member, then I don't see how you can still be vested.

Thank you.

Any questions?

You're right.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Tony Krebsky, you have two minutes.

I want to take the time on the record to fix a Scrivener's error in my brief.

I apologize to the court, but in page 33 of my brief, I make reference to 100A, and I got to insert one, and then the Roman numerals.

So it goes A to Roman numerals.

There should be a one in that I'd like to have the record reflect a correction for that.

I do apologize to the court.

How does A3 really support your client's position?

Isn't that just procedural?

How to get the statement?

How to figure out how much interest to pay?

Absolutely not.

I believe that that statute talks about putting the individual back to the place they were when they used the word reinstatement.

They could have used a variety of different words, including you can purchase time for the future, you can do, etc.

But no, it used the word reinstatement, which has its common meaning, which is to put that person back in a place they would have been,

both under the dictionary and under our legal precedent.

Without any further questions, I would waive my remainder time.

Thank you very much.

In the case submitted, take a brief recess.
