This is case number 20-25-03-44, Appeal of New Hampshire Division of State Police.

For the record, the Chief Justice and Justice Will are disqualified from this case.

Attorney Jepsen, when you're ready. I understand that you've reserved two minutes.

I have, thank you. I'm Megan Jepsen. I represent the New Hampshire Department of Safety, Division of State Police.

RSA 21-I-58, which is now RSA 273-D3, is clear that when the PAB reinstates a previously terminated employee,

that employee shall be reinstated without loss of pay, provided that the sum shall be equal to the salary loss suffered during the period of denied compensation.

Less any amount of compensation earned, or benefits received from any other source during the period.

Here, the PAB erroneously included overtime into its reading of the phrase, reinstated without loss of pay.

This ignores the fact that the legislature expressly limited that statutory phrase to the salary loss suffered, less certain other amounts.

Reinstated without loss of pay means salary loss suffered.

What about the language, or make such other order as it may deem just?

Does that provide the PAB with the authority to provide compensation above and beyond salary?

No, because I think the statute is clear that reinstated without loss of pay means salary loss suffered.

So, the statute is defining what that loss of pay is.

So, because, though, the statute does not define the word salary, we look to the dictionary for guidance.

The plain meaning of salary is fixed compensation paid regularly, as by the year, quarter, month, or week, for services.

Overtime, however, is an additional payment for overtime.

So, overtime is separate from salary.

What if this trooper was due to a step increase during his termination?

Would he be entitled to that step increase upon reinstatement?

That would be part of, I believe, the salary.

So, that would be, the step increases would be separate than that additional amount for overtime.

So, I'm not exactly sure, but I believe it probably, he probably would be.

The overtime is being separate from salary is condition, is consistent with a trooper's collective bargaining agreement.

So, that includes a salary schedule in there that lists hourly, bi-weekly, and annual wages,

without reference to any sort of overtime pay.

The basic work period for troopers is 160 hours in a 28-day period.

So, then they receive time and a half, though, if they work over that time.

Thus, overtime is an additional payment separate from salary.

Moreover, the calculation of overtime is speculative.

So, even assuming that Mr. Owens was able and available to work overtime shifts during his period of termination,

that does not mean that he would have worked them.

That is particularly true here, where the division had terminated Mr. Owens,

and the reason we're here today, that was based in part on his adjustment to his time card regarding overtime.

I did respond to the authorities cited by the claimant here that overtime is awarded as damages

and in other circumstances, even though there's no basis to determine whether, in fact, it would have been earned,

but based upon the track record of the employee, there's every suggestion that it would have continued to have been earned.

So, why doesn't that apply here?

Why is it speculative in this circumstance, but not in the circumstances cited by opposing counsel?

So, some courts have said, just as a matter of law, that it is speculative.

Other courts, as opposing counsel cites, say that it is not always speculative.

That there are times when the employee may be able to prove that he or she would normally have worked that overtime.

Here, I think it's particularly speculative because Mr. Owens was terminated for issues surrounding his overtime.

So, overtime is never guaranteed, and it's certainly not guaranteed when that employee was previously terminated for issues regarding overtime use.

Is that in the prior case, the fact that it was related to overtime?

Yeah, I believe the court referred to it as extra duty shifts, but it was time above what he would normally have been working.

Is there any evidence in the record that state police would prohibit somebody from working overtime if they've had that sort of disciplinary past?

I'm not aware of there being anything specific in the certified record about that,

but in the record, there is no guarantee for overtime.

So, an employee needs to get permission to receive that overtime.

So, it's never going to be guaranteed anyway.

In the cases as well that opposing counsel cites, they don't deal with the statute that we have here that specifically sort of defines what that loss of pay means.

So, here, the PAB ignored the fact that the legislature expressly limited the phrase reinstated without loss of pay to the salary loss suffered, less certain other amounts.

Moreover, calculating overtime is speculative, and the court should not include it in back pay awards.

To what extent do we owe any deference to the PAB in this case?

So, there are certain circumstances where the PAB is owed deference.

Here, this is a statutory interpretation issue, so the court should be looking at this de novo and not giving the PAB any sort of discretion in that regard.

So, we ask that the court reverse the judgment of the PAB unless you have any other questions.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Attorney Boudouin.

Good afternoon.

And thank you for celebrating my birthday with me today.

Counselor, can you identify yourself, please, for the record?

This is Attorney Mark Boudouin.

I'm representing Tom Owens for the appellee.

Happy birthday.

Thank you.

If it pleases the court.

I went to law school later in life.

I went to school when I was 36 years old.

I became a licensed attorney when I was 40.

One of the things that I found interesting when I went to law school was the concept of damages when it came to civil cases.

Specifically, you know, that it was there to make a person whole, not to give them a windfall.

And it's sometimes hard to try to explain that to your client when they feel like they have been wronged.

But I think here that the PAB tried to come out with a fair award and a fair decision based on the facts and circumstances of this particular unique case.

Their decision was not unreasonable.

It wasn't unjust.

It wasn't unlawful.

They used their permissive authority given under the statute of 21-I-58, and they heard evidence of the pay that he made in 2017 and 2018, which were the two years prior to his termination.

So the underlying termination, according to counsel, had something to do with overtime, and that termination was overturned, I assume, right?

Correct.

Yeah, it was an implementation of the, they went to an electronic time card as opposed to the old paper sheets.

And what was happening was it was hard to get it accurate.

Because sometimes you had to fiddle with the numbers in order to get the program to accept it, otherwise it just wouldn't accept the entry.

And so we were able to show that, you know, it was, he wasn't purposely trying to do anything wrong here.

So he was reinstated with a loss of pay and benefits.

I'd like to point the court out to a decision that this court made in the Appeal of Barrington Education Association.

And I think that's an important case here because it dealt with a sister agency, the P.E.L.R.B.

And in that particular case, their statute under 273-A colon 6 is very similar to the P.E.B. statute,

and that it doesn't specifically state how to make computations of awards.

And the court said in that decision, and I quote,

In the absence of a statutory formula, we can only conclude that the P.E.L.R.B., like its federal counterpart, the N.L.R.B.,

should be given wide discretion in the computation of such awards.

The P.E.B. has been dealing with reinstating state employees for years.

And sometimes they deal with overtime issues, and sometimes they don't.

I can point to two cases where they did deal with it, Appeal of Appleby, which I believe was a 2018 case that dealt with a trooper as well.

In that case, it was dealt with in kind of a reverse order, so to speak.

In that case, what the division was trying to do there was they were trying to take Mr. Appleby's overtime that he earned at the Tilton Police Department

and used that for the purposes of mitigation.

And here the P.E.B. said, well, in all likelihood, it's more than likely than not,

that he would have worked the same overtime had he still been employed by the state police,

so we're not going to allow you to use that for the purposes of mitigation.

So they kind of used it in a reverse way to calculate an award in that particular case.

There's also the Appeal of Williams, which is a more recent case, where they ordered payments of overtime, holiday,

and shift differential to be included in the backpack.

And so the P.E.B. has been crafting these awards for a long period of time.

Now, had the legislature had an issue with that, they could have addressed it,

especially when they changed it and repealed RSA 21-I, colon, 58, and implemented RSA 273-D, colon, 3.

That was a perfect chance to say, you know what, we don't like what the P.E.B. is doing with their decisions.

We're going to put some guardrails in the standard.

Neither of those cases were appealed to us. Is that right?

The appeal of Appleby was as a termination, but not as an award case.

But only one of them occurred before this case, right?

Yeah, only one was heard before the Supreme Court. That was the Appleby case.

My understanding is the second case you rely on for your administrative loss argument took place after this case.

Yes, after this case, yes, it did.

So you have one case, and it's our belief that there's probably others if we were to do some deep diving into that.

But, again, I think with the administrative loss argument that I'm making here is that if the legislature had an issue with the decisions that the P.E.B. was making,

they had the perfect opportunity to make those changes and put in guardrails, and they chose not to.

So I think that goes to show that they are given some discretion when they craft awards.

And, again, because they're the fact-finders. They're the ones that have seen what's in front of them right there.

And they're the ones, I think, Your Honor, you said it, that says write the statute and what they deem just.

And that's what they felt in this particular case.

So is it your position that we owe deference to the P.E.B., or, like, the state is arguing,

that we should be reviewing this de novo since it's statutory construction?

I think that, to answer the question, I think I'm going to say it this way.

I think what the state is looking at is they're reading the statute as being ambiguous and saying that, you know,

you should focus on the one-term salary.

Well, there's also the term pay in there. There's a term compensation in there.

They're all slightly different definitions when you look at them through the Black Law's Dictionary.

But I think you have to look at the statute as a whole.

And as this court has done in the past, when you interpret statutory language, you're the final arbitrators of it.

You look at the plain language as written.

You don't add language that the legislature did not see fit to include.

You examine the statute as a whole to effectuate its overall purpose to avoid any absurd or unjust results.

In this case, when you review the statute, its overall purpose has two things.

To reinstate an employee, if they were wrongfully terminated, and to come up with, you know, a back payment of benefits as well, which they feel is just.

And that would be a factual question to which the PAB has owed some deference.

Even if we agree with the state's statutory construction, at the end of the day, the PAB has brought authority to order whatever it deems just.

And that's what I would argue here, Your Honor, is that it is broad and that it doesn't, because the statute doesn't say base pay only.

The death statute doesn't eliminate overtime.

It doesn't eliminate other benefits.

If the legislature wanted that, they could have easily put in guardrails and said, look, it's only base pay.

You don't include this, you don't include this, you don't include this.

But they didn't.

They left it wide open for the PAB to make those decisions.

The sentence you're relying on uses both the term, as you just pointed out, both the term pay and salary.

Now, when the legislature uses two different words, we assume that they have two different meanings, that you would agree with me on that, right?

That that, when the legislature uses two different words in the same sentence for related concepts, the intent is to express something different with each of those words.

Normally, I would agree with you, but when I look at the statute, it also uses the third word of compensation, which is, again, something completely different.

So, I think it is ambiguous in that, but I think what I'm relying upon, like you said, is what they deem just in there, which, to me, tells them, you know, make something, come up with a back pay award that you feel is appropriate, given the facts and circumstances of these particular cases.

But the state's point is that you don't get to apply that more generic authority if you have a specific provision in the statute that dictates how back pay is to be calculated.

How do you respond to that?

I think it's left open, again, to that because of the wording that it uses.

The only thing that, the only guardrail that the legislature gave was to minus whatever pay they made during the course of their, while they were out.

So, you subtract that to whatever the award would have been.

So, the mitigation part of it.

But also, interestingly, they do put another guardrail in there and they say, well, you don't minus if the person already had a part-time job that they were already doing.

So, they did find that they had to put that in there, but they left the rest of it rather open.

So, I think it's up to interpretation at that point.

And I think their purpose was to allow them a little bit of authority to come up with something that was fair.

Because every case that comes to perform is going to be slightly different.

Most of your employees that are subjected to overtime or have the ability to do overtime are the ones that are going to be, that have 24-hour shifts,

that have 24-hour coverage, so to speak, which are troopers, correctional officers, and the such.

Do you agree that provided that the sum shall be equal to the salary loss suffered, etc., is a limitation on the phrase without loss of pay?

I think it is a limitation on the phrase without loss of pay, meaning, what I think the legislature was looking at was saying,

okay, take their pay, what would that normally have been, and then minus what they made for the mitigation purposes,

in order not to give them a windfall, in a particular instance.

And there's a couple, you know, other states, and I just want to correct the record for a second.

In my brief on page 23-24, I cited a Massachusetts case there.

Massachusetts, as a public policy, doesn't allow for overtime in the calculations of backpack.

And I was citing a case that dealt with arbitration in that particular case, so I think it was a little misplaced.

But there are other states that do deal with overtime, and specifically, New York and Illinois will allow it, as long as it's not speculative.

And what they do is they put the onus on the employee and say that the employee has the burden of proof,

by preponderance of evidence, to show that they would have made some overtime had it not been but for the termination.

And I think that's exactly what the PAB looked at in this case,

and I think that's exactly what Mr. Owens did when he was able to show that in 2017 and 2018,

the two years prior to his termination, he made almost very similar the amount of overtime.

And he also showed that he would have been available for that.

And he also showed that, through testimony, that there was an abundance of overtime and detail

that was available during that period that he would have had to pick of anything he wanted at that point in time.

So I think they took that into consideration.

Our sister state to our west, Vermont, has also done something similar.

In Ray Brown, they looked at their version of their PLRB, and they also have their version of their PAB.

And they did something that was very similar to the appeal of Barrington education that this court had done.

Is the statute similar in Vermont?

Their statutes, they're very similar in that they have a PLRB that's very similar to ours,

and they also have a PAB that's very similar to ours as well, too.

And what they were saying in that particular case as well is what this court has said in the past,

is that we don't see why they shouldn't have the wide authority to be able to craft that award,

you know, given the fact that their federal counterparts have that ability to do that as well.

So, with that, I respectfully ask that this court affirm the PAB's back pay award,

and in doing so, allow the PAB the wide discretion that is needed in order to craft a fair award,

given the unique facts and circumstances of cases that come before it.

And with that, I'm happy to take any last-minute questions that you may have.

Thank you.

Happy birthday.

Thank you very much.

Tanya Jepsen?

Just very briefly to clarify, we're not stating that this statute is ambiguous.

And in regards to the Administrative Gloss Doctrine, that would not be applicable here.

This is not an ambiguous statute, and it's not shown,

there's been no showing that the PAB has been consistently for many number of years issuing overtime.

So, with that, unless there are...

Do I correctly understand your argument that you don't get to the sort of the generic authority to fashion a remedy

because we have a specific statute that describes what is recoverable for back pay?

Correct.

The statute is clear as to what that loss of pay means or is.

So, the PAB can't contradict the terms of that governing statute.

Thank you.

Case amended.

Court to me says...
