This is case 2025-0230 James Orr McCann v. Brittany Bauer et al.

Good morning, Attorney Brezius.

Good morning, may it please the court.

My name is Daniel Brezius. I'm here today on behalf of the Defendants and Appellates Douglas and Brittany Bauer.

We are here today because the plaintiff, Mr. McCann, seeks to enforce alleged parking right easements that his tenants allegedly own against the Bowers.

I also welcome any questions from the court at any time.

Plaintiff attempts to allege this easement using a 2003 deep theory that he did not plead, he did not assert during discovery, and he did not try before the trial court.

And in addition to that, he couples it with an alleged nuisance cause of action that he expressly disavowed during some re-judgment proceedings.

Simultaneously, the plaintiff has failed to provide 16 years of the defendant's trial or chain of title.

Therefore, there is no evidence that any alleged easement is even enforceable against the defendants.

There are numerous reasons today that the court could issue.

Are you saying we don't have deeds in the record?

There are no deeds from 2004 to 2020 with regards to the Bowers chain of title. That is correct.

So didn't the trial court look at the, I thought it was a 2020 deed that the trial court was relying upon?

That is the Bowers deed. Anything between 2004 and 2020 is not present in the record.

There is a deed in 2004, I believe it's the Wycle's or Welcle's. I'm not sure if that's an I or an L.

But that 2004 deed, and then there is a giant gap until 2020 when the Bowers acquired the property.

And one of the errors that we've pointed out in our briefing is that the trial court made a lot of inappropriate assumptions here.

There was an assumption that we owned the property, which wasn't in dispute, luckily.

But there was also an assumption that Mr. McCann owned the property.

And we've pointed out in our trial exhibits and in our briefing that there are at least three issues with his chain of title.

Are you saying we don't have the deed to McCann, the 2020 book 3674, page 2873?

No, there are deeds to McCann on the Bowers side, which is my client.

With regards to enforceability of any alleged easement, there has to be a chain of title presented that shows the Bowers had notice of this alleged easement.

Why would you need a chain of title if you have the deed and the plan?

Because to kind of step back a little bit, the original source of easement that Mr. McCann alleged was a 2000 deed.

And that was from Patricia Hill to herself. And we asserted to the trial court and the trial court confirmed an individual cannot convey an easement to himself.

So at that point, as far as we're concerned, the case should have been over because that was the only thing that we pled that's the only thing we discussed in the discovery.

And then in summary judgment proceedings, there was additional documentation provided.

A subsequent deed in 2003 from Patricia Hill to be Mark Rentals with regards to both properties.

There were separate deeds regarding both parties' properties.

So those deeds were executed and we again alleged once the minute that happened, there was merger and unity of ownership again,

any alleged easement that was conveyed through those two separate deeds was extinguished.

And at that, the trial court agreed with us there.

And in addition, once that easement was extinguished, it was gone forever.

Now there is...

I can't...

A property owner created easement at any...

I mean, I could create an easement right now.

Absolutely.

Absolutely.

And this court has considered those circumstances in Appletree,

citing to the Oregon Supreme Court their decision in Faulkner.

And the rule for that is if there is ever an attempt to recreate a new and an easement,

then the parties need to show that express intent in that document that is recreating.

And the case law that's out there will say, you know, if there's an exhibit attached, if there's some specific reference,

there has to be an express intent shown on the face of that document.

Well, was this a recreation or was this simply in the deed from B. Mark to Grenier?

Wasn't there simply the creation of an easement?

There would have to be a recreation because the trial court has already found

that the easement was extinguished through merger to B. Mark rentals.

So we fall under the recreation rule.

And I understand the plaintiff McCann contends that it was first created from B. Mark to Grenier.

But because of the trial court's findings which stand to this day,

we must analyze it under the recreation process.

So it has to have the express intent.

Why doesn't the lot line adjustment move this argument?

The lot line adjustment was created for the purposes of providing the buildings

that were on the respective lots, on the respective lots.

Prior to that, my client's building flooded over a little bit onto the neighboring property.

There was disagreements with where the line was drawn in the middle.

In this instance, the lot line adjustment was done to adjust the lot lines.

And the statement from Allentown Planning Board confirms that.

There was no desire to, and quite frankly, no reference in Allentown's statement with regards to parking.

So the fact that we are here discussing parking,

especially when Mr. McCann can park 12 vehicles on his own property

and we would be blocked from our own, is an oddity as we see it.

The plan does in reference a common parking area?

It does. It does.

But as far as trying to figure out if parking can be conveyed by an easement,

it's near impossible for an easement.

You don't dispute that the plan itself is enforceable.

I dispute that the plan itself creates a parking easement.

As we view it, it's a parking license.

It's almost impossible to create an easement by any means with regards to parking,

because when you park somewhere, you possess that property.

There's a case we cited to the court, Judd v. Ballin.

And in that instance, they had...

Is that an Hampshire case?

No, it's a persuasive authority.

And in that case, they had parking.

There was two camps.

They shared a driveway and there was an argument that there was parking.

And the court said, you really need to show adverse possession.

You need to show that you've done this for 20 years in order to take someone's rights.

Here, my client is in a position where if there's parking declared on their property,

they're going to be prohibited from parking in their own property.

They're going to be blocked from their own parking spaces.

But the plan itself says lots 41, 43, and 44 are to have deeded access to the common parking area.

The parking area between the three buildings is to be common parking for all of the parcels shown on the plan.

How is that not enforceable under chapter 676?

A plan itself cannot create an easement.

There needs to be a plan and an instrument.

And as you go through the chain of title, you look at Patricia Hill.

That didn't create it.

You look at Patricia Hill to be marked rentals in separate deeds.

We had merger.

And now there's a new deed that's been discussed with regards to be marked to mark her near.

My client didn't even have notice of that.

The white bulls or well bulls, I apologize for which of their last names it is.

They didn't even know that there was a transfer.

There's two documents in the record.

There's a partial release and pedestrian access easement that they signed with be marked rentals.

After be marked rentals allegedly transferred the ownership to mark her near.

Is there anything in the record that shows where this parking for the McCann tenants takes place on block 43?

No.

There is no indication of number other than up to two spaces.

There's no indication of location.

Quite frankly, they could park anywhere.

There is a clause that Patricia Hill successors is the language have reasonable have the right to establish reasonable rules and regulations,

which again jumps out to me is an oddity for an easement.

If somebody can come a servant can come in and tell a dominant estate.

This is how you're going to do it.

This is how you're not going to do it.

That's not an easement.

That's a license.

That's permission.

If it was an easement, there'd be no rights.

The dominant could could do just about anything as long as they're not interfering.

And the fact that there are even that clause, which is not in dispute.

If that if there is an easement that that causes effective the existence of that clause coupled with the lack of location, the lack of number.

All this really points to it being a license like in quality discount where there was there was deeds that allegedly created a parking easement.

However, when the when this court looked at that case, they found that there was only a license because of all the deed language and the oddities.

In that case, quality discount, there was deed language saying that we allow you to park there.

We permit you very similar language here.

We're allowing up to the languages were allowing up to two vehicles to park.

That's the language is directive of permission rather than mandatory easement access.

It's not a right away like we see in other cases with shared driveways where there's only transient access.

This is this is possession.

This is taking how is language that says the right and easement to allow and it goes on.

How is that not an easement?

How is that a license?

The language of the deed itself is not indicative of what rights are created.

And we've seen this in many cases where parties will use the word easement and it actually isn't an easement.

And I think the nature of what rights are alleged here is even more important because, again, we're talking about parking rights.

Parking rights are rarely, if ever correctly determined to be an easement because they are possessory interest and an easement is a non-possessory interest.

So we end up with a conflict right there even though they use the word easement.

That's not indicative of what the actual rights are.

What case stands for that proposition?

We cited several in our brief.

New Hampshire keys.

I don't believe New Hampshire has a case on that as many things, unfortunately.

But when we do the analysis, we can consider that an easement word was used.

We could try and see if there's intent that came from that.

But at the end of the day, the rights that are conveyed don't fit that mold.

They fit the mold of a temporary license where these parties were.

If somebody wanted to convey a temporary license just to the individuals, they would use the word a license, too.

And they would generally name the individual.

But when it says an easement, how does it not run with the land?

Well, in this instrument, there wasn't even language of succession.

It was to the owner's tenants of that property.

It didn't say, and successors, science, heirs, everything else.

So when we look at that, I think it goes to the court's recommendation that we are in an instance where we are conveying something to individuals temporary,

not to be conveyed further through succession as Mr. McCann has contended.

So I think there's, as we review that, again, we can and we should consider that the word easement was written there.

But when we try to fit that mold with what rights were conveyed and the fact that they weren't conveyed to successors, heirs, and the science,

we end up in a position where if that document did convey something, it conveyed only a license.

The trial court found that if the McCann tenants had the ability to park on your client's land,

it would prevent your clients from being able to park on the land.

But I saw no explanation of that. Can you provide me with something in the record that explains why that is true?

Sure. If you looked at the plan 14986, you'd see that the entrance into the driveway is a 12-foot paved driveway,

which is slightly bigger than one vehicle.

And as you come in, the driveway widens, I believe it might be about 20 feet on the tall widens.

So you're in a position where you branch out and you would have what I call tandem parking.

Basically, you're parking in whoever comes in first.

And so historically, my client has parked all the way up towards the house at the top of the parking lot.

So if people come in behind and park behind, my clients will be blocked in through that process.

And on the other side, the Mr. McCann's property is three units, tenants in there.

I think it's probably a 25-by-60-foot driveway.

The trial court went and viewed it between 12 and 15 parking spots.

Mr. McCann alleges he needs this extra parking on my client's property because of snow and ice buildup in the winter season.

So really, as far as equities lie, we're in a position where Mr. McCann has plenty of parking for three apartments,

and my client has limited access to begin with.

And providing any type of easement or rights to Mr. McCann's tenants would deprive my clients of their very rights

in using the property that they own.

But to the extent there's an easement, it's limited to two cars, two vehicles.

It is up to two vehicles, which again, the ambiguity of that, when we look at rights that are conveyed with regards to parking,

we really want those to be specific.

We want to show where there's a location.

We want to show what the exact count is.

We want to make sure that specificity is provided so that it is enforceable and understood.

But can't that be done through the rules and regulations piece?

So I think that plays into it.

But let's say my client wanted the rules and regulations to be one car.

I'm sure Mr. McCann would disagree with that.

Well, you couldn't establish rules and regulations that would essentially unilaterally decrease the easement, right?

If we were to agree it's a two-vehicle easement, then it has to be two vehicles.

The rules and regulations can't cut that.

The language that we're arguing about here is up to two vehicles.

So I would argue that we would have access to look at that, figure out what makes sense.

How can we park? How can we position?

Do they need to be slanted? Do they need to be straight?

Do we need to limit it to compact cars versus SUVs versus trucks?

Can we do two tiny compact car spots but maybe only one truck spot?

And through that process you could avoid the blocking in problem that's your client's concern.

And I think there is some issue that could be resolved there, which admittedly to the court we've tried to do that before all this litigation happened.

But isn't it possible that the rules and regulations piece is what overcomes your thoughts about easements for parking and how unusual they are, right?

I think it helps, but really what it shows is the fact that it's undisputed if there is parking rights that my client has the right to modify those really shows that it's not in the nature of an easement.

So if there is an easement and there are rights to enforce it, that would be through the tenants, but there's not an easement because of when we look at the actual instrument itself,

we see that there are plenty of oddities here that steer away from easement.

Quite frankly, the only thing that steers towards an easement is the word easement.

Everything else points us in the opposite direction because I apologize, I'm at the end of my time.

A serving in a state typically doesn't have any rights to restrict the dominant in a state's use.

Thank you, Attorney Britsius.

Attorney Snook.

Good morning, Your Honor.

I think this case...

Please identify yourself for the record.

Huh?

Please identify yourself.

Oh, I apologize.

I'm Christopher Snook.

I represent the appellee in the situation, James McCann.

As I was saying, this case, I think, really comes down to the transfer from BMARC to Mark Grenier

and the transfer from BMARC to Weigel.

Because in my client's chain of title, when BMARC rentals transferred to Mark Grenier,

it contained the same easement language that is found in my client's deed.

It references plan number 14986, which also mentions that there's common parking to be deeded to the owners of certain lots,

which include my client's lots, and identifies the lot on the plan where the common parking is supposed to be.

And once it was transferred to Mark Grenier, BMARC rentals lost the ability to release that easement to anyone else

because they no longer owned the property.

Even though it wasn't in the record, BMARC rentals owned,

received all of the hill lots and then deeded them out individually.

And at trial, the only testimony that was heard was from my client and he testified that the behavior of the appellants

suggested that they weren't challenging the other lot owners right to park in the common lot, only my clients right.

And the release of easement that was asserted by the appellants in the situation

references that BMARC is the owner of not just my client's lot, but the other lots that have the easement to park in that common lot.

Is this case distinguishable from quality discount in your mind?

The case that held that where the court found that it was, I believe it was an easement in gross or a license,

the language used was agreed to permit and the words to allow appears in the language that your client is relying upon.

Why isn't it an easement in gross?

It's not an easement in gross because I think for one, when the easement is actually created is when BMARC is transferring the properties out

because prior to that point, the relevant lots, the dominant state serving state was all owned either by BMARC or by Hill

so there's no easement over their property, but it's when BMARC transfers it out and transfers the property to different people.

There's separate chains of titles for all the lots.

And all the dominant lots contain identical language saying that there's an easement to park up to two cars.

That says to allow parking up to two cars, right?

I think that is where the portion where it's subject to reasonable rules and regulations,

which is just an incorporation of common law, easement law, that no one can use an easement that would unreasonably interfere with the

servient state's use of the rest of their property.

I think there could definitely be a situation where maybe only one car is allowed to be parked because it's the middle of the winter

and there's only room for one large car or maybe two small cars as opposing counsel was describing.

And I'm sure you wouldn't interpret the language literally and say, well, you can't park trucks there because it just says cars.

There's a difference between trying to park an extended bed pickup truck and trying to park two small compact sedans.

So I think that language is acknowledging that any of those things, they have a right to park on that lot,

but it has to be a reasonable use and the owner of the lot is allowed to set some reasonable regulations.

If the dominant state believes that the servient state is being unreasonable,

that's something that would have to be decided with the court.

And that's something that happens in any easement case.

If it's a right-of-way, you may have a right as the servient state to place some kind of...

You may have reason you need to place a gate as long as it's not unreasonably interfering with the use of the right-of-way.

If the gate comes with a key or some way that the state that owns the right-of-way can still access the right-of-way the same way they have been.

And I think that's the situation we're in.

The plan lays out very clearly where the common parking is, who's allowed to use the common parking, and a deed.

How does it lay out very clearly where the common parking is?

Because it states the lot that is subject to the common parking.

But it's the entire lot. It's lot 43, right?

It doesn't specify a location on the lot, does it?

No, but it specifies the lot.

And any easement is you're allowed to, as again, you're allowed to use it reasonably.

And I know with right-of-way situations, if for any reason the deed is right-of-way, you can't use it.

I believe there's a case law where somebody had built a barn or something across where the right-of-way was located.

You're allowed to move the right-of-way, if that's the most reasonable way to use it, to go around the barn

even if it doesn't match the description of where the right-of-way is.

Do you maintain that your clients have the right to park anywhere on lot 43?

Anywhere that would be reasonable for them to park on that lot.

If they're parking in a way where they're just boxing in somebody's cars and they're unable to get out

or somehow making it impossible to use the lot as it's supposed to be used,

then that would be an unreasonable use.

They would be taking advantage of their easement.

And I think the common law also...

So you would say if their parking was blocking access to that lot, that would be unreasonable?

I believe that would be unreasonable because there would be an unreasonable interference with...

Firstly, I believe it would unreasonably interfere with the other lots, you know, right to park in that lot

if they're blocking the lot entirely.

But it also would unreasonably interfere with the serving estates' use of their own property.

So the two of the lots that have parking rights supposedly on the lot, how many vehicles are they allowed to park?

Is it up to two as well?

I believe every deed says up to two for all the dominant estates in this situation.

So there could be as many as six cars being parked in the Bauer's lot?

I believe so.

And maybe that's the situation where we're getting, if there's six lots and there's only five...

There's only room for five vehicles, you know.

I don't think any interpretation of an easement or a deed has to be so inflexible

because vehicles change in size over time, you know.

If this was an easement to park two cars from 1930, that may only be the size of one car now.

And I think these are things that have to be taken into account.

But the problem in this case was that the Bauer's were trying to deny access entirely,

trying to tell my client's tenants that they have to park only on my client's property.

And that's unreasonably interfering with the use of the easement.

So we've been told that access into the Bauer's lot is 12 feet wide.

What is the dimension of the parking area, do you know?

I knew because I wasn't the council at trial, so I don't know exactly the specific width.

But my understanding is, as the opposing council described it, is that it opens up.

So the driveway is 12 feet, but then it's a much wider area.

It's the full space between the buildings is what it comes down to is that they're sort of a U-shape

between three different sections of buildings, and that's the common parking area.

And the trial court took a view of the property.

Yes, that's my understanding that the trial court took a view of the property.

What's your response to the challenge to your client's ownership of the property?

I think that's a bit of a red herring because first the argument is that

it was an illegal transfer from BMARC to one of its managers and members, Mark Grineer,

because there was another member and manager of BMARC Rentals, Belkis Grineer.

And that's a problem within the LLC.

The other members or managers felt that this was an illegal transfer.

They're trying to defraud the LLC or do something.

That's going to be handled internally.

There may be a lawsuit.

There's different remedies that managers and members of LLCs have against other members

and managers for misappropriating funds, embezzlement, things of that nature.

And to our knowledge, that never happened.

But it doesn't matter because Mark Grineer then transfers it in 2004 to Mika Eli,

who there's nothing to suggest that Mika Eli took that property with the thinking that

Mark Grineer didn't have authority to transfer the property that he held in his own name to him.

And then after that, there's a foreclosure deed to North Coast LLC,

to Flannery, Flannery to SPAC, SPAC to my client.

There's several bona fide purchasers of value in that chain of title that I think.

To the degree that there's any merit to the BMARC Rentals to Grineer transfer,

not being legitimate, I think it's long past the time for where that property

can actually be voided, where that transfer can be voided.

Because essentially what the founders are asking is that,

well, the property is actually owned by BMARC Rentals that defunct LLC that hasn't existed for two decades.

It seems it would be absurd at this point.

Why shouldn't there be a reformation of the release of the easement?

Because there isn't sufficient evidence to suggest that the release of easement by BMARC Rentals

was supposed to be done by Mark Grineer in his individual capacity.

Mark Grineer, I presume, knew he had received the property from his own LLC.

The deed from BMARC to Weichel mentions the easement,

and it mentions the Hill Plan being subject to the common parking easement.

The deed from Mark Grineer to Miki Eli says he has an easement to park up to two vehicles

subject to reasonable rules and regulations mentions the plan.

And then when we go through the chain of time all the way down to the deed from Amlaw to Bauer,

it contains the same language that was found in the BMARC to Weichel deed.

It's nobody in the chain of title thought that they need to remove that language

because no one in that chain of title references the release of deed.

It's not as if you contain that language,

and you also say, and subject to whatever stated in the partial release of easement,

book, page, so on and so forth.

At the end of the day, there needs to be some evidence that the partial release of easement

was filed as a mistake because it falls outside the chain of title.

It was signed and recorded after the property was transferred to the Weichels,

and it was after the property was transferred to Mark Grineer,

and it was recorded, I think maybe a few days before the Miki Eli deed was recorded,

but that contains the easement language as well.

It's not as if even the deed that Mark Grineer provided to Miki Eli

in no way references the partial release of easement.

I think there needs, had there been testimony if Mark Grineer, if he's around, had testified.

Yeah, that was a mistake, and this is what happened.

We'd be having a different story, but there's absolutely nothing there.

It's completely outside the chain of title.

No one going forward would have any idea that that partial release of easement

would apply to their property because it was filed by someone who didn't own the property

after it had been transferred.

If there's no more questions, I'll just say in conclusion,

I think this is the trial court zeroed in specifically on what's that issue here.

It's B Mark created an easement when they transferred my client's lot to Mark Grineer

and when they transferred the Bauer's lot to Weichel using the easement language.

They corresponded with one another, referenced the same plan,

and this has been carried through their chains of title.

The deed to Bauer contains the same language regarding the easement as the deed to Weichel

and my client's deed contains the same language,

and you see that through every deed in the chain of title.

Thank you.

Thank you, Attorney Snook. This case is submitted.

The court invites counsel and judge
