This is case 2025-0342, appeal of Christos Gacchus.

Morning, Attorney Branch. I understand you reserved two minutes for your butthole.

Yes, I did, Your Honor. Thank you very much. May it please the court.

My name is B.J. Britch. I'm here for Christos Gacchus.

By way of an opening statement, I'd like to offer the following.

In preparing for this hearing, I stumbled upon something kind of weird about this court.

You all share the same name. Justice Gould, Justice Count White, Justice Will, Justice Donovan, and Chief Justice McDonald.

That's because your core mission is to do justice. And this is a case where justice needs to be done.

It's also ties to the fact that in this case, you're very standard for when to disturb a compensation appeals board's decision

is when they are unjust or unreasonable, and when there's an error of law.

I'm going to suggest to you in this case, there is both an error of law and that and an unjust result,

and that the unjust result flows from the error of law.

And the error of law here from my standpoint is clear by the absence of any reference

to the most important fact I've ever seen in a workers' compensation context on the actual state of mind of a claimant.

In this case, you can find that on the appendix, page 13, because that captures exactly what he knew and when he knew it.

It says, and it's a handwritten note from Mr. Gacchus calling his employer, like every good employee he should,

to say he went to a doctor. And they quote their own evidence, this was produced by the defendant.

States in a handwritten note with some spelling errors, but that just highlights its authenticity.

Christos called, went to doctor's appointment for what he thought was his hernia from the first time, but it is not.

The CAB nowhere mentions that fact. I practically set myself on fire in arguing that point.

It's not mentioned once. All that they focus on, literally, is Christos Gacchus' state of mind, subjective state of mind.

And you have ruled on more than one occasion, although I've only cited one case for it,

that the claimant's subjective state of mind, or the plaintiff's or anybody's state of mind, under the discovery rule,

is an objective standard and that the subjective state of mind of the claimant is not controlling.

So when there is demonstrable, significant evidence of other factors that should be considered

before determining, as between all those factors, what his actual objective state of mind was,

it is incumbent upon the CAB to at least mention them and discuss them.

The only fact that the CAB cites is the subjective state of mind of Christos Gacchus.

He's a good-looking, well-spoken young man, and he is.

But he went to a door and he admitted, because he's honest to a fault, that when this initially happened,

the first thing came to his mind, I think this is work-related.

That's in 2016.

No, that's 2020. 2016 was the first comp claim. He also thought that was work-related. It was denied.

So he just kept working.

So in 2020, the doctor supposedly tells him this is not about the first injury in 2016.

Correct.

But does that preclude it from being a work-related injury, nonetheless?

Well, you will see in the appendix at page 19, lines 5 through 10,

no one told him that it was work-related when he went to that visit.

And then he was told it was not what he thought it was.

That's clear from the note that was left.

But those are all questions because these are findings of fact that the CAB can and should consider.

And if they had said, we've looked at the fact that Mr. Gacchus was told by a doctor that he did not sustain a recurrent hernia,

even though that's what he had reported was the case.

And the absence of the evidence indicating that anyone did tell him it was work-related.

But we find it counterbalanced by his prior experience in 2016 or something along those lines.

But there's absolutely no evidence of an evaluation taking place.

And with reference to a remedial statute where there's no dispute that he suffered a devastating work-related injury which has ruined his life.

And he's four months late to take away his right to benefits under those circumstances

without demonstrating in the decision that they adequately considered all the factors

and then made a judgment call which I might still disagree with.

Down the road, I could lose this case again. I've lost better cases.

It won't be a problem.

But I don't think we will if you weigh all of the evidence.

And you point out clear confusion by the CAB between the 2016 and the 2020 event.

They consistently commingled them when it was very clear if you look at the trajectory of the case that these were separate and distinct incidents.

In fact, in page two of the decision from the CAB, he cites the fact that his 2016 claim was denied as work-related.

As somehow Christos' excuse for why he didn't think the 2020 claim was related.

At some point, a provider does tell him that it is work-related.

Yes.

And when does that occur?

February of 2022.

And it's very important to bear in mind because you guys focus...

And that's when they contemplated the surgery.

I'm sorry?

That's when the surgery took place thereafter.

Yes.

And you focus on due diligence.

And so just because you get an opinion that's in the discovery rule, you talk about the claim and having to engage in due diligence.

While this isn't a pandemic case, you can't ignore the dates.

It was February of 2020 that he was told by a doctor, you don't have a recurrent hernia.

And he called it in and said, I thought I had one, but I don't.

Now, in terms of getting a second opinion, that's something that due diligence probably does require.

But the world kind of closed down on March 13th of 2020.

So when we're talking about a four-month gap in when he...

But we're in 2022.

Pardon?

We're in 2022 that he objectively learns from a medical provider.

Yes.

So...

In the intervening period of time, he could not go get a doctor because of the pandemic.

Those kinds of visits were stopped because it was not a crisis situation.

I don't mean to go astray.

I'm just trying to figure out the four months because we know as of February of 2022, he, under your standard,

he objectively knows from his medical provider that it's work-related, the recurring hernias work-related.

Yes.

But the notice of claim is not filed until three years and four months later in June of 2025.

Is that correct?

I don't think so.

No.

I believe it was about a year later I filed in 2023.

I'll have to check my...

Oh, okay.

I'm sorry.

June of 2025.

So where is the...

At my marriage.

Date of my marriage, yes.

I'm sorry.

I had a typo in my timeline here.

That's okay.

So where does the four months come from in the CAB's decision?

The CAB ran the numbers from February of 2020 when he went to see that doctor.

The doctor had told him, you don't have a recurrent hernia.

I see.

But he indicates the CAB person who wrote the chair, I mean, wrote the decision.

He indicates...

And that's why the note in your view is so important that 2020...

Yes.

It had to at least...

And I'm not asking for you to disturb the findings and say, we're throwing it out and he gets

comp and everything goes away.

We're asking for a remand just to make sure that under the context of a remedial statute,

the law is correctly applied and the facts that are absolutely essential to that inquiry

are considered.

There's no way you can look at that CAB decision and conclude that they...

Even we're listening, frankly.

So the doctor in 2020 recommends surgery at that point in time.

There's a surgical note, yes.

And does the pandemic weigh into your client's decision not to have surgery at that point in

time?

No, no.

He just was weighing his options because he had been told something by that doctor that

made him conclude it wasn't work related.

He was therefore aware he would likely be having to get this surgery done and have

no money coming in.

He was able to self-treat and he continued to try to.

But in terms of what his objective state of mind was, at that moment, he, going by that

note, he had been told something by that doctor, which he can't remember now exactly because

he made a contemporaneous memory of it by calling into work.

Christos went to the doctor for what he thought was his hernia from the first time, but

it is not.

Let me ask you this.

In the description, it was kind of a colorful description of what happened in 2016 when

he was injured.

Yes.

It was this very sudden sensation of sort of an explosive event.

Yes.

Was there anything like that in evidence before the CAB that demonstrated that something

happened at work that caused this new condition to arise?

There was the fact that, well, first of all, of course, at the CAB decision we did

have expert testimony from the doctor in 2022 who indicated that it was work-related and that

it was a cumulative trauma injury because he had had the surgery given his heavy lifting

at work.

It started to slowly tear.

So there was that evidence.

But he didn't have a simultaneous experience like he had in 2016 where I'm lifting and

bang, I feel the pain.

Correct.

And again, what I wanted in evaluating what his objective state of mind is, he's

not a doctor and he has this very colorful, as you said, event at work and they say it's

not work-related.

And so imagine the subtlety of in fact being told it was work-related when something didn't

dramatic occur.

I think we can all understand that, you know, if you're at work and you slam your

hand in the door, it's, ouch, that hurts.

But developing carpal tunnel over time is a much more subtle kind of an equation.

And in this case, his told us not work-related because not because there was a finding, it

wasn't work-related, but because there was basically an insufficient record, right?

I mean, it was because the medical wasn't it in 2016 for lack of submitting the medical

records or something like that?

That is correct.

It was denied for lack of medical support.

But there also was no evidence that any of those doctors said it was work-related during

his treatment with them in 2016.

In terms of the 2020 injury, is that when the statute began to run from your perspective?

I'm sorry, I missed the first part of the question.

When did the statute begin to run for the second injury?

That would have been when he met, as Chief Justice McDonald noted, that time from my view

of the case began in February of 2022.

That's when he sat down with the doctor.

He testifies about it.

There's a medical record that was submitted and in that medical record, the doctor indicates

that I discussed with him his work duties and it appears to me that he sustained

a work-related injury in the course of his heavy lifting.

But it was over time.

So initially it was just a slight protrusion, no big deal.

I don't know how many people have had hernias, I have, and believe me, you want to put off

the surgery as long as possible, I suppose.

So he just kept going.

He did have to have the surgery in 2016, obviously, because that was a catastrophic

kind of an event.

But this one was, and yet it was still denied.

From his standpoint, looking at him in his circumstances as a reasonable person, under

his circumstances, a guy who does a lot of hard physical work, high school graduate,

no medical training, he certainly thought 2016 was related.

So if we're going to remand, what should we tell the camp to do?

I think there should be a de novo hearing on the issue of what he knew and when he

knew it, using the discovery rule as it should be applied, meaning that you weigh

what he says, which was that he, well, I thought it was work-related in both 2022

and in 2016, excuse me, 2020, I'm sorry, 2020 and 2016.

But then I went to a doctor and he said it wasn't work.

He said you don't have a recurrent hernia.

So he lost track of the condition that he allegedly thought he had aggravated.

It's as simple as that.

Again, this is...

I'm going to branch your red lights on.

Oh, okay.

Thank you.

So you reserved two minutes.

Thank you.

Dr. Lonano?

Good morning, may it please the court.

My name is James Lonano and I represent the employer on this case.

I'm asking the court to affirm the cab's decision.

It's our position that there was no error of law in applying the statute

limitations to preclude this claim.

And we'd also argued that there is no unjust decision here that the

cap had ample support for its decision in finding that the triggering

event for the statute of limitations was the February 2020 medical

treatment that he sought.

So is a 2016 injury relevant at all?

I believe that it is.

I believe it's the start of the whole sequence of events.

I would posit that there's no evidence to suggest that 2020 represents

a new injury.

There is that phone call, which is written down by my clients about it.

But there's also, if you look just halfway down the page, there's

the asterisk that the person the note was addressed to says, this is

the first time that I have heard of this.

He said pain was an original spot.

All of the treatment from 2016 through the present has been for

a right-growing injury.

There's never been any suggestion that there's another injury.

So in terms of the 2016 injury, it is entirely irrelevant because that

starts the timeline of events.

2020, as the cab found, was the first instance of treatment for the

recurring injury, and that's what started the statute of limitations

clock.

When the claim was filed on June 19th of 2023, it was four months

beyond the statute of limitations.

And that timeline is supported in the medical records.

I know where Attorney Branch is talking about the claimant state of

mind, but when you look at the other treatment records from 2022,

there are references to it being a recurring event.

But he was told by the surgical care group in 2020 that it was not

a recurring injury, wasn't he?

That's according to this one document, this narrative note that

when he calls into the employer, what the cab relied on, I think,

is important, that the claimant testified under oath at the cab

hearing that by 2020 he believed that this was a recurring event

going back to the 2016 subjective belief, right?

I'm sorry, Ron.

That's his subjective belief, right?

Well, he testified under oath to that in 2020 that he believed,

sure, that it was related.

But that's not, I mean, he's not a medical expert, right?

He's not qualified to make that diagnosis for purpose of knowing

that it's related, right?

No, but I would deposit that he doesn't need that for purposes

of the statute of limitation statute in that it's new

or should have known.

And again, when you look at the narratives in the other 2022

records, and he is the sole historian for his medical history,

he is noting, the doctors are noting that when you look

at the June 15, 2020 surgical note,

chief complaint, right groin pain, history of present illness,

right hernia, recurrent after 2016 repair.

So the doctor's not pulling that out of the air.

He's getting that from the patient contemporaneous

to the event.

So but how can I say?

He should have known that if a medical professional,

a doctor is telling him it's not recurrent.

I mean, if I write, I mean, how can he be charged

with that objective knowledge?

Well, we don't have a medical record that says it's not related.

I think that's sort of the problem in this case

is that we have, again, just this call

into the employer on February 5,

and it's transcribing, you know, the person who takes

the call is writing it down, that it was the hernia

from the first issue, first time, but it is not.

That's the only evidence of that.

So do we have the medical records from the 2020 evaluation?

We do not.

The only thing we have from 2020 is a February 7, 2020

to whom it can make concern letter

that says he was examined on February 5, 2020.

He is scheduled for surgery for the anguinal hernia.

And I think when you take that and then look

at his testimony at the cab, when he's asked again

about what you believe in 2020 that this was all work related

and he testifies unequivocally, yes.

When he's asked, why don't you go through with the surgery?

His words were, well, I'll just go on with the pain.

He's not talking about that this is something

he doesn't testify at the cab, that it's a new injury.

He just testifies that he'll go on with the pain,

he pushes it in, and that's sort of the recurring theme

from 2016 through 2022 that he sort of deals with it.

He tells the surgeon in 2022 that he had the surgery in 2016.

Couple years later, he has what he described as it happened.

It felt like it had happened again.

And I think one of the justices asked about another intervening

event, and there's not a documented work event,

but he describes it to the doctor,

saying a couple years after the 2016 surgery,

I felt like it had happened again.

So that's sort of a first instance

of the recurring symptoms.

And then in 2020, we have this letter indicating

that he's scheduled for surgery.

But the cab didn't make a finding that

it discounted the note memorializing his statement

that he was told it wasn't a recurring, right?

In other words, there isn't a finding

that that was not credible or a lie or something like that,

right?

No, no, not specific, Your Honor.

The cab does state that, essentially in the background

section of the decision, Mr. Gaick

has testified that he believed at this point in 2020

that's the first time that his hernia was work-related.

The claimant is obviously intelligent and well-spoken.

He was familiar with his condition

and clearly knew it was caused by his heavy work.

But the cab doesn't confront it at all.

I'm sorry, Your Honor.

The cab doesn't confront the issue at all of the note.

No, no, it does not rule it in one way or the other.

Well, similar concerns.

I mean, the cab specifically finds it

is clear the claimant knew the hernia was work-related in 2020.

And how do you square that with this note, which

was before the cab?

How could you say he knew when he's

disclaiming that it's work-related contemporaneously?

Well, the note was in the record.

It was submitted to the cab.

I understand that.

But he would at least, to Justice Will and Justice Donovan's

point, you would expect the cab to somehow address this,

because it does appear he had a contemporary in his understanding.

It was not work-related.

He is, quote, good to go.

And I think they're relying on his testimony

at the hearing that he testified that in February of 2020

he understood it to be work-related at that point

in time.

So and again, the narratives in the other 2022 records,

I think, again, still speak to his knowledge

that this is a recurring condition coupled with his testimony

on the matter.

So I don't believe that there's been any error

in the application of the statute of limitations here.

And while it's not the issue of this appeal,

Attorney Branch is bringing up in his brief

that a prior claim had been litigated up through the cab

and sort of the law of the case at that point was

that the triggering event was the February 2022.

So from your standpoint, maybe you've already answered this,

when does the statute begin to run?

I would argue February 5, 2020, which

is when the to whom you may concern letter

it stated February 7, but it references

he was examined on February 5 of 2020.

Nothing prior to that, including 2016,

is relevant to the statute of limitations

from your standpoint.

I think there's an argument to be made that really goes back

to 2016, and that he's precluded

because he didn't pursue it then.

But from a recurring injury standpoint,

I think February 2020 is absolutely when the statute

starts to run.

And unfortunately, it was just four months too late

in filing it.

The risk of repeating myself, I guess

I'll just defer to the court here

if there are any other questions.

Thank you, Ron.

Thank you very much, Attorney Branch.

Very quickly, there's no reference

in that note of 25, 2020, that it's work related.

They indicate to them that he has something

that will need surgery.

But nowhere in that note do they say it's work related.

And you would think they would throw that out there

if that had been even discussed within the context

of the doctor's opinion.

In terms of it being a new injury,

I don't know from my standpoint,

they're in a box because they go through under background

that he submitted a worker's compensation claim that

was denied.

There was a worker's compensation complaint in 2016.

And then it indicates that he returned to work

and worked full time full duty for more than at least two

years.

And when you return to work full time full duty

in the worker's compensation statute

and you don't have any problems.

And then all of a sudden, you slowly

start to develop problems as a result of recurring lifting.

That is the very definition of accumulative trauma injury,

which is what we argued, which is by definition

a new injury.

Thank you very much.

Thank you, counsel.

He's submitted.
