The new members of the court, I'll give you a brief summary of the background that I think is relevant to decide this appeal.

Chris and Kelly Ann, I'm here on behalf of the appellants on the case that has been before this court previously.

The Chief Justice and I believe Justice Donovan both sat on what I will refer to as Andrews 1.

The new members of the court, I'll give you a brief summary of the background that I think is relevant to decide this appeal.

Chris and Kelly Andrews, a young couple, had a love of the Washington Valley in the ski areas.

Went up there and visited frequently, and they started looking at some properties.

I've shown a number of these rental properties that they could purchase, use for their family on vacation time, and rent to help pay the mortgage.

First property they bought was an 11, and the second one was an 13.

They've since sold one of those because of the turmoil involving this case and various things.

They still own one of those properties.

In 2017 or thereabouts, there was a member of one of the political factions that lived next to one of the Andrews properties that had a dislike for short term vacation rentals.

That started this ball in motion in the KLP, and what happened I believe they went to an ordinance that I think initially started in the 50s,

maybe amended somewhat in the 80s, and said here we have a provision that we can use to stop short term rentals.

And that provision, our view is ambiguous, and I think that's an issue for the court to take up together with the ultra virus matter.

If you look at the ordinance, which is in the record, it looks like it came from the 50s.

It's not something that you'd see today.

They give a list of various permitted uses in the residential zone, single family homes, duplexes, apartments, lodging houses, tourist homes,

which my understanding back then might have been the ski groups or ski camps and that sort of thing.

And there's a provision down below that basically says those offering sleeping accommodations for transient or permanent guests

must be owner, occupied, and managed, or operated, excuse me.

And our view that was never what this provision was intended for, and as you stated in the Kudrick case,

hard to imagine that someone back in the 50s or the 80s would be thinking of what short term rentals would look like in 2017.

When you go back to Anders 1, if you look at the dissent in that case, Judge Hans Marconi of Experienced Land Use Practitioner wrote,

and she stated that she would have reversed this case on administrative gloss because there was a number of findings in the record

over 50 years of non-enforcement against single family renters and there was a whole host of them.

Admissions by the KLP that they never enforced it.

Questions from the KLP if they enforced it, would it be legal?

So she thought that was sufficient.

And of note, when the majority remanded it on ultra virus, she said,

I'd like the trial court to take a look at ambiguity because Justice Dignatius in the first round said,

I'm going to assume without deciding that that provision is ambiguous.

So the majority of the court in Anders 1 rejected many of our substantive, all of our substantive arguments,

equal protection and so forth.

But they used the deferential standard, right?

We give difference to the ZBA for all factual findings.

Then we give difference to the trial court.

And the only basis for reversal would be if there was an error of law or the conclusion was unreasonable.

And that's how Anders 1 was evaluated.

We get sent down on Anders and then something happens.

This court, of course, and short-term rentals is the buzz throughout the state.

And I think as you noted in Kudrick until such time as the legislature addresses this,

we're going to deal with it on a piecemeal basis.

But you had some instructive comments in there.

You looked at the language, and in my view, you set a new standard for the evaluation of zoning ordinances

that restrict fundamental property rights.

Kudrick said that ownership of real property is a fundamental property right,

and you compared it, in fact, to taking away parents' parental rights.

And it deserves that same protection.

You know, that is certainly one of the most sacred, if you ask me, constitutional protections.

But that's what it talks about.

And it goes on to say that when we're looking at these ordinance, does this provision so clear and so concise

that it would take somebody that was going to buy a house and mortgage it and have to have payments know that it applied to them?

We think if the court takes a look at the transcript and the decision from Judgatory,

it reads like a storybook on ambiguity.

If you go to page 26 of the transcript, it's a great question, Your Honor,

and I struggle with it every time I look at it.

You know, the first part of it, and I would say it's broader than that.

The first part, someone offering sleeping accommodations.

Is that different from somebody that's offering an entire home?

Does it just mean a tourist house, a boarding house, or a lodging house?

The Andrews, for certain, are not just offering sleeping accommodations.

They're offering a total house for a family.

They want to go to Storyland or Ski.

It certainly would include sleeping accommodations.

It certainly would.

And then when you get there, permanent guests, what's a permanent guest?

Well, according to Judgatory, it's not a tenant.

It's not a tenant, and that's an interesting thought.

And the question is, regardless of how you decide here, it seems to me,

if you affirm Judgatory's decision, I can draft up a lease,

apply 540A or 540C, which is not addressed in that opinion,

and say, look it, I have a tenant here.

They're here for a week. They're here for two weeks.

They're here for five days.

There's nothing that restricts a homeowner to enter into a contract with anyone

and to find them as a tenant.

Not the way the order is written.

If you're in the area and there's no duration, like Kudrick,

you say, you're not going to insert a duration.

But I don't know the difference between what's a permanent guest.

Is that my brother-in-law who moves in?

Is that someone I find on the street and say,

have a sleeping accommodation?

It would be to me if you look at it, if they're not paying rent.

But the court goes on to say,

well, I have to look at this and give it the plain reading of the language

that they chose to use.

But by the way, I'm not going to deal with that permanent guest thing

because it comes to an absurd conclusion.

Kind of like the struggle that we're having.

What is it? Well, it doesn't really apply to permanent people.

And I think even the KLP said, you know,

if you have a one-year lease with somebody and one-year rental,

that's not governed or restricted by this ordinance.

And then it came down to the question from the court,

what about a one-week rental?

And the KLP's answer, that's a fine line.

That's a fine line.

So I can't give you an answer of how the KLP would enforce that.

I just can't.

And I think that's the hard part of that whole section.

If I'm going to spend money in burdening myself with a mortgage,

do I look at that and say, this applies to me

clearly from the 1950s or the 1980s, a period of 50 years,

they were people that looked at that ordinance,

purchased homes, took out mortgages

and rented them to vacationers

and never thought that provision applied to them.

And neither did the KLP.

Never happened.

Now what you did in Kudrick, I think, is instructive

and throughout the state, it's had impact.

You said, let's look at the use of the property,

not so much what's in the property or how we define it,

what goes in the four walls.

And you encouraged communities to look at this short-term

rental business.

A lot of them said, yes, let's regulate the impacts

to have that quiet, safe community,

which is supposedly the legislative intent.

Well, how do we do that?

We limit occupancy.

We limit parking.

We have a manager on file with the town

who lives a certain distance from the property that can respond.

We give the enforcement official authority to fine.

We have regulations for garbage pickup and removal.

My view, looking at my light on, when you look at this,

I don't think there's any way that this court can conclude

that this is a clear and concise provision

that restricts property rights.

And to the extent you do, I think you have a problem

that it conflicts with Kudrick.

I think the answer here is to reverse it.

I know what we sought to amend here to add a new count,

and that was denied.

But I would invite the court to ask the KLP

as to what's the basis for not enforcing this provision

against other people that are similarly situated.

I think you'll find the answer instructive.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Tony Cronin.

Good morning.

May it please the court.

My name is Dmitry Osparis,

and it's my privilege to represent the Keir Sarch Lighting Precinct.

We also called the KLP for short, as the court's aware,

from our prior case.

The KLP is a village district here in New Hampshire.

It has statutory zoning authority that was granted

by a special act of the legislature in the 1950s.

They've enacted a zoning ordinance.

There's basically a single provision that's an issue in this case,

and that was at issue in Andrews 1,

which is what we refer to as the guest provision

or the owner-occupied provision.

I want to start by just pointing out

that there's really only one issue on appeal here,

and it's whether or not that guest provision,

that owner-occupied provision, is all for varies.

Opposing counsel has brought up, I believe, ambiguity

and administrative gloss.

Those issues were either resolved

and are now the law of the case

or they were not preserved for appeal.

In fact, if you look at the notice of appeal

filed by the Andrews for the second appeal,

the word ambiguous doesn't appear at all

under any of the questions presented,

and that's because the trial court found

that the language at issue was unambiguous

and that, to the extent that that was appealed

in Andrews 1, this court affirmed it.

The only issue this court remanded on Andrews 1

was the ultraviries argument.

Here, I'd asked the court to affirm

the trial court's remand order

that the guest provision is not ultraviries

because it's consistent with the statutory grant

of authority to zone.

That law, which was enacted in 1957

and just for clarification, there is some dispute

between the parties as to whether

that special act in 1957 is governing

or whether or not it's the more modern

RSA governing zoning.

Which one does govern?

That's sort of fundamental to an ultraviries argument.

It is, and it isn't.

The only real difference between the language

and the two statutes is that the version

from 1957 includes the word morals

and the present version doesn't include

the word morals and the trial court

did not resolve the ultraviries argument

under the morals provision.

It was assumed, I believe, without deciding

that RSA 67416, which is the modern statute

that applies to all village districts,

applied, and so it didn't consider morals.

I believe it resolved it under the general welfare clause,

which appears in both.

So the same language, health, safety,

and general welfare.

Correct.

And so we're asking this court to affirm

either under the general welfare provision

as the trial court found.

I think the court could also separately affirm

language as well, because it's sort of all

wrapped up in one.

Because I agree that the regulation

of any use of property, and fundamentally

use of property like this, where you're having people

stay overnight in residential homes,

does implicate health and safety matters,

issues of policing, of trash pickup,

of congestion, parking, and things like that.

It's important here for the court

to recognize that the trial court on remand

reaffirmed the prior determination as to the motivation

or the intent of this legislation,

which is that it was enacted to, quote,

maintain a quiet, peaceful neighborhood

made up of residents, not transients.

And to have the owner on the property

in order to serve as a check on guest behavior,

which might otherwise be incompatible

with the neighborhood.

And that's consistent with promoting health,

safety, and the general welfare of the community.

And the owner-occupied language here,

which simply says if you're going to have

a transgender permanent guest,

you need to be at the property.

You can't be renting out your residential home

as if it's a hotel, or as if it's a motel,

and having people just come in and out

who have no connection with the community

while you're not there.

That's inconsistent, and it undermines

the ability of the KLP to maintain

both its residential character and to address

the issues that Andrews Council raised of safety.

So wouldn't we need to understand

what a permanent guest is under that analysis?

I don't think so, because I think

the trial court hit it on the head,

which is that it's not a tenant, right?

And so fundamentally, you're either a tenant or a guest,

and if you're a tenant, then this provision

doesn't apply.

The normal rules of tenancy

and your possessory interest applies.

If you don't have that interest,

you're a guest.

You can be removed at any time

by the owner of the property,

and therefore, you're subject to this provision.

Where a guest moves from transient to permanent,

I don't think this court needs to reach,

whether that's one week, whether it's a month,

whether it's six months.

What's the difference then between a tenant?

Isn't it durational?

Could I be a tenant for a week?

Sure.

You could enter into a lease agreement

where you had a week by week lease,

perhaps an auto renews on a weekly basis,

and then you would be subjecting yourself

both as the renter

and the property owner

to all the legal protections

that this state imposes

both via statute and common law

on that landlord-tenant relationship, right?

So the interest could rent

their home for one week at a time?

Correct.

If they entered into actual lease agreements.

And there's a particular reason why

the short-term rental businesses

do not utilize traditional lease agreements

and go out of their way

to avoid lease language in their contracts,

and they frame everything as guests,

there's a benefit to that.

And it's understandable why a property owner

would want that benefit, right?

They don't have to pick them if they want to stick around.

Exactly.

Call the police, right?

It's more akin to a hotel situation

where, yeah, you've paid for a service,

you've paid for the use of a physical property,

but you don't have a right

to that property.

So the KLP to manage this

is going to review the actual lease agreement

or the agreement entered

between a non-permanent guest

and the landowner.

I mean, how is that regulated then?

Well, I think it would arise during enforcement, right?

So, I mean, hypothetically,

if the KLP believed that an individual

was engaging in rentals involving guests,

they'd probably send a cease and desist letter

or some sort of enforcement notice,

and then that property owner could say,

hey, actually I'm not violating the ordinance,

this is my tenant.

Provide the lease, it would presumably

stop there, right, because that would be

compliant with the ordinance.

Does the judgeatory

order is likely to drink?

I don't believe so because

ultimately, judgeatory

is allowing

the regulation of the property

based on its use.

Fundamentally, that's still what's going on here.

It's the use, the occupancy

and the physical characteristics

are all within the normal zoning power.

There's nothing fundamentally

exceeding typical zoning

power in this case at all.

I do want to note

a couple of things on the permanent guest issue,

because fundamentally, I believe it's a red herring here.

I noted in the brief that

history is replete with examples

of permanent guests. Normally it's celebrities, right?

There are a number of celebrities

who have lived in hotels on a permanent

ongoing basis, and I think it's conceivable

to understand the concept of

someone residing indefinitely somewhere

that we would colloquially refer to

as permanently residing

at this place or at this hotel.

They're not tenants of those properties.

They're paying money, they're living there.

They might even refer to themselves

as residing there, but they're not tenants, right?

They don't have a property interest,

and so they can be removed at any time.

And I'll also know, and I believe

the full ordinance is in the record as part

of the certified record, this provision

is consistent with other language

in the KLP zoning ordinance. The KLP

regulates bed and breakfasts

in tourist homes and other

uses of property in which

people are occupying it on

a transient basis where they do not have

that possessory legal interest

in the property in a similar manner.

Bed and breakfasts also need to be owned or occupied.

So why not just use the word

guess? Why do you have

transient and permanent?

I didn't draft the ordinance. I was not

around back then. But the distinction

must have some, I mean

I understand

he now reaps and

I can't remember your other examples.

I can tell the court we all

did our due diligence to try to dig up

the historic record to try to find where that comes

from. As best I can tell

is that the intent probably was

to address exactly what we're talking about right now

which is that if you just use

bare guess, people are going to automatically

assume that that means very short duration.

And that's not necessarily true.

The real distinction is that

property right. Now

at this stage it might be

better to use language of tenancy

and make the distinction in the negative

right that a person offering

overnight accommodations

to a guest who is not a tenant

might provide more clarity. But

working on the language that we have

that has been around for decades.

It just seems so incompatible.

You can't have a permanent licensee.

I mean there are just two concepts

that are just materially different.

I disagree. I don't think

the license is limited

temporarily. It can be

and in most common uses it is.

There is some predefined definition

but you could have an indefinite license

to reside somewhere.

Indefinite is not permanent.

It is in the

sense that there's no end.

Isn't that what permanent means? It may not

be infinite. It may not

factually end up that way.

You may eventually move out

but as it stands in this moment in time

the expectation is you're going to indefinitely reside there.

I mean there's some sort of

analogy to the domicile

analysis and sort of the present intent.

Right? Like you might intend

to reside somewhere indefinitely

and now you have domicile and ultimately

residency but you could move later.

Right? It doesn't

extinguish the fact that for that period of time

you had

domicile your resident. You might

What terming should be the focus?

That's somehow limiting that it's

not just sleeping accommodations,

not a kitchen, not everything else.

I'm not sure I fully understand

what that argument is advancing

in terms of the ultraviries argument.

The regulation applies

to residential properties,

single family homes,

other residential properties which are separately

defined in the ordinance.

So they're necessarily going to include

bedrooms, kitchens and all those facilities.

The use is offering

it for the overnight sleeping accommodations.

I suppose there may be

a separate question of

if someone does short term

rentals where they only allow someone to come

in the home to cook in the kitchen.

Would that violate the ordinance?

I would say no because it's not offering

the overnight sleeping accommodations. There may be

other problems certainly

engaging in commercial activity

as we know

cooking and generating food

products are heavily regulated and so there may run

into other business licensing issues.

Do you have an intent to broaden

the application because it could apply

to boarding houses, it could apply to homes,

it could apply to multiple residents?

That's the way I hear it.

Yeah, I mean it's

regulating the use.

I mean ultimately that's what it is.

It's regulating the use in terms of

how are you using the property,

you're offering it for overnight sleeping accommodations,

who are you offering it to, they're not tenants,

they're guests.

Okay, at that stage the owner

asks if there's any more questions.

That's all I had, I'd ask that the court

make a decision. Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Just briefly, the argument about

possessory interest in the same as a hotel,

that doesn't work here.

We have a statute, 540C,

part of the Landlord and Tenet Act,

really cited, really used.

That distinguishes homes

that are used for vacation

rentals versus hotels

and other things. You can't call

the police and evict those people.

Unless you have a written lease

which I now understand would make them a tenant.

And in that lease

you tell them that you are going to take enforcement

outside of 540A.

So it's not the same

as a hotel or an inn

or something like that. It's very different

and 540 states that.

If you look at the ultra virus,

yeah, assuming those folks aren't paying rent,

right, they come over, they get unruly,

call the police and get them out, sure,

you could do that. Second piece,

I see my light on.

Just imagine yourself

renting one of these houses,

take your kids up to Storylander skiing

and you're shearing the bathroom in the kitchen with the owner.

It doesn't make any sense at all.

And also, what I heard today

is I can rent

with a lease for 5 days

or a week to someone

that's recently served their time

at the state prison and

they can live there without any offence

to this goal

to have a nice, quiet, safe community.

It just doesn't make sense.

Would there be

a distinction between transient

and permanent gas with respect to the

interest of the general welfare of the community?

I don't see how there could be.

I mean, the general welfare,

that's the linchpin of all zoning, right?

You can do that.

But are there different concerns

that attach to a transient gas

versus someone who's there permanently?

I'm looking at Kudrick, right?

And I'll just read the piece

in here.

It is imperative that we focus on the activities

taking place on the land,

rather than the identity individuals

conducting them.

Any ambiguity arising from the language

chosen for the regulation of land use

should be resolved in favor of

indicating a land owner's

property rights.

So when there's questions like that,

I think that's where you go to.

Alright.
