This is case 2025-0064, petition of Metro Treatment of New Hampshire L.P.

Good morning.

I understand you reserve one minute.

Two minutes.

Two minutes, I'm sorry.

Yes.

Good afternoon.

May it please the court.

Cassie Rogers of She, N.F.B. Bassen Green on behalf of Metro Treatment of New Hampshire L.P.

We're here today on a Rule 10 petition, appealing a decision from the Department of Health and Human Services Administrative Act.

Administrative Appeal Unit, AAU, determination that it has jurisdiction over managed care organizations payment disputes with their health care providers.

The question before the court is whether the AAU acted illegally in determining it had jurisdiction over an MCO and payment dispute with its health care provider.

Here, AmeriHealthcare attached the MCO and Metro Treatment, the health care provider.

Metro's position is yes, that the AAU did act illegally in finding jurisdiction, and that argument is primarily twofold.

First, that...

These disputes happen all the time, don't they?

And has the AAU typically sat on these cases without objection?

I don't have the historic account of how many have been brought and whatnot, but I do know that there have been many brought in conjunction with this,

that there seem to be perhaps a little bit more of a surge in audit experience or auditing at the time.

And that Metro raises on a number of accounts, one faced with audits by various MCOs.

But to your point, contract disputes happen all the time.

And the question is, here where there's two private entities at play, is it the case that the AAU should...

The DEHS should be the final arbiter of contract disputes between private parties simply because Medicaid eligible recipients are at providing services.

And is that really enough under the enabling legislation to provide that jurisdiction necessary in order to extend the jurisdiction here?

Your position at this $38,000 dispute should go to Superior Court.

Correct.

And so looking to the twofold...

There's no dispute resolution clause in the MCO contract?

I believe...

With providers?

And I would turn that question perhaps to Council as well to correct me if I misspeak, but it's my understanding that in this particular one,

there was not a arbitration provision, et cetera.

That's correct.

So primarily Metro's argument for lack of jurisdiction is twofold.

One, that the enabling legislation here does not provide for the breadth of the state and the health provides that it does.

And two, that even putting aside the enabling legislation, the terms of the enabling legislation,

what the legislation provides, specifically RSA 126A5, 8 provides,

which all parties agree is the enabling legislation of interest.

What that provides is that the Commissioner of the Department of Health and Human Services is to establish a appeals process for matters it has jurisdiction over.

And here on review, we have provided a fair amount of the rulemaking in the briefs.

There is no process established by the Commissioner for disputes of this nature.

To provide a little bit of a basis for our discussion today, a little bit of a background regarding the dispute underpinning this jurisdictional question.

This is...Metro treatment is a opioid treatment provider.

It provides medication assisted treatment to Medicaid eligible patients.

Some of those Medicaid eligible individuals are enrolled with AmeriHealth.

The relationship between AmeriHealth and Metro is governed by an ancillary services agreement.

And in 2022, AmeriHealth audited 10 patient records of Metro and issued a determination that some of the sums were to be disallowed or disallowed.

And as such, about 36, as you've identified, $37,000 had been overpaid and would need to be recouped.

Is Metro certified or licensed by the Department?

Metro is.

So why then doesn't it fall under the RSA 126A5, 8?

So I presume what I'll refer to as turning to that legislation, there's four categories outlined within that legislation, RSA 126A5, 8.

One being individuals and provided services or applying for services from the department or its contract providers.

Two being what you have identified as the provider's licensed or certified.

And here, when we're looking at questions of jurisdiction and the precedent that's acknowledged by all parties requiring for specificity and

particularity in the enabling legislation, simply we don't have that here.

First, Metro would argue that that provision is really looking to appeal processes for challenging licensing decisions.

And that's not what we have here.

And we in fact do have that in the rulemaking established that there is an appeals process for licensing decisions.

Second is the question of whether it extends to these types of disputes.

We look at the rulemaking that is then enacted by the commissioner, promulgated by the commissioner.

And here the rulemaking provides that the definition of appeals requires an action by the department or a decision by the department.

And here that's noticeably lacking.

We don't have an action by the department.

We don't have a decision by the department.

And accordingly under the DHHS's own rules, which they are obligated to follow, it does not fall within the...

Are those rules dispositive against the plain language of the statute?

Well, first I would argue that, again, as I mentioned, that the plain language provides more so to licensing and certification.

First, paragraph eight.

Yes.

What about section four?

So this is to section four.

We're talking about, again, turning to the precedent that we have, specifically noting that it's meant to be specific.

It's meant to be particular.

And here we have this catch-all provision, or that's what I'll refer to it as in the fourth.

And what the state and AmeriHealth are relying upon in making the argument that we are falling in that catch-all provision is this argument that DHHS is the Medicaid agency.

That it's tasked with administering Medicaid and ensuring that funds are appropriately spent.

But that application to say that this broad grant of oversight is sufficient to provide the jurisdiction necessary is directly contrary to the precedent,

which is providing for peculiarity and the circumstances.

Are you referring to...

Yes.

So I'm looking to appeal a campaign for ratepayers' rights 162 NH245, providing the tribunal that exercises, so a tribunal like the AAU,

that exercises a limited and statutory jurisdiction is without jurisdiction to act unless it does so under the precise circumstances

and in the manner particularly described by the enabling legislation.

Well, it's particularly described.

Any other matter within the jurisdiction or the department?

I mean, it's broad, but it's described.

And so perhaps that's just where we have a disagreement, because particularly described is exactly, it seems to contradict to broad.

So to say it's particular and broad seemed like two contradictory adjectives.

Well, something can be particularly described and broad.

Broadly particular.

Well, here, I'm turning to the catch-all provision specifically looking at, again, it's not just any other matters within the jurisdiction.

If we were to concede that that is broadly particular, if that's how we coined it.

If we were to concede that, again, what the state and the mayor health is relying upon is this grant of administration

and or ensuring appropriate expenditure of the Medicaid funds.

And there are numerous examples throughout the briefing of how one administers the Medicaid program.

Administration includes certification.

It includes making requirements of contracts.

It includes processes for termination.

And here, administration, as it extends to this dispute was for a grant of authorities for the MCOs to enter into these contracts.

It did not, nowhere does it provide that the grant then extends to DHHS providing or serving as a final arbiter of contractual disputes between private parties.

But Medicaid is within the jurisdiction of the Department of Health and Human Services, correct?

Correct.

And ensuring that Medicaid dollars are spent appropriately is within the jurisdiction of the Department of Health and Human Services.

That's correct.

So how is this dispute not within the jurisdiction of the Department of Health and Human Services?

Yes.

And so it's the question of when is it enough insurance and what are the mechanisms of insurance, right?

So here, insurance included the DHHS reviewing MCO contracts.

So they have specific requirements of what go into MCO contracts.

And then on the other side of it, they provide licensure requirements, they review termination decisions on the provider side.

So there are multiple different mechanisms and the list goes on about how we insure.

But insuring here was, it stopped at entering into an agreement with certain provisions in place, agreements that DHHS reviews.

And then to say that now we're in a private contract dispute and DHHS gets to either hover above and or jump to the end to make it a termination

when DHHS can actually do these exact recruitment efforts itself.

And in that case, it can do so.

There's no challenge there.

But here what we're challenging is DHHS coming into private contract disputes, which quite frankly, as we...

So you come into it, didn't your client file the appeal?

Yes.

And I presume if I'm guessing where just has come away, you are going as regarding a waiver question, is that word?

No, because I think you preserved that.

But it's not like DHHS intervened and required that step, did they?

Well, I think that is what...

I don't want to speak for counsel for the state in our mental health,

but I think that that is what I understand the argument to be, that it is required for there to be a process.

The process that's been designated is the very one that we're here disputing.

And so we would say no, it's not...

The provisions that are in place are not the required provisions.

I mean perhaps that they eventually can go through the rulemaking process to make an appeals process for this very circumstance.

You have filed an action in the Superior Court.

If you disagreed with that determination.

I missed the very beginning.

Could you have filed an action yourself in the Superior Court?

While this proceeding was occurring, is that your question?

No, instead of.

Instead of?

Yes.

And I think that the concern was at the time, any argument regarding untimeliness or waiver,

certainly did not all lose the right to challenge the letter that was provided to AmeriHealth.

Following AmeriHealth's, excuse me, to Metro, following AmeriHealth's internal audit,

was that the process was to go through the state hearing process.

That was a doctrinal of administrative loss.

So, turning to administrative loss, if the court were to find that while Metro's position is that the enable legislation is not ambiguous as to...

It doesn't provide the jurisdiction necessary.

But if the court were to say, the scope of jurisdiction is ambiguous here.

What we look to is, since at least 2007, the Department of Health and Human Services has consistently applied particular definitional language.

What's your position on it?

The question is that perhaps there's a concern regarding that last section, at least the catch-all provision,

regarding what the scope of that jurisdiction of any other matter within the jurisdiction is.

And if there is a question in the court's mind about what the scope of that is, then at the very least that's ambiguous.

And what has been consistent since 2007, at the very least, is that appeal is defined to include department action or department decision.

And then we go through it.

You look at the purpose.

It also includes department action or department decision.

And it goes on from there.

There's one exception that provides that contracting providers, service providers are included within the definition of the department.

That's one small exception.

And it even shows that the commissioner knew how to discuss these very parties.

And it has opted not to establish an appeals process to date.

And accordingly, applying the doctrine of administrative gloss, we have to provide deference to the administrative agency.

And accordingly, there will be a finding of no jurisdiction with the AAU because looking at the rules, you need department action.

And we don't have that here.

You're by the lights on.

Sorry about that.

Attorney Tierney, I understand you're going to have 10 minutes to argue.

And Attorney Trick will have five.

Correct.

Thank you, Your Honors.

Michael Tierney here for the AmeriHealth Caritas, who's one of the managed care organizations.

I have Attorney Ewing, my law partner with me.

And we also have Mary Trick from the Attorney General's office who will be arguing separately for the State Department Health Human Services.

What we're here about is not a contract dispute.

What we're here about is what do the Department of Health Human Services rules mean?

What do these Medicaid rules mean?

And does the administrative appeals unit have jurisdiction to determine what these rules mean?

You can see in the certified record pages, you know, 4 through 13, all the various Medicaid rules that were violated by Metro and would likely continue to be violated by Metro if we had not done this audit.

But the case we're here at the Supreme Court about isn't about whether these particular Health and Human Services rules were violated and whether AmeriHealth is interpreting these rules properly.

What this case is about is who has the authority to have this appeal?

Does the administrative appeals unit have that authority?

Luckily, we have...

Just get there.

What decision is actually being appealed?

There hasn't been a decision, right?

Or is it just the position of the parties?

Well, AmeriHealth determined that the rules were violated and therefore was entitled to a recoupment.

Metro disagrees with that.

And that was what was appealed to the AAU.

Whether these rule violations occurred entitling AmeriHealth to a recoupment.

When you put it that way, it sounds like a dispute between two private entities.

So it is not a simple contract dispute.

It's whether these rules were violated leading to potential waste, fraud, and abuse of Medicaid funds.

And in order to determine whether the AAU has authority to decide whether there has been waste, fraud, and abuse of Medicaid funds, we have to look to the statute.

And the statute isn't that long in its relevant portion.

And in fact, for this court, there's only six words that the court needs to be focused on.

The statute very clearly gives authority to the AAU to any providers.

So any providers.

There's no limitation on what that provider may do, what type of that authority is to any providers.

And then the statute goes on to broadly say for any other matter.

If you look at the AAU's decision, which has been appealed, the hearing officer determined that under both provisions of the statute, that the providers need to bring their appeal to the AAU, Metro is a provider, or it could fit under the catch-all.

Okay, so we have specific statutory authority, although it is specifically broad, absolutely broad.

It's undisputed that what is at issue here is whether health and human services, administrative appeal, has the authority to consider whether Medicaid rules and Medicaid funds are being interpreted and spent incorrectly.

And all we need to do is look at that statute.

If we wanted to go further, which is not necessary, but if we wanted to go further and talk about the contract that the parties had, the contract that the parties had specifically required Metro as part of, you know, participating in its program with AmeriHealth to bring any appeals to the AAU.

And so Metro is contractually required to go to the AAU.

The court doesn't need to get there, but that's sort of the additional reason, of course, you're going to go to the AAU.

And it absolutely makes sense when you're talking about whether these health and human services rules are being properly applied by AmeriHealth, that you have one agency that is making that determination, the Department of Health and Human Services.

This isn't just even state law that requires just the Department of Health and Human Services to make that determination.

Federal law, 42 CFR 431, requires that every state just has one agency making these determinations and that it can't go to 17 different places.

But shouldn't there have been a determination by the commissioner first that would predicate the AAU appeal?

So the commissioner can determine whether the commissioner is going to make a determination on these rules or she can designate a hearing officer to make the determination in the first instance.

The statute is clear that the commissioner's determination is the AAU's determination.

The commissioner can take that back or the commissioner can allow the hearing officer to make that determination.

So they're essentially at the same level?

Absolutely, yes.

So you've focused on the statutory language saying we don't need to get to the contract, but as to the statute, Attorney Rogers points to the administrative rules and the procedural rules.

You talked about substantive rules.

What role do they play in resolving the question before us?

Two points. They play no role whatsoever because you cannot, by administrative rules, take away jurisdiction that has been granted by statute.

However, the rules also don't say what Attorney Rogers suggests they say.

The rules, and in particular, HEC 20113 says that in appeals such as this, the department's contract service providers is the department for the purpose of this appeal.

We have that language right there in 201.13.

And then it goes on to 2113B only when the department and the contract service provider are adverse should the department and contract service provider not be considered synonymous.

So when there's language in the rules saying the department this, decision the department this, decision the department that.

Okay, 20113A says that AmeriHealth and department are the same thing unless and until the department says nope, we're different AmeriHealth, you're wrong.

We're taking an adverse possession.

So the argument that the department says under 201 would be an appeal of a decision of the department under that interpretation.

Correct, correct.

So an appeal of the decision of the department includes AmeriHealth in this for these particular facts.

And you couldn't by rule change what the statute grant says authority.

But the rules absolutely allow this sort of appeal as has happened.

The final point, please interrupt me if the court has particular questions.

But the final point that I just want to make is that this is not something that is private between different parties.

This is about whether these particular rules which the State Department of Health and Human Services has adopted and has said you AmeriHealth should not be paying for services if the providers don't comply with the rules.

Whether the Department of Health and Human Services has any say in what their rules mean.

I think it should be obvious that the rules should be applied the same throughout the state, throughout all the different providers.

And that if AmeriHealth is somehow misinterpreting these rules, clearly the Department of Health and Human Services through the administrative appeals unit should have a say either through the hearing officer or through the commissioner saying,

well, hold on a second, you didn't apply these rules correctly, we're interpreting it this way.

We think of course we determined the rules correctly, but it is the administrative appeals unit that makes that determination, not some third, fourth or fifth party who doesn't have that experience in the nuances of Medicaid rules.

I'm probably under time, but I think it's probably better to sit down unless the court has any questions.

Thank you attorney Terry.

May it please the court. My name is Mary Trick and I'm here on behalf of the Department for Health and Human Services.

I'm going to try not to repeat what my other colleagues have talked about, but I just want to reiterate the position of the department that the state Medicaid program and administration and oversight of the state Medicaid program is within the jurisdiction of the department.

Is it your experience that the AAU has resolved or heard these disputes in the past on a regular basis?

It's definitely not in the record. That is my understanding, but I do want to preface that with I don't work at the department and I haven't handled one of these before, but that is my understanding.

Certainly the AAU handles these disputes outside of the managed care context, right?

So if the department is directly paying the service provider and determines that an overpayment was made, that that dispute goes to the AAU and I think that that actually goes to my bigger point, which is the state's use of managed care does not change its obligation under federal law and its

obligations to ensure it has oversight over the MCOs to not lose its federal funding. And so it's not by accident that the legislative delegation is broad and it's certainly at the very heart of that delegation when we're talking about oversight of the federal and state joint Medicaid program.

I did want to go to a question that Justice Donovan asked about the merits of this dispute. So the dispute hasn't obviously been resolved or proceeded to the merits.

And so the AAU and the state would not take a position on who's cracked at this point, right? But we have Metro, the service provider, saying that the MCO is refusing to pay or trying to claw money back that they paid for services to Medicaid recipients that they should have paid for, right?

That the Medicaid that they provided properly to Medicaid patients and the MCO is trying to get that money back. And the MCO was saying that the service provider is providing and was providing client services out of compliance with, I believe, the Medicaid assistant treatment rules.

So missing medical exams, missing counseling, treatment plan problems, those sorts of things. That is a dispute both within the jurisdiction of the department and certainly a dispute that affects Medicaid patients, right?

And so to Justice McDonald's point, I don't think we have to get to the question about if the rules were not co-extensive with the jurisdiction of the statute because here they are. This is clearly a dispute within the jurisdiction and clearly a dispute that has effects on Medicaid patients.

At that point, do you agree with the argument that Attorney Rogers made in the brief and I think here that AAU's interpretation of the rules should be accorded deference?

Yes.

Interpretation, I'm sorry, of the statute should be accorded deference.

Yes. Yes. But here the rules are likewise broad. So for ease of discussion, the rules mostly talk about department decisions.

But then it has this carve-out that says decisions made by our contract service providers, right? When we contact, crack those decisions out to the extent that the appeals affect any people receiving services that those are decisions of the department.

So I will choose not to labor the point and ask that this court affirm the finding of jurisdiction and just remand it back for litigation of the substance of the dispute.

Thank you.

Attorney Trick, Attorney Rogers.

Just a few brief comments. Just picking up where Attorney Trick just left off regarding the comment on effect, the carve-out provision.

As has been briefed, the effect is present tense and I think that that is notable because we're talking about an effect on individuals and I want to make sure I quote this right.

So reference to the department at HECC 200 shall include the department's contract service providers when they are participating in appeal proceedings affecting any individual applying for or receiving services as described in RSA 1-2-6-A-5-3.

So effecting is present tense first and I believe I understand the state's argument to be that it's affecting the Medicaid program, has the recoup funds are going back to be used for other services, but that's not really what the effecting here is providing for.

It's providing for effecting any individual applying for or receiving services and that's the same language that's used in the RSA 1-2-6-A-5-8 section.

And we look at what I referred to as category one. So we're talking about individuals who are at that time applying for or receiving services, not the hypothetical down the line.

And this carve-out, the very fact that we're distinguishing the effecting language, I think demonstrates that there could be more precise language by rulemaking here.

So if the commissioner is in fact obligated to provide an appeals process for disputes of this nature, it could do so if the court were to find jurisdiction lied there, but it hasn't done so.

It provides one specific carve-out in its metro position that it doesn't extend to the situation here.

But I wanted to touch on a question regarding the impact of the rules and regulations in light of the statutory language.

The statutory language provides for the commissioner to establish an appeals process for those four categories.

And as such, the rulemaking can't just be set aside regardless of what the enabling legislation as jurisdiction provides because we need to have appeals process established.

And as the rules demonstrate, we don't have one. We've identified one particular carve-out that carve-out doesn't apply.

And for a finding of jurisdiction at the AAU, we need an appeals process to find.

Otherwise, it's essentially skipping the rulemaking step.

The rules can't rewrite the statute.

Sorry?

The rules or the lack they wrote cannot rewrite the statute.

Correct. Yes, that's correct.

You read that.

Yes.

Thank you very much.

Okay. This case is submitted. Thank you very much, counsel.
