The Supreme Court, New Hampshire Superior Court, New Hampshire Circuit Court, New Hampshire

Public Defender's Office, New Hampshire Attorney General's Office, US District Court for the

District of New Hampshire, the federal public defender, and I understand there are some

students from Nashville here, high school students, is that right?

I think they're coming a little bit later.

So we'll have a chance to visit after the argument in the afternoon, so welcome.

This is case number 2025-0047, LB versus P.I.

Good morning, your honor, this is the court.

My name is Brittany White, and I appear on behalf of the Appellant Defendant and Jotah's

Iotrao, and I am from the law firm of Hamlet and Kerrigan.

Now the two main themes in this appeal before the court are first that the trial court

in this case made insufficient findings for granting the petition for domestic violence

protection order for the plaintiff, and the second being that the plaintiff's case itself

established insufficient evidence for a finding.

Now the first theme being that the court did not give specific findings is that pursuant

to New Hampshire precedent, the court is specifically required to make specific findings in cases

involving domestic violence order of protection.

The court in South v. McCabe provides some of that precedent where the court has specifically

found the trial court needs to make specific findings, and in the South v. McCabe case, the

petitioner was requesting a domestic order of protection based on stalking, and there

in South v. McCabe the court found that specific findings by the court are required

of two or more acts by the defendant over a period of time to show continuity of purpose

and explain its findings.

The appeals court reviewed the trial court's decision in South v. McCabe and found that

where the trial court issued its order on the standardized form, but gave no indication

of the facts or reasoning of the trial court's order that it wasn't sufficient.

Well, wasn't there sufficient evidence to establish at least a simple assault on more than

one occasion?

I would argue there is not sufficient evidence to establish assault, and there is not sufficient

findings to make a finding for assault.

As for the evidence itself presented by the plaintiff in that case, it did not meet the

elements of assault as required under the statute RSA 631.

Would you like to touch it?

Yes.

When you reached up under your shirt, that's not a simple assault without our consent?

We would argue that the elements were not met because of the testimony that there was

not an ongoing pattern of this behavior, nor were there any findings that there was an

ongoing pattern of this behavior.

Why would there need to be a pattern?

Because pursuant to the statute, it does require that there be an ongoing credible

and present threat that be found in making that finding.

Under the 631, under what statute requires an ongoing threat?

RSA 173-B requires that the defendant commit or attempt to commit one or more of the offenses

and that the defendant conduct pose a credible present threat to the plaintiff's safety.

Okay, so there are two elements there.

Let's just take the first element that Justice Donovan identified.

Isn't the court's finding with respect that there was an assault reckless conduct

under 631.1 sufficient?

We would argue that there is not sufficient findings for that unprivileged conduct.

It was contested that this was uncrivileged, the defendant testified that this was

privilege contact, that this is something the parties would do, that they were still

in a relationship at the time of this occurrence.

Why would she ask that the exchanges occur at the police department if it was something

that she invited?

I'm sorry, I didn't hear the first part of your question.

Why would the mother then decide that she wanted the exchanges to take place at

the police department moving forward so we couldn't engage this behavior anymore?

I would not speak to the plaintiff's mindset in regard.

I would note though that she filed the six months after the alleged incident occurred

and I would note that there was an ongoing parenting petition that occurred at the

same time at the filing.

That goes to a credibility determination, is that for the trial court?

That's not for us.

I would argue for the trial court but I would also argue that the court's findings

do not identify any of the supporting factors to make that finding.

But once the court made the finding of an assault and setting aside that your client

disputed that it occurred, what about the issue that the trial court said see above with

regard to the credible present threat, which was the piece that the chief was asking

about?

So I would argue that there's insufficient findings to just reference see above.

I would argue that in determining the credible threat tenant there needs to be more of findings

to explanation of what the court considered in making that decision.

And do we have a case or statute that specifies the level of findings that a court has

to make with regard to credible present threat?

I would refer the court to a keel via keel regarding ongoing conduct that is required.

Well understanding the standard but do we have a case that stands for the proposition

that the court has to make more specific findings with regard to credible present

threat?

I would argue it falls within the South v. McCabe case as well as the Comer case

that does require that we give explanation based on the reasoning of the order in that

in McCabe as well they touch on the fact that where there are bare bones orders it leaves

the respondent as well as this court to speculate as to where it came to those findings.

And that specifically in this case where the trial court checked off assault in the

standardized form as for the basis for that finding, it does not identify which

statute it falls under.

So would your remedy be that we remand to the trial court for more specific findings?

Our request with that would be either remanded or vacated.

The second element that we would argue was not met either as the fear for safety.

There was testimony by the plaintiff regarding this incident and she specifically

does not say that she feared for safety.

She says that in the moment she felt offended and that she felt confused.

Does fear for her safety need to be tied to that incident?

I would argue yes it does.

And what's the authority for that?

Under Walker v. Walker the court does clarify there has to be more than a

generalized fear for your safety.

And did that part of Walker v. Walker survive?

When was Walker v. Walker?

Walker v. Walker?

I think it was in 2009.

So the statute was amended subsequent to that to add the second

sentence of the definition of abuse.

So do we apply Walker v. Walker or do we apply the sentence that says the court

may consider evidence of such acts regardless of their proximity of time

in time to the filing of the petition which in combination with reason

conduct reflects an ongoing pattern of behavior which reasonably

causes or has caused the petition to fear for her safety?

So I would argue it still has to be applied in a general sense because

the findings themselves do not explain any of the factors the court

considered to amount to that more than a generalized fear.

And the court doesn't explain any other incidents in its...

I understand your point about not making findings.

My question is does it need to be tied to that specific incident?

The incident in which the assault occurred?

I would argue yes it does.

It does need to show that fear of safety.

It can be tied to the 2022 choking event?

I would argue it cannot.

I would argue it's too remote in time and non-specific.

The plaintiff was cross-examined on that issue and it was not included

in the court's finding.

Again, we don't have the explanation as to if it was not,

but we would have to speculate that it was too remote in time.

The transcript does reference that testimony regarding the plaintiff

stating that this was well over two years ago,

that it was distant in time.

And I believe also in that incident, the plaintiff again states

she did not fear for her safety in that alleged incident as well.

I would also compare this court's order to the case of Colmar v.

Tracy, where the Supreme Court did exam in the trial court's

decision in granting a domestic order of violence or protection.

And similarly, it had to speculate at the trial court's finding.

In its order, it does state that the Supreme Court

found that the trial court appears

to have found that the petitioner was stalked.

However, it did vacate that order

as there were insufficient findings.

I also wanted to jump back to the South v. McCabe case, where

it did find that the court made insufficient findings

as well as the court including unnoticed allegations

in the court's findings that it considered also at trial.

We would argue that this is very similar to the case

at Barr as well.

The line in the order about the defendant

allegedly repeatedly driving by the plaintiff's home

in place of work and honking and burning out his tires

was not something that was present in the petition whatsoever.

It was only mentioned on testimony for the first time

at the final hearing by the plaintiff.

But we don't know if the trial court relied on that testimony.

Do we?

I would argue that the trial court did rely on that testimony

because the order specifically quotes burning out his tires.

That is not anywhere in the petition.

There's one paragraph regarding the defendant allegedly driving

by the plaintiff's home in place of work.

But it does not contain the detail about burning out

his tires.

And am I correct that there was an objection during the trial

and the trial court let that in any way?

Yes.

So the trial court asked kind of generally,

is there anything in the petition related to the allegation

that he drove by her place?

So it's a fairly detailed paragraph, paragraph 12,

that talks about driving by.

Why does, what difference does it make,

whether it says burning out the tires?

Because I would argue because of the precedent

and the strict standard in the statute,

it's an unnoticed allegation that's

required by New Hampshire law to be noticed to the defendant.

Burning out tires is a separate allegation?

Yes.

Under the case in Comer v. Tracy,

it provides that perfect example

of that strictness of this rule.

The plaintiff in Comer v. Tracy filed

for a domestic violence order of protection

based on stocking.

And one of her incidences was an incident

where the defendant was in around her car in a parking lot

and she alleged it in her petition.

But on testimony, she also alleged

that she had found cigarette butts in or around the car.

And that's why she believed the defendant had been there.

The court cited the standard in RSA 173

that the notice of facts alleged against the defendant

shall be given to the defendant and then immediately

and conclusively found that because the petition included

no allegations concerning the cigarette butt deposit

and the petition was not amended prior to hearing

to include any such allegations,

the trial court heard as a matter of law

by considering the cigarette butt deposit.

They'd argue it is a very strict standard.

And even though it is a detail,

it is a very strict standard.

I know that the appellate has also made the argument

that it is a small detail and the defendant has to provide

that it was prejudicial to him at the final hearing.

I'd first respectfully disagree that this is not

the analysis that Douthby McCabe

or Tracy V. Comer underwent in determining

if an unnoticed allegation can come in.

But assuming that we would have to prove that tenant,

I would argue that the defendant could.

In this case, the trial court did find

that it was related enough to have the plaintiff testify

about the burning out incident and she went so far

as to testify what that means and what it does

and the marks that it leaves on the road.

Had the defendant been given notice of that allegation

prior to the middle of the final hearing,

he could have brought, for example, photos of his car

and if they could have made a burnout

or photos of the street where this allegedly happened

to show a lack of tire marks.

We would argue that it did show a prejudice

but that the standard is very strict

and that detail needed to be noticed.

Did you argue below that the defendant's driving

on the road was constitutionally protected activity?

Yes.

Sorry guys, I had to think about it.

We did talk about the notice requirement

and that it is a deprivation of his ability

to adequately defend his case without that allegation

because of, for example,

the evidence he could have introduced a trial.

But the driving itself,

setting aside burning out tires,

did you address the stocking statute

because you weren't necessarily on notice

that it was a stocking case

but the stocking statute has a provision

that excludes constitutionally protected activity

so I'm just wondering if that specific argument

was made with regard to the driving

by the house or business?

I don't specifically remember, Your Honor.

So I'd have to refer to the brief.

I'm sorry about that.

That's okay.

And then just the last point on that,

that theme of the case,

being that the South v. McCabe case also clarified

that although the trial court

is a given broad discretion in admitting

relevant or material evidence,

it, quote, should not admit,

or excuse me, admit unnoticed allegations.

So in this case, we would argue that

it not only considered the burnout situation

but it also used it in making an order against the defendant.

Do you wanna address the parenting plan argument?

Thank you.

I will quickly.

For the parenting plan,

Tenet was the last question in our argument.

We would argue that the court unreasonably modified

the parenting plan of the parties in this case.

In the section regarding communication

in the parenting plan,

the court did restrict communication between the party

only to be emergencies regarding the child.

It's our position that severely restricts

the parent's ability to co-parent

and discuss the child's daily care or schedule.

But isn't that an issue to be considered

in the parenting case?

So I would argue it is not

because it goes beyond the modifications

allowed in cases such as Achilles

and that the parenting plan now in the family case

mirrors the one here

because there's domestic violence order of protection.

I have my lights.

Thank you.

Do you have anything?

Good morning and may it please the court.

My name is Ali McKnight.

I'm with New Hampshire legal assistance

and I'm representing the plaintiff of LB.

Every issue in this case comes down

to a matter of the trial court's discretion.

Both the 173B statute and the case law of this court

offer deference to that discretion

unless it is unsustainably exercised.

In this case, it was one.

I'd like to address two pathways for this court

to affirm the trial court's decision

to issue a domestic violence protection order.

First, the court should affirm on both the assault

and docking findings by the trial court.

Second, this court could affirm on just the assault finding

without proceeding to the stalking inquiry at all.

I'll start the first pathway affirming

on both stalking and assault.

The trial court did not unsustainably exercise

its discretion when based on the evidence presented

it found that PI slid his hand up LB's skirt

during a child exchange

and that he repeatedly drove by her home and workplace.

These incidents in combination

compose stalking course of conduct

and that conduct would make a reasonable person

here for their safety.

It's safe.

I'm assuming that those are trial court's findings.

We don't have any specific findings

in the trial court's order

other than the stalking reference and C above.

What are we to do with that?

So the specific findings listed in the trial court's order

include findings of the skirt assault during the exchange.

I believe the direct quote is slid his hand up

the her skirt during a child exchange

and the court also says repeatedly drove by her home

and workplace and then mentions the burn incidents.

But where's the finding that under 633AA

she was actually placed in such fear?

Are you referring to the stalking reasonable fear?

She's actually placed in such fear.

Where's that finding in the trial court's order?

So that finding is not in the trial court's order

but the trial court did check the box that says 633A

and under the 173B statute

there's not the requirement that the court set out

their support for every single element of the criminal act.

So would this be different if the case had been filed

as a stalking petition under 633A?

I believe that it would be different

because in a stalking course of conduct case

there is the requirement as the defense counsel noted

in South v. McCabe that every single element

be laid out of what the course of conduct was.

We don't have that in a 173B case.

Was there testimony in the transcript

of the petitioner being in actual fear?

In other words, can you point to her testimony

where she talks about fear?

Yes, so there's several places

where I think that she just causes her reasonable fear.

She testified that she felt offended

by the contact during the skirt assault.

So much so that she began insisting

upon having child exchanges at the police station.

And I would point to the fact that this change

in the status quo is evidence

that she felt that her safety needed to be protected.

She testified that her,

that PI's actions during a more recent exchange

this was the October 31st exchange

made her feel, quote,

like her nervous system was constantly on the fritz.

And she also filed her petition

after PI had been near her workplace

two days in a row during the preceding weekend.

And was the petition,

the facts in the petition incorporated in her testimony

or does it not need to be?

The big fact that is that issue in this case

was included in the petition.

Except the burnout wasn't.

The burnout was not included,

but it's relevant and material to the incidents

that were included in paragraphs 12 and 14 of the petition,

which are about drive-by incidents.

I'm assuming the trial court indicated to the plaintiff

that other than what you allege in your petition,

what else can you tell me?

Is that how the hearing began?

Or did she say, was there,

how are the allegations in the petition

incorporated into her testimony?

She was asked specific questions

about every single stalking incident in the petition.

If you turn to pages 22 and 23 of the brief,

there are nine incidents of stalking listed out

and the petitioner testified to every single

one of those nine incidents

during the hearing and the transcript.

Could you switch to how assault alone

might be a path to affirm?

Absolutely.

So the trial court sustainably exercised its discretion

in finding the PI assaulted LB

within the meaning of the assault statute

by sliding his hand up her skirt.

LB presented testimony that PI did this

after making monetary offers to her

in exchange for sexual favors.

This unprivileged physical contact falls

under the definition of simple assault.

Nowhere in the simplest statute

is there a requirement that the contact induce fear

or physical harm, though in this case

the court could absolutely have found

that it did induce fear.

All of the simple statute requires

is unprivileged physical contact.

The trial court made a credibility determination here

based on both parties' testimony and evidence

and as within its discretion found that PI assaulted LB

and this was not an unsustainable exercise of discretion.

So then as to specific findings of credible threat

where the trial court sees C above

to what are you directing us?

So for the C above issue,

I would first point to the fact

that credible present threat

has not actually been raised as an issue in this case

as it was not noticed.

But beyond that,

the C above, there's no statutory requirement

that the facts that support the acts of abuse

may not also support the credible present threat element.

So I think what the court is pointing us to here is

he slits hand up her skirt,

he repeatedly drove her house.

These are also the facts that I'm using

in order to support a credible present threat argument.

So when this statute, when 173B refers to

in combination with recent conduct, what does that mean?

I mean, you seem to be cabined in on the assault incident

itself in terms of fear for safety or credible threat.

So I would point to the assault occurred in July.

In October is when the plaintiff experienced the incident

where she had relented and let exchange occur

at her home once again.

And she testified that during that incident

she felt that the defendant had kind of come at her

in a way she described his body positioning as angry

with his shoulders tilted toward her.

And that was where the court from her nervous system

constantly being on the fritz was from.

Then that Saturday, November 2nd,

after that incident, which was that Saturday

is when he then drove by and she testified to this,

drove by her workplace and hopped his horn.

And then she also testified that on the Sunday following,

so November 3rd, he was at a coffee shop

across the street or across the way

and was texted her from that location.

So on your path to a firm via assault alone,

you're not excluding those findings regarding stocking

that would still fall into the credible present threat

analysis, however, you're suggesting that if we

determined that there were insufficient findings

for a finding of stocking as a predicate act,

those components of the find could still be used

for a credible present threat.

Did I understand that correctly?

Yes, the facts that support the reasonable fear

can also be the same facts that support

the credible present threat.

And what would you say in terms of an objective standard

regarding fear back on the stocking issue?

I think that that's a matter of the court's

credibility determination.

There was an hour and a half of proceedings in this case

in which the plaintiff testified to several facts

that could point the court to make the determination

that she was reasonably afraid.

Some of the other facts that I think point to that

are that while PI denied the skirt assault ever occurred,

he testified that in the past he had pinched Elby's butt

during child exchanges and that he had called her a stripper.

And he testified that he actually had been

by her workplace two days in a row,

once driving and once at a coffee shop across the way

and that he had made efforts to contact her on both days.

She also testified that without a protection order,

she believed that PI would continue to drive by her house,

email her, text her and would try to change

their parenting plan.

But none of that behavior is actually threatening

in the sense of a criminal threatening, isn't it?

So I think that contextually thing,

it's very important to look at this from the full context

of that might not be threatening in and of itself,

but when someone has violated you in the past,

it is threatening as Justice Sonnevin alluded to before.

There had been an incident in the past

where he had put his hands on her neck.

There had been an incident where he punched the wall,

both of which he testified to,

and then there's this assault incident.

And after those three things happened,

I think the court can look at reasonable fear

and say if these three things happened to someone,

of course they would be afraid.

I think the question about these incident

and what's in the petition, paragraph nine,

describes what I think is the assault incident.

And it said that the defendant said,

I looked like a stripper.

He slid his hand up my skirt while I was buckling in.

Then the affidavit says I was extremely scared

by this interaction and now that it happened,

I'm going to be scared at every parenting exchange.

Did her fear at that time, as indicated by the affidavit,

come out in testimony?

I think that it did come out in testimony.

It came out in the way that she was saying

that she felt she needed to protect her safety afterwards.

And she said, I switched the child exchanges

to the police station after that.

I think that there's no magic words

that a plaintiff needs to say

in order to show that they're afraid.

Sometimes it's the actions that they take

that show that they are afraid.

If someone's protecting their safety

by having child exchanges at a police station,

then that shows the court that there is a fear there.

On the communication piece,

I would just reiterate that the trial court

appropriately used its discretion

in order to limit communications between the parties.

It has broad discretion to order a parenting plan,

visitation and communication in 173B5.

And as to the argument about modification

of the parenting plan presented in the briefs

by the defendant, a permanent parenting order

is the only kind of order that 461A11 can modify.

It cannot modify a order

that has never been court ordered before,

which is what we had in this case.

Could you respond to Attorney White's argument

that our cases require a level of specificity

that burning out of the tire should have been included

in the petition?

Yes, so in Ray Al, there is a quote from the court

that the fact finder may accept or reject

in whole or in part the testimony of any witness or party

that is not believed to be uncontroversed evidence.

And also in that case, there is a standard

of the court is allowed to make subsidiary findings

and not write them into their findings in this case.

And this court assumes that the subsidiary findings

are found.

Thank you very much.

This case is submitted.

Court, take the recess.
