Good morning. Before we proceed with today's, this morning's argument, the

court wishes to welcome students from South Hickin High School. And their

teacher, Mr. Esterbrook, welcome. We're going to hear the argument and then

afterwards, attorneys Gagne and Sir Zan will meet with the students and then

we'll come out and have a chance to visit with them, okay? This is case

2025-0167, State of New Hampshire versus Timothy J. Hefferon.

Tony Gagne, I understand you reserved two minutes for a rebuttal.

That is correct, Your Honor. Thank you. Chief Justice, Associate Justice.

Identify yourself. Good morning, Your Honors. My name is Sam Gagne. I

represent the State of New Hampshire. May it please the court. A faithful

application for the totality of circumstances test coupled with the

deference that is due to the expertise, training, and experience of police

officers. Establishes that in this case, the Seabrook police had

articulable, specific facts that led them to reasonably believe that the

occupants of the Red Chevy crews possessed drugs. I plan to advance

this argument in three phases, first explaining what the police knew

heading into June 2nd, 2023, then explaining what the police observed

on June 2nd, 2023, and finally explaining how that knowledge and those

observations combined to create reasonable suspicion. But I welcome

the court's questions at any time. Great. You referenced in your brief

an investigation of the Danbury Drive Apartments that resulted in

search warrants being issued and convictions of individuals and a

significant amount of drugs and products that would be used to

create drugs and distribute drugs were found there. When did that

investigation occur? So the transcripts, Your Honor, at page eight

and nine, I believe the transcripts, Officer Couch explains that

that investigation was going on in May 2023. I don't know the

exact date of the execution of the warrant. It does appear that

it took place after the stop, but the information from the

Danbury Drive Apartments is being gathered in May 2023. So what

specific information regarding those apartments did that officer

had? So that officer had a specific information that that

apartment complex was a source of drugs for residents in Seabrook

that came through a tip and then that tip was corroborated

through controlled buys. First with confidential informants,

the testimony at the hearing was that during the confidential

informant buys, the police saw at least one car leave the

Danbury Drive Apartments, go to Seabrook, complete the

transaction and then drive directly back to the Danbury

Drive Apartments. And there were three confidential informant

buys. Is that right? Excuse me, Your Honor? There were three

confidential informant buys. I don't recall from the

transcript exactly how many were done with the Danbury Drive

Apartments, but in addition to the confidential informant

buys, there were also buys performed by undercover

officers with the same group from the Danbury Drive

Apartments. So based on those facts, the police did

have a reason to believe that the Danbury Drive Apartments

were a source of drugs for residents in Seabrook. So

there's 48 units. Was there anything specific about which

unit was engaged in the sales? So first, Your Honor, I

don't, I recall from the Record Defense Council asserting

that there were 48 units. I do not know that. I don't

think the record clearly establishes that. But even

assuming that there are, I don't think it matters how

many units there are. There was no information about which

unit specifically drugs may have been stored or being

sold from. But there was specific information that

the drug transactions at the Rockingham Village Apartment

Complex took place in cars behind the buildings. As far

as the Danbury Drive Apartment, I believe the record

established that there were four buildings there. I

don't think it was clear that there were 48 units. And

I don't think the police needed to know exactly which unit

might have been selling the drugs. The articulable specific

fact that factored into reasonable suspicion here is

that the police did know that that apartment complex was a

source of drugs for residents in Seabrook. But wouldn't

you agree that if you have a single family home and a

purchase is occurring in a thing from a single family

home, that's very different from a complex that has

multiple units? I think that might be important if you

were trying to get say a warrant to get inside of the unit to

look for drugs inside of the unit. I don't think you need

that for reasonable suspicion in this case. To know that

that was a source of drugs, the Danbury Drive Apartments

that that needs to be looked at in totality. So the

police also know that they're following a car that

they know to be involved in drug transactions. It

travels from the Walmart and Seabrook directly to the

Danbury Drive Apartments with no stops in between. It

stays there for five to 10 minutes, the about the

amount of time that it takes to complete a drug

transaction in Officer Couch's experience. And it then

goes only a half mile before it makes a stop at the

target parking lot for 20 minutes. As this court has

recognized the case is escaping me and decided

in our brief, it is not uncommon when people

purchase drugs for them to make a quick stop at

somewhere like a highway arrest area or a parking

watch to use them, manipulate them or conceal them.

So putting all of those together traveling from Seabrook.

But those individual actions really are themselves

not inherently criminal. They're not, right? And so

I know that you that you argue that there's

evidence of drug sales for generally or drug sale

activity at both apartment complexes. But then we

have a trail of what are basically what is

basically legal conduct. Whatever one might think

about it in terms of whether it's odd or what

have you. But it's legal conduct. And so, you know,

in Blaisdell Moore, we've said that, you know,

the the it's impossible for a combination of

wholly innocent factors to combine into a

suspicious conglomeration unless there are

concrete reasons. So how do we tie the illegal

conduct of, you know, what might have been going

on at these drug at these apartment complexes,

which seems to me to be kind of the bulk of

the suspicious sort of conduct. How do we tie that

down in a concrete way to the elements that

pertain directly to the red crews and the

occupants activities? Sure, your honor. So I

would begin by noting that this court has also

recognized that innocuous conduct can be cast in

a different light when there are facts. It can be,

but it needs to sort of have a concrete link, right?

Right. So I think the concrete link here, what

makes that seemingly innocuous behavior, if

you didn't know the subject that was engaged

in it, that casts it in a light of guilt here,

is the police get information from confidential

informants and from tips that these drug sales

are going on behind Rockingham Village Apartments.

Two cars are primarily involved and they meet

regularly. A red Chevy Cruze, a Silver Honda Civic,

they give them a model, the license plate number.

And then another tip called in the name,

Belinda DeTilio, she's selling the drugs at

the apartment. The police run DMV records,

they run a spots check, they find out that,

yes, indeed Belinda DeTilio does own a red

Chevy Cruze and she does live at the Rockingham

Village Apartments. Those are concrete specific

facts that when the police then observe the

red Chevy Cruze on June 2nd, 2023, that's

while this investigation is still ongoing,

the police just begin tailing it. Where is my

suspect going? But what are the specific,

to Justice Will's point, what are the specific

facts anchoring whatever happened in the target

parking lot? So I think that that's

stop in the target parking lot needs to be

understood in light of what the police

understood. This car that I suspect to be a drug

dealer in Seabrook just went directly to a

location known to be a source city for drugs

in Seabrook. Isn't that just a hunch?

No, Your Honor, I don't think it is. The police

knew that Belinda DeTilio was involved in

drug sales. They knew that the Danbury

Drive Apartments were a source of drugs

in Seabrook through confidential informant

buys and undercover buys. They knew that she

was there for five to ten minutes because

they stayed. But wasn't that in Belinda?

But the police reasonably believed that it was.

The person driving the car was a female,

matched the height and weight description

that they received from the ENV records.

And as this court has held, there's nothing

to indicate to the police officer that the

owner of the vehicle is not driving it,

then it's reasonable for them to

assume that they are. And in this

case it was the Belinda DeTilio's daughter

who was driving it. But they matched the

description that the police had on the DMV

record. And so they made that observation

when they switched seats? Because otherwise

they didn't see who was inside the

vehicle, right? I don't recall that

clearly from the record, Your Honor.

But I think if the record supports that

the police saw it and were not able to

see who at all was driving the car,

then I think it remains that it is

reasonable for the police to begin with

the premise that the owner of the car

is driving the car. I would suspect that

the police would have been able to at

least see that a female was driving

initially, and I do believe that's on

the record that at the beginning a

female was driving. Right, but

witnessing somebody driving a vehicle

doesn't allow an officer to determine

what that person's height or weight is.

Does it? I will, Your Honor, of course

the police cannot pull the person

out of the vehicle and measure them.

But in the case where this court has

said that if there's no reason for the

officer to believe the owner is not

driving the car, then they can assume that

it is. The officer didn't pull that

person out either. I believe they

looked at the person and they looked at

the description on the DMV records and

says, yeah, that looks about right.

And from there it's reasonable for

the officer to believe that the owner

is driving the car. Would you agree

that it significantly undermines

reasonable suspicion if you, if the

officers did not know that there was

drug dealing at the Rockingham

Village Apartments that the crews was

involved in it and that Detilio was a

participant? Yes, Your Honor, minus those

facts. Yes, that's significantly

undermined. So, and as I understand it,

all of those facts, all of that

information came to the Seabird

Police through confidential informants.

Confidential informants and concerned

residents, the record says. Okay, and I

understand that you have contended that

the reliability of those informants was

not preserved. But setting that aside,

can you tell me what evidence there was

that those confidential informants or

residents making complaints were, that

those reports were reliable? So, I

would begin again noting we didn't get

as much of a record as we could have

on that because the reliability was not

challenged below, but even on the record

that we have, the tip that calls in the

Red Chevy crews is a very specific tip.

It gives the make model of the car, it

gives a license plate number, and all of

that checks out. And then when an

individual gives this name Belinda

Detilio, she's involved in drug

transactions at the Rockingham

Village Apartment Complex. When all

this information gets run through

spots in the DMV, the police are

able to corroborate. Indeed, she does

live there and she does own that car. I

would also note that this court has

stated, I believe it is in state versus

SUSE, that because reasonable suspicion

is a lesser standard than probable cause,

it can be established on tips and

information of lesser reliability

than probable cause could. As to the

Danbury Drive Apartments, the

reliability of that is difficult to

assess on this record because there

is no challenge, excuse me, the

reliability of the confidential

informants. But these were not just

tips that the police did not know

with saying, hey, this apartment

complex is a source of drugs, these are

confidential informants for the

police as well as undercover officers

who then go make those buys. So that

has corroborated as well and those

tips were reliable on the record and

we would also note that the superior

court went out of its way to say

that it was not discounting the

reliability of those tips, it just

did not move the needle for the superior

court. But you just said that's Danbury,

what about the tips regarding

Rockingham Village? What

corroboration or confirmation of

reliability is there on that? So that,

so those are also first confidential

informants and residents of the

apartment complex, but we would go

back to one of the tipsters, gives a

very specific tip. It's this red Chevy

cruise, it has this license plate

number, the police run that

information and checks out and then

when they get the name Blinda

Ditilio, they run her through spots,

she indeed does live at the

Rockingham Village Apartments. Maybe

that wouldn't get you up to probable

cause, but that does get you enough

reliability to build reasonable

suspicion on. Thank you. Thank you

Attorney Ganya, you reserved two

minutes. Attorney Sirzan? May it please

the court, Chelsea Sirzan, on behalf

of Timothy Hevron. The trial court

correctly ruled that the police

lacked reasonable suspicion to seize

this vehicle and thus violated Mr

Hevron's constitutional rights. The

day of the surveillance, the police

observed nothing rationally pointing

to illegal drug activity. Just a,

there was no attempts at concealment,

no furtive movements, no meetings

or exchanges. Just a relatively

brief drive into Massachusetts with

two brief stops during daylight

hours. The complaints or tips at the

regarding the Seabrook Apartments and

the Methuen Apartments do not make

that travel more suspicious. Well why

not? I mean you have residents that are

complaining to the police that this

red Chevy shows up every other day and

meets with another vehicle and it's

really suspicious because it seems to

be a consistent sort of operation.

Why isn't that suspicious? So the

police said that they had one

specific report regarding

those vehicles meeting. The tip didn't

relay any specific observations, no

highly detailed observations, just the

sweeping allegation that there were

drug sales occurring. They didn't

reference seeing Ms. Dottilio

involved in those meetings with the

crews and the specific facts about

the cars are things that anyone in the

parking lot that Ms. Dottilio lived

at could have reported to the police. So

they don't as the case law suggest

point to a tipster that has special

access or information or has observed

something highly detailed that they're

able to relay to the police. Do we

know whether Ms. Dottilio was a

resident of them? The Rocky M

complex? Ms. Belinda Dottilio?

Yep. I think that the record supports

that she was a resident. Yes. So this

could be a phone call from another

neighbor that just was upset that she

put her trash out on the street. Yes, and

I think that that is why the police

cannot rely on face value on reports

that they receive without corroborating

pieces of it before making a seizure

or otherwise having some of the

factors that this court is considered

sufficient for. What's your

response to the state's argument

that that corroboration the liability

argument was not has not been preserved?

Yes. So it was the state's burden at the

suppression hearing to supply all

information that they thought

supported the officer's reasonable

suspicion.

Mr. Hevron challenged that stop and

everything underlying it. So he does

not have any obligation to preserve

specific challenges to the things the

state put on to support their seizure.

The state attached the defense's

motion to suppress. It does refer to the

tips as unproborated. So I do think that

the trial court considered this and I

don't think this court has specifically

addressed this but as persuasive

authority the Fifth Circuit federal

court has that's in

USB Martinez addressed. Well certainly

the trial court addressed the

reliability of these tips in its order

right? The trial court said that they

did not discount the validity of the

tips. I think that the trial court

did not consider them to have very

much weight at all because there was

nothing offered by the state to support

how much weight the the court should

give them. I'm sorry you always

versus Martinez supports what? That

the defendant does not have an

obligation to specifically preserve

arguments about the tips when they've

challenged the reasonable

suspicion to stop to make a seizure.

Because the government bears a burden?

Yes and then the government was already

obligated to put on all evidence that

it wanted to to establish the

suspicion. As I read the motion to

suppress well it says

according to an unproborated tip and

alleged drug supplier by the same by

the name of Eric lived in Danbury

court. So the argument on

lack of corroboration related only to

the Mthuin

end of the transaction. So I would

rely just that Mr. Heffron doesn't

have an obligation to specifically

preserve that and that

detail didn't come out in the

officers sworn testimony regarding

that particular person in Danbury

Drive.

So what we were left with regarding

both apartments was

very minimal information. I did want

to respond to some of the court's

questions to the state.

So I think it is very clear that the

search warrant at the Mthuin

apartments did not occur prior to this

stop.

The testimony was not clear on that

point and the state's

objection to the motion to suppress

in the trial court which we attached

clearly states that the search warrant

was subsequent to the stop on June

2nd 2023. So that cannot be relied

on whatsoever to corroborate or

support the reliability of the tips the

state

seeks to rely on. I think Justice

Gould, you had asked if it was three

buys with vehicles coming from Mthuin

up to Seabrook. All of the record

supports is multiple buys. There was no

specific number in the testimony.

And the buys of undercover officers

going to the Danbury Drive apartments,

the officer testified that those were

later on, she said. So I also don't

think that the sales to undercover

officers

supported her reasonable suspicion on

this date.

So I

I do think it is not fair to say that

the police knew Belinda DeTilio was

involved in the sale of drugs without

having confirmed anything from the

reports they were receiving.

And I do not think it's fair to say

that the Mthuin apartments were a

known drug location.

Based on the testimony, the police had

not been able to confirm who in the

vehicles traveled to Seabrook might

have been connected to the apartments

in Mthuin.

They didn't, even if someone did live

there, they didn't know if the person

got those drugs from there or got them

from somewhere else and brought them

up to Seabrook.

They didn't have any specific unit

identified at the Mthuin apartments.

So you can compare that to State v.

Veniz, where both officers involved

had conducted multiple drug arrests in

the apartment complex that they

considered a known drug location.

That's not at all what we have here.

Assume for purposes of this question

that the tips about the

Rockingham Village apartment were

reliable. So you knew that drug deals

were taking place,

that a Chevy Cruze was involved,

and that Ms. Detilio was also involved

in those deals.

That same car leaves Rockingham

Village, goes to Mthuin where

previous drug deals have taken place.

They're there for 10 minutes to turn

right around and go back to Mthuin.

I'm sorry to Rockingham Village.

Isn't that articulable, reasonable

suspicion that a drug deal has taken

place in Mthuin?

I don't think so, without the officers

observing anything at the Mthuin

apartment complex.

So if they had known that a

particular building contained the

unit or units that they had reliable

information on, and they had seen

these occupants go into that building

and come out, I think that then

maybe you are there if they

knew that Belinda Detilio was involved

in drug sales.

But without an observation, I think

that the apartment complex is too

large and the suspicion too weak

for the court to find

reasonable suspicion with no

observations about whether they even

went into a building at all, or if

anyone came out and met with them,

the officers don't know.

So I think I would respond to the

state's response to Justice Countway's

question.

The trial court found that there were

approximately 48 units at this

complex.

That was based on the officer's

estimate as to how many units she

thought were in each of the four

buildings, and that was a finding

that the court made.

I think that the guess was to the

math that was involved, but that

is a finding. So it was a

significantly large complex and it

is not reasonable to assume that if

one or two units might

involve people involved in

drug activity that the visit to

somewhere in the entirety of that

complex is suspicious.

I do, I want to comment on the

totality of the circumstances and

how it is a faithful application

here, and the trial court did

faithfully apply that standard

because all of the observations

that the police made that day were

wholly innocent and they didn't have a

concrete reason because of how weak

the tips were and how much they relied

on just hearsay and speculation from

residents or confidential informants

that the state did not put more

detail on about.

So there was no reason to jump to

the conclusion that these officers

did. The totality of the

circumstances does not mean that

some fact that has very low probative

weight must take on

more significance because some other

information that is very minimal

comes up. Unless those two things are

logically tethered to each other

just because there are a lot of

potential speculations does not

mean that they have to bolster

each other and they didn't. So you're

going to get into the weight of each

piece in the totality analysis.

What deference do we owe to the trial

court in that analysis?

So I do think that this

the court's president suggests that

the weight to give evidence is

in the province do deference to the

trial court and specifically

regarding the inferences that

the officer articulated

to the court and the way that the

court weighed those as persuasive or

not or credible or not.

I don't think that this officer's

explanations for why she thought

certain things were suspicious

was rational and she was not able to

offer experience or training to explain

the inferences that she made

specifically at for example stopping

a target for 20 minutes.

She didn't say that like in the

LeRose case that in her experience

people stop frequently right after

buying drugs to use drugs.

She just said it was abnormal behavior.

They thought they might have been

concealing or consuming the drugs.

She says we weren't sure it was just

very odd behavior.

So I don't think that that's the

kind of inference that is.

The trial court found the officer to

be credible. Did he not?

I don't think that the trial court

made a specific statement about that.

The trial court for example regarding

the excessive blinking on the way back

did note in its order that the

officer testified to that but had not

included it in her report and I think

that's an example of the time where

the court was weighing credibility

and weighing the inferences and the

weight to give them from that

officer's testimony. Do we also defer

to the court's finding that the

tips were credible? All that the court

said was that they were valid but

even you know their validity did not

convey fact. So it may be true that

the police received these reports

but what the officer testified to was

not fact that the that the state can

rely on in order to meet the

reasonable standard. Well the tip is

there are drug transactions happening

at Rockingham Village.

Isn't that a fact? If that's a reliable

tip, isn't that a fact the police can

rely upon?

The the trial court referred to the

tips as potential drug sales occurring

at Rockingham Village. So I don't

I don't think that the trial court

did conclude even considering the

tip valid that it was fair to conclude

that the there were definitely drug

sales occurring there and that Ms.

Detilio was definitely involved in

them.

And it seems like those tips were

separate that there was the observation

of the vehicle's meeting and then

oh we've heard that name before not

that any anyone had linked the

observations. So we have really no

idea the basis for the people who

said

she is someone who's involved in selling

drugs at this complex. There's zero

information about who said that and

what they knew

about her and the police hadn't

confirmed anything about that yet.

Do you agree with the state that

there's a de novo aspect to our review?

Yes absolutely. And how does that

work given the deference we owe to

the facts

that are found? So I think that the

the court looks at what facts were

on the record and that the trial

court included in their order

and can reassess them which is

why I've emphasized that I don't think

there was much

at all behind the tips and complaints

because if this court

does take a different view than the

trial court

then you then one might interpret the

trial court's order

regarding the validity of the tips

that this court can

can look to the very low weight that

or the very low

facts that supported the tips in this

case.

Thank you very much. You write lights on?

Attorney Kanye. Thank you your honors.

Just a couple of brief points. Justice

Gould had asked defense counsel if

the police knew that

Blinda DeTilio was involved selling

drugs at the Rockingham

apartments and then traveled to a

place where

that is known to be a source of

drugs for Seabrook and then traveled

right back.

To Seabrook would that be a

reasonable suspicion and the answer

was not unless the officer saw something

like going into the building or money

changing hands?

The state's answer to that question

would be yes

but if this

would be yes

that is enough for reasonable suspicion

justice Gould's question

to ask for something more

like money changing hands

if this police in this case saw money

changing hands

it's the state's position that we're

talking about probable cause

to arrest.

It's reasonable suspicion is not

probable cause.

If the officers saw the people going

into the Danbury Drive apartment

complex it's lost on me how that would

add to the analysis.

You don't know where they're going

which apartment they're going into.

That's the whole point right?

It might not change if the officers

saw them go into the complex

but the officers didn't even see that

and so you've got a large apartment

complex

into which two people go.

Inherently is that suspicious

because there might be drug

activity somewhere in the complex?

Not on its own your honor.

It has to be viewed completely in

the totality and the pertinent fact of the

stop is that it takes five to ten

minutes in the officer's experience

that's about how much time it takes

to complete a drug transaction

and knowing.

That might be the time it takes to

go pick up a stroller or a pack

and play right from a name.

I mean it just again I

guess I'm coming back to this

sort of totality of holy innocent

factors and I'm trying to

understand sort of what concretely

connects them to drug activity

that would give rise to reasonable

suspicion.

If I may quickly thank you.

Sure, sure.

Because one thing I wanted to do is

distinguish blood cell more because

I was not able to do that.

That truly was all combined

completely innocuous activity.

The two circumstances were nervousness

and bloodshot eyes.

Here we have a tip that somebody

is involved in drug sales.

That is that that casts

everything else in a different light.

It allows you to understand

the five-minute stop at the

Danbury Drive Apartments in a way

that you couldn't if you didn't

know that.

I see my red light is on after

court. Has no further questions.

Thank you.

Very much counsel. Case submitted.
