This is case 20250048 Nathaniel Moffitt,

trustee of Pamela Dawson Moffitt revocable trust versus Sarah Shrebro et al.

Good morning, Attorney Forrest. I understand you'd be resur- I mean, splitting time on your argument.

You're taking 13 minutes and Mr. Matthew Moffitt is taking two. Is that correct?

That's correct, Your Honor. I'm taking two for rebuttal. Two following the happily.

Good morning, Your Honors. My name is Tom Quarles from the Divine Millimet Law Firm.

With me is my colleague Joe Dolceato. Together we represent Nathaniel Moffitt, the trustee of the Pamela Dawson Moffitt trust

in appeal of some of the trial court's rulings following a four-day trial on our petition to partition real estate

and respond to Sarah Shrebro's much broader counterclaims, which the court allowed,

challenging all of the trustees handling of the trust property, not just the real estate.

As the real estate, the trial court awarded the three.

Just on that issue, did the court have jurisdiction to hear all these counterclaims?

Well, the trial judge thought he did.

But that's a threshold issue.

And do some of the counterclaims relate to the probate of the estate, which is not remotely before the New Hampshire court?

Again, we challenged the counterclaims in a motion to dismiss. We lost that at the trial level.

We argued jurisdiction in the motion to dismiss.

We did. We made a decision not to appeal that for strategic reasons, I think.

So we have an obligation to determine whether subject-managed jurisdiction exists, whether we have authority to decide this case?

I would agree that subject-managed jurisdiction is a threshold issue that has to be determined.

Again, once we lost that issue, my clients and I moved on.

It certainly is your prerogative.

If you want to look at that as a threshold issue and rule on that, that's dispositive.

To get back to the presentation, again, I think your question just illustrates how out of control this case got from our perspective

when we were trying to cabin the case as just a review of the real estate issues in the case

for which the parties had come to an impasse.

And that's an important point.

The court, mistakenly in its final order, said, I don't know why I'm here.

Well, he was here because the parties at a minimum were at loggerheads on the real estate issues.

Two pieces of real estate, as you've read in the briefs.

They are across the street from each other, literally, on a rural road in Hancock, New Hampshire.

My client, the trustee, Nathaniel Moffat had purchased the property at the direct order, if you will, of his father

in order that it could be home for his father and his mother in their declining years.

That never happened because they died unexpectedly before the renovations could be completed on that property,

33 Kings Highway, and the parents moved up there.

But nevertheless, in the first instance, the trustee took the position that those renovations,

since they were done on behalf of the parents, and they both trust

that the trust should be paying for those renovations.

The trial court judge decided, based on the facts and circumstances,

that because they died before they never got to New Hampshire,

the trustee should be paying for 100% of those renovations.

We're not challenging that.

But we are challenging, and in addition, we're not challenging the fact that rent should have been paid

for the occupancy of 33 Kings Highway by my client and his wife during the penance of the litigation.

What we are challenging, among other things, is the allocation of the 34 Kings property,

the family ancestral property, if you will, just to the respondent, Sarah Cerebro.

And again, we're challenging that because the judge made findings totally contrary to the uncontested trial evidence.

The uncontested trial evidence was of just extreme animosity between the siblings in this case.

And while I understand that in general, those weighing of credibility and in effect,

worth of the party's position is in general something for the trial judge to determine

and not for you to get involved in.

In this case, it's based on undisputed evidence.

But how is it an unsustainable exercise of discretion to award the 34 to the sister?

I mean, how does it rise to that level given the deference that we owe to the trial court?

Agreed. It's a very highly deferential standard towards the trial judge.

But the evidence was entirely one-sided.

Every single, we've cited, I won't go into the details, but it's all in our brief,

we've cited eight different very serious conflicts between the siblings.

And it's not just as between Nathaniel and Sarah Cerebro.

It's between Nathaniel and his brother Matthew and Sarah Cerebro.

That makes it clear that these parties could never abide living across the street from each other.

What's your response to the trial court's observation that if you saw, that is to sell 34,

that Mr. Cerebro could have purchased it in the auction?

I guess our response is, so what?

Again, that's making an assumption that she would have bought it.

It would have been an open sale, an open bidding process.

She may have gotten the property, she may not, but that's not an ex post facto ground for saying,

oh, it would be a useless act to sell the property.

The court had and should have found, based on the undisputed evidence,

that these parties could not live across the street from each other.

I'd like to get back to the attorney's issue because I think that's more salient in terms of the legal issues that the case presents.

Chiefly, there is no question under the Restatement of Trust and the Uniform Trust Code

and some of the case law from other jurisdictions, we haven't had this issue yet in New Hampshire,

that where a fiduciary wins on some issues and loses on others, logic says it's improper for the reviewing court to say,

in a sense, a pox on both your houses, which I think is how the judge felt in this case.

I'm going to do rough justice here.

I'm going to give Nathaniel 33 Kings.

I'm going to give Sarah Cerebro 34 Kings.

And even though, as Cerebro says, I would like you judge to order that Nathaniel, the trustee, pay all of my attorney's fees.

I'm going to reject that request, but I'm still going to make Nathaniel pay 100% of the attorney's fees associated with litigation.

But was that fee shifting or was it an award of damages for the breach of fiduciary duty?

It certainly wasn't fee shifting.

It was an award of damages and has to be based on breach of fiduciary duty,

but he didn't do the proper analysis of the breach of fiduciary duty.

As I laid out in detail in the brief, once the trial court judge said,

we're not just talking about real estate, we're talking about every aspect of the trustee's conduct as to the three types of trust property.

The financials, investment in material, the tangible personal property, as well as the real estate.

Once all that's in play, then the attorney's fees associated with that had to be incurred by the trustee to defend against those counterclaims.

And did that, back to the chief's point about jurisdiction,

it seemed to me that the trial court acknowledged that personal property was governed under the Maryland proceedings.

So don't you have an argument in terms of jurisdiction vis-a-vis these fees?

Well, absolutely.

That would be another point, obviously, in our favor that if there's no jurisdiction,

then he can't assess attorney's fees against us for improperly having to litigate that subject matter.

I'm assuming we do have jurisdiction.

What law applies, as I understand it, the estate was subject to the laws of the District of Columbia.

Is that a law we should look to in terms of determining whether the award of attorney's fees is appropriate?

Or what other law are you asking us to look at?

Well, Your Honor, we've got a states and a stated issue here and a trust.

And the estate was probated in Maryland, as I understand it.

That's correct.

So we would have to look at Maryland and the District of Columbia?

I'm not sure. I'm not going to give you an opinion as to the estate operative law.

I will and have to give you an opinion as the operative law for the trust.

And that is, by agreement, the parties and the trial judge agree that District of Columbia law and New Hampshire law, excuse me,

District of Columbia law applies to the trust.

It is not really a difference in substance because the District of Columbia has adopted the Uniform Trust Code as has New Hampshire.

And both of those codes allow and require this type of recognition that if a party wins an issue, they shouldn't have to be paying attorney's fees for winning that issue.

But again, I'm stuck on my threshold question, which is this case seems to raise claims that go beyond the estate itself.

Am I correct about that?

The breach of fiduciary duty claims that go to the entire administration of this matter, which involved probate matters going over into a trust?

Yes, yes it does. And obviously our position is improperly.

Just to be clear on jurisdiction, there are two pieces of property in New Hampshire at issue.

Those are the only real property as to the trust or the estate, however you want to style it.

And so obviously under concepts of ancillary probate jurisdiction, the trial court had jurisdiction over the real estate.

And again, that's how we styled the case.

Now the case, we only wanted to do the partition of the real estate, opposing counsel and the respondent said no, no, no.

Every single act that we allege wrongfully done by the trustee is in play.

And the trial judge said, I agree over our objection.

Here we are today.

As a consequence of that, this piece about fee shifting comes into play.

And I think it's important that the court understand if it goes to reach the merits that there is, there has to be either a finding by you.

We say we should only pay 25% of the, of the total fee award or that it should just be remanded.

Great. Your red light's on. Thank you. Attorney Poros.

Attorney, Mr. Moffat, you have two minutes.

Oh yes, I am Matthew Moffat, brother of Nathaniel and Sarah.

I will be brief because I only have two minutes.

When you look at all of Sarah's statements and actions over the years, there's a clear pattern of unwillingness to compromise or negotiate

or have any serious, entertain any serious proposals.

Basically over and over again, she says, I demand 100% of everything and throws out a bunch of accusations.

And there's no give or take. There's nothing to work with.

And it is my opinion that it would be stressful and unfair to force Nathaniel through the decision of giving the whole of 34 Kings Highway to Sarah, 100% of it, to force him to live across the street.

Do you believe that she would move to Hancock just in spite of you and your brother?

Well, she would get, I mean, whether she would make it that principal residence is another issue, but she would have full possession of the property on one side of the street right across from her.

Your request was for the court to order a sale of the property, reading between the lines that looks like there was some discussion of sharing the property.

Have you now abandoned the thought of sharing the property?

Well, I haven't so much as abandoned it as Sarah's thrown it out the window.

She's basically said she wants the whole thing and she's shown no willingness to negotiate.

And I'll just state two recent actions and we'll go back because in the interest of time, there is the police report from Hancock.

December 23rd, Nathaniel was reorganizing the house moving some boxes around and she became very agitated and started throwing things around.

And I was not there, but Nathaniel and his wife were there.

And the other thing is he wanted to build a garage on his side of the property and because there's nowhere to park on his property

and she tried hard to stop him from building the garage.

Thank you very much, Mr. Moffat, your time is up.

Thank you.

Attorney Quarles has reserved two minutes for rebuttal.

Attorney Newkirk.

Thank you.

Please look forward.

I'm Pam Newkirk.

I represent Sarah Sribo.

I would like to address the subject matter jurisdiction question that the court raised.

The petition to a partition concerned real estate that's owned by the Pamela Dawson Moffat Trust.

The court, the probate court in New Hampshire has subject matter jurisdiction over that trust pursuant to 54731D.

And that question was not, that issue was not raised or disputed thereafter.

What about the motion to dismiss?

I'm sorry?

Didn't the motion to dismiss challenge that?

No, the motion to dismiss, I actually had filed to say that the court did not have the legal ability to partition.

Not saying the motion to dismiss the counter claims.

The motion to dismiss the counter claims, I frankly don't recall if they raised it at that point or not.

But regardless, the court does have subject matter jurisdiction over the Pamela Dawson Moffat Trust.

In addition, there was no jurisdiction exercised over any assets of the Maryland probate estate.

What had happened was at the time that the petition of partition was filed, there were issues related to the disposition of property that we thought belonged to the estate.

But the council from Nathaniel Moffat in New Hampshire treated as though it was part of the trust distribution.

And we were unclear as to whether it was trust property or a state property at that point.

So since the conclusion of the trial in this matter, proceedings were instituted by Sarah Srebro's council in Maryland to reopen probate.

And it's my understanding from looking at the docket down there that the court has reopened it and ordered that the property,

we're talking about tangible personal property, that it be distributed, I think, within 120 days of the court's order.

So that all is subject to Maryland jurisdiction. It was not part of the order in this case.

The order in this case arose from the fact that the trustee tried to partition real property that was owned by the trust solely because Nathaniel Moffat personally did not want his sister to have the property across the street.

And he knew that she wanted that property or an interest in that property.

He didn't want her to have an interest in the property. Now that's a personal thing.

As a trustee, a trustee has a duty to distribute the trust property selflessly as provided by the terms of the trust and for the benefit of the beneficiaries of the trust.

And the trustee's personal animosity towards a beneficiary has absolutely no role in making a choice that they don't want someone to have a property.

So in that sense, your client challenged Nathaniel's decision to provide the 33, lot 33 to him personally?

We did not challenge outright the disposition of 33 to Nathaniel.

We challenged the disposition of 33 to Nathaniel without him having to pay for his use in occupancy, his exclusive use in occupancy of the property for an extended period of time.

There was also an issue because there were improvements that were made post the death of Pamela Dawson Moffat when it was clear that neither she nor her husband who had pre-deceased her were going to live in the property.

They used trust assets in order to pay for those renovations and improvements.

So we had concerns about that part of it.

So in that sense, the trial court was wrong in deciding and ruling that this lawsuit didn't have to be filed?

The court ruled that partition was inappropriate. It was not necessary.

That if the trustee did not want to distribute trust property to Sarah Srebro, then he could have gone to court and said,

I'm a trustee. I have a duty to distribute this property. I don't want to do it because I don't like her.

And we've had some altercations between each other. We've had animosity or whatever. He could have done that, but he chose not to do that.

He chose to say, I am going to wield my power as trustee, my broad power that I have to manage and distribute these properties.

And there's not just real estate. There's significant amount of cash and liquid securities, other liquid assets in this trust.

I choose not to distribute to you because I don't want to.

I want this one property that's at 33 Kings Highway, and I don't want you across the street.

That a court would license a trustee to take that position violates the whole tenet of trust law.

A trustee is not allowed to act in his own self-interest to the detriment of the beneficiaries of the trust.

And, you know, I just like to, as a bit of a parallel, you know, we had the Hodges case.

Hodges v. Johnson came before the court, and in that instance, there was a decanting of trust assets.

Decantings are allowed. Beneficiaries were eliminated as a result of the decanting.

Statutorily, you're allowed to decant and eliminate the interests of beneficiaries.

That was tried. It was found to be improper conduct by the trustee because even though the trustee had the authority to do that,

they did not have the right to do that and violate their other fiduciary duties.

And it was appealed. It came up to this court.

It was sustained. The findings of the trial court were sustained on appeal, and the decantings were disallowed.

We have a similar thing here where the trustee sought to partition the real property for no reason again,

other than not wanting Sarah Shrebo to have the property that was across the street from the property that he wanted

and spent presumably significant amounts of money doing so to try to deprive her of property from the trust.

And that is not a proper action by a trustee. And that is why at the end of the day,

the counterclaims that were raised were that the trustee has to distribute the trust property in accordance with the terms of the trust

and the applicable laws. And I will say that even though the trust says that Washington, D.C. law applies,

they have the trust code. The provisions are identical to New Hampshire law as it applies in this instance.

So when the court again found that there was no good reason under trust administration to deprive Sarah Shrebro

of 34 Kings Highway, there was no testimony from any witness at trial that any of them,

that either Nathaniel or Matthew wanted to have that as part of their share.

How is the trial court's determination that the partition action was improper?

How is that consistent with the trial court's denial of your motion to dismiss?

The court wanted to hear more fully the evidence before drawing that conclusion.

And my experience in probate court is that there are very few instances, unlike in superior court,

because it's a court of equity, there are very few instances in which a dismissal is granted.

Even again, I don't know that a trustee can never partition, but certainly once the court heard all of the evidence

as to the reasons why the trustee was seeking to partition, it was clearly not appropriate

because it was a violation of his fiduciary duties for him to have undertaken that step.

And in addition to doing that...

But it served as a basis, a primary basis for the award of attorney's fees.

And you argued, I just want to follow up on Justice Gould's point.

You argued that the exercise of the ancillary jurisdiction to partition this property should be dismissed.

And that was denied.

Yes.

And then it got fully litigated and now the trustee is being ordered to pay attorney's fees for that litigation.

Correct.

It does seem a little incongruous, doesn't it?

Again, it does not.

Because again, the court has broad equity powers and the train was set in motion by the trustee.

Sarah Srebro did not set this idea of selling 34 Kings Highway instead of distributing it to her as part of her share.

She did not set that in motion.

But isn't a petition to partition broad enough that virtually all of those remedies could have been ordered by the trial court?

Sure, but at the end of the day, even if the court did consider that,

it could not look at it in isolation and say, sure, partition is okay.

It still had to consider what the trustee's duties were to the beneficiaries.

And I keep coming back to that because that's the reason why the fees were awarded.

It was improper.

How is that?

That seems to go well beyond the narrow question of whether a partition is appropriate or not.

All these other things all of a sudden are coming into the exercise of ancillary jurisdiction to partition property in Hancock, New Hampshire.

The entire administration of this trust is now all of a sudden at issue.

And it is, you know, a district of Columbia Trust where all of a sudden the judge in New Hampshire is deciding all these equities that go beyond the partition question.

So all of the trust property was New Hampshire property.

So the real estate was New Hampshire property.

There were securities and securities accounts that were not specific to any location.

And the tangible property as we discussed earlier, even though it had been moved all of it to New Hampshire, that was not subject to the court's jurisdiction.

And that was not part of, that was part of the trustee's arguments about why he didn't like his sister.

And Matthew's arguments about why they didn't like the sister because they were unable to agree on the distribution of that tangible property.

But that was not, none of that was before the court.

Did New Hampshire have jurisdiction over the securities?

Yes.

Under what?

It's trust property.

But it wasn't located in New Hampshire.

Wasn't located in New Hampshire.

Well, again, the trust address is New Hampshire.

It's a New Hampshire, the citus of the trust administration at this point is in New Hampshire because all of the trust property is in New Hampshire.

So you can't say that a securities account or a bank account because, you know, it's located in a bank that has offices in all different parts of the country,

somehow is attached to a completely different jurisdiction.

And the primary, the impetus between, behind getting this into the court in New Hampshire.

And again, this was driven by the trustee.

He chose New Hampshire as the jurisdiction.

Well, it's because the property is located in Hancock.

Exactly.

So to now claim that...

He couldn't bring a petition for a partition in the District of Columbia to partition real estate in Hancock, New Hampshire.

Yes.

And nor was he required to bring any trust administration questions in Washington, D.C.

Just because the choice of law in the trust instrument itself was that Washington, D.C. law applied, the assets were in New Hampshire

and therefore the citus of the trust is in New Hampshire.

As for the attorney's fees claim, you seem to be arguing in your brief that the requirement that Nathaniel pay back the trust for those expenses

was a result of the court's finding that there was a breach of fiduciary duty.

But then you go on to analyze that in terms of whether individual claims were won or lost.

Do you agree that in determining the amount that should be repaid to the trust, we should be looking to which of the claims were won or lost?

I do not, because under 1010.04, it's not a prevailing party standard.

And this court has previously again addressed 1010.04 in the Hodges v. Johnson case

and before that remotely in the Shelton v. Tamposi case.

But in Hodges v. Johnson, the court acknowledged that as long as there is some equitable basis for the allocation of fees to a particular party

that that is justification under 1010.04.

And the court has very broad equitable jurisdiction to make an allocation of those fees.

And again, I would submit that the court, which heard all of the evidence from all of the parties and saw all of the documents,

was very clear that the foundational premise that got the parties into the court in the first instance was improper.

Where Sarah Srebro had sufficient beneficial interest in this trust to receive 34 Kings Highway.

And the only reason that the trustee did not want her to have it is because he did not want her to have a property across the street from him.

And that is what can't be lost with all the other legal issues that are before the court.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Attorney Quarles.

Quick points, hopefully.

On the issue of whether our motion dismissed the counterclaims at the outside of the case raised the issue of subject marriage jurisdiction,

I'd call your attention to our appendix, rather, page 45, which is the first page of that motion to dismiss.

I'll read briefly.

The defendant's counterclaims are directed not at the proper subject matter of this case, a petition to partition real estate,

but rather at every perceived problem defendant Srebro claims she encountered during the administration of this trust.

None of those wide-ranging complaints are properly before the court.

So it was clearly raised.

The judge ruled against us.

Here we are today.

I've heard over and over again and again today this distinction without a difference between a petition to partition, in this case,

and a petition for instructions.

Could it have been filed as a petition for instructions?

Potentially.

Does it make a would-of difference?

No.

The bottom line here that we all have to concede is that as the real estate, for which there's clear New Hampshire jurisdiction,

the parties could not agree on how to equitably divide that property.

It wasn't until the day trial started that Srebro's position became,

oh, okay, I will let you have 33 kings, as long as I have 34 kings.

For the entire length of the litigation at that point, her position was, you don't get 33 kings, Nathaniel.

I get 34 kings, even though she was very vague about this initially in the case.

By the time we got to trial, I won all 34 kings, and only on the day trial started, I will concede you can get 33 kings.

What was your client's position with respect to the rent and the payment for the renovations and the upgrades that were done to 33?

Well, our position was we shouldn't have to pay for the renovations because they were properly trust expenses in anticipation of the parents moving in.

We lost that issue.

We're not going to appeal it as to the rent.

But when we got to trial, we said, yes, we owe rent.

We concede that.

We did a complicated calculation of the rent, unchallenged by the other side, is accepted by the judge, and that rent has already been paid.

Thank you.

Thank you very much, counsel.

Mr. Moffat, this case is submitted.

Thank you, Your Honor.
